CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LEWISVILLE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: October 5, 1992 
Effective: October 5, 1992 
____________ 
Published in 1992 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2003 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LEWISVILLE, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
B. C. Groves 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kathy Uhlich, Mayor Pro Tem 
Bobbie Mitchell, Deputy Mayor Pro Tem 
Allen Judkiewicz 
Ann Pomykal 
Tracy Clinton 
City Council 
____________ 
Charles R. Owens 
City Manager 
____________ 
Ronald J. Neiman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Marty Hendrix 
City Secretary 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
LEWISVILLE, TEXAS 
____________ 
Rudy Durham 
Mayor 
____________ 
R Neil Ferguson, Mayor Pro Tem 
Greg Tierney, Deputy Mayor Pro Tem 
Leroy Vaughn 
TJ Gilmore 
Brent Daniels 
City Council 
____________ 
Donna Barron 
City Manager 
____________ 
Lizbeth Plaster 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Julie Heinze 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1990 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1990 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ron Neiman, City Attorney, Marty Hendrix, City Secretary, and the other members of the city staff, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 1727-10-92 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEWISVILLE, TEXAS, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEWISVILLE, TEXAS THAT: 
SECTION 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Lewisville, Texas", published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 17, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
SECTION 2. All ordinances of a general nature which may have been heretofore codified and those enacted on or before March 16, 1992, and not included in this code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed. Provided, however, that all ordinances of a special nature, including but not limited to tax levy, budget, bonds, franchises, election, zoning, vacating and abandonment of property, and annexation shall continue in full force or effect unless specifically repealed or amended; it being intended that special ordinances are not to be included in this code. 
SECTION 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been heretofore repealed. 
SECTION 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 for violations of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, nor exceeding $500.00 for all other violations except traffic and vehicle violations, whereby such fines shall not exceed $200.00. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is re-enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies available at law or in equity, such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
SECTION 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
SECTION 6. Ordinances adopted after March 16, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
SECTION 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon its final adoption. 
SECTION 8. The fact that a codification of ordinances passed in recent years is necessary for the administration thereof creates an urgency and emergency requiring the suspension of the rule requiring three readings, and this ordinance shall become effective immediately. 
DULY PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEWISVILLE, TEXAS, BY A VOTE OF 5 TO 0 ON THIS THE 5TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 1992. 
APPROVED: 
	/s/   
      B. C. Groves, MAYOR 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/   
      Marty Hendrix, CMC/AAE, CITY SECRETARY 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/   
      Ronald J. Neiman, CITY ATTORNEY 	
 	 
 
PART I - HOME RULE CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF LEWISVILLE, TEXAS[1] 
Preamble 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the home rule charter of the City of Lewisville, Texas adopted by referendum on January 29, 1963, the returns of which were canvassed by the city council on February 4, 1963. Style and capitalization have been made uniform. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added in brackets. Amendments have been included and are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 
State Law reference— Home rule powers, Vernon's Ann. Tex. Const. art. 11, § 5. 
 
PREAMBLE 
We, the citizens of Lewisville, Texas, in order to establish a home rule municipal government, provide for the future progress of our city and obtain more fully the benefits of local self-government, and provide for the public welfare, hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter, in accordance with the statutes of the State of Texas; and do hereby declare the residents of the City of Lewisville, in Denton/Dallas Counties, Texas living within the legally established boundaries of the said city, to be a political subdivision of the State of Texas, incorporated forever under the name and style of the "City of Lewisville" with such powers, rights, privileges, authorities, duties, and immunities, as are herein provided. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92)  
ARTICLE 1. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Section 1.01. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this charter, shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government." Pursuant to its provisions, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the statutes of this state, and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the "city council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city manager, who in turn, shall be held responsible to the city council for the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the state constitution, or by the statutes of the State of Texas.  
Section 1.02. - The boundaries. 
The inhabitants of the City of Lewisville, Denton/Dallas Counties, Texas residing within its corporate limits, as heretofore or hereafter established, are hereby constituted and shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate, in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of Lewisville" with such powers, privileges, rights, duties, authorities, and immunities, as are herein provided. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92)  
Section 1.03. - Extension of boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Lewisville may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size and configuration, by the method hereinafter set forth: 
a.  The city council shall have the power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Lewisville, Texas, and to provide for the alteration and the extension of said boundary limits, and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the city, with or without the consent of the territory and inhabitants annexed. The city council of the City of Lewisville, Texas shall provide for such notices and publications of such notices as is required by the laws of the State of Texas; and upon the final passage of any such ordinance, the boundary limits of the City of Lewisville, Texas shall thereafter be fixed as provided in such ordinance. 
b.  When any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the City of Lewisville, Texas, and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the city, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of the other citizens of said city, and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the city. 
(Amend. elec. 4-4-72) 
State Law reference— Annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.021 et seq.  
Section 1.04. - Contraction of boundaries. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the city council, there exists within the corporate limits of the City of Lewisville any territory not suitable or necessary for city purposes, the city council may, upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory, if the same be inhabited, (or without any such petition if the same be uninhabited), by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of said city; said petition and ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from the city and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that the same can be definitely ascertained and when said ordinance has been duly passed, the same shall be entered upon the minutes and records of said city, and from and after the entry of such ordinance, said territory shall cease to be a part of said city, but said territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts incurred while said area was a part of said city and the city shall continue to levy, assess and collect taxes on the property within said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the city as though the same had not been excluded from the boundaries of the city.  
ARTICLE 2. - POWERS OF THE CITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 26.001 et seq., 51.001, 51.071 et seq. 
 
Section 2.01. - General. 
a.  The City of Lewisville may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be impleaded in all courts in all matters whatsoever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof, the federal government, or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas; and shall have all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all the powers granted. 
b.  The city may own or acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose in fee simple or in any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation; and may sell, lease, hold, manage, control and police any property now owned by it or which it may hereafter acquire, and shall have the right to lease or let its property whether inside or outside of the city limits, subject to the limitations hereinafter set out, and may construct, own, lease, operate and regulate public utilities, may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issuance and sale of bonds, warrants or notes of the city; may appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations; and may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace and welfare of the city, for the performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its residents; and may provide suitable penalties for the violations of any ordinance enacted by the City of Lewisville; and, except as prohibited by the constitution and laws of this state, or as restricted by this charter, the city may exercise, and shall have, all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, authorities and immunities, of every name and nature whatsoever.  
Section 2.02. - General powers adopted. 
The enumeration of the particular powers of this charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the city shall have and may exercise all powers of local self-government and all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this charter specifically to enumerate. The City of Lewisville shall have and may exercise all the powers enumerated in Article 1175, Chapter 13, Title 28, of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925, as now, or hereafter amended. 
State Law reference— Home rule powers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 26.001 et seq., 51.001, 51.071 et seq.  
Section 2.03. - Eminent domain. 
The city shall have the full power, authority and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable, to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this charter, or by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The city may exercise the power of eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred, shall include the right of the city to take the fee in land so condemned, and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn private property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess the right and power of condemnation for any and all municipal or public purposes, even though not specifically enumerated in this charter. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92) 
State Law reference— Eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 251.001 et seq.  
ARTICLE 3. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Section 3.01. - Number, selection and term. 
The legislative and governing body of the city shall consist of a mayor, and five (5) councilmembers, and shall be known and referred to as the "City Council of the City of Lewisville, Texas." All references made in this charter to "the city council" shall mean the duly elected mayor and five (5) councilmembers. The exercise of any power granted to the city council shall require an affirmative vote of at least three (3) councilmembers, with the mayor having no vote except as provided in section 3.01b. of this charter. 
a.  The mayor and the other members of the city council shall be elected from the city at large. 
b.  The mayor shall preside at meetings of the city council, and shall be recognized as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. He may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the council. He shall not be entitled to vote as a member thereof, on legislative or other matters, except in case of a tie, when he shall have the right to cast the deciding vote. 
c.  At the regular city council election in 2002 council places 3, 4 and 5 shall be filled by filling one place for a three-year term and two places for two-year terms. The place to be filled for the three-year term shall be selected by lot. At the regular city council election in 2003 council places 1, 2 and the mayor shall be filled by electing one place for a two-year term and the mayor and one place for three-year terms. The place to be filled for the two-year term shall be selected by lot. At the regular city council election in 2004 and in all subsequent city council elections all council places and the mayor shall be filled for three-year terms. All persons elected shall hold office until one's successor is elected and qualified. All elections shall be held in the manner provided in article 5 of this charter. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92; Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01)  
Section 3.02. - Qualifications. 
The mayor and each member of the city council, in addition to having such other qualifications as prescribed by law, shall be a qualified voter of the city; shall have resided for at least one (1) year immediately preceding his election within the corporate limits of the City of Lewisville, or shall have been a resident for at least one (1) year immediately preceding his election of any territory not formerly within the corporate limits of said city, but which has been annexed to the city under the provisions of section 1.03 of this charter; shall not be in arrears in the payment of any taxes or other liabilities due to the city; and shall not hold any other office or employment under the city government while he is a member of said council. 
The office of mayor or a councilman shall become vacant upon his death, resignation or removal from office in any manner authorized by law or by this charter. The city council shall also have the power and authority to declare, and may at its next regular meeting declare a vacancy to exist in the office of mayor or any councilman if such mayor or councilman: 
a.  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by this charter or by law; or 
b.  Violates any expressed prohibition of this charter; or 
c.  Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or a felony; or 
d.  Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the council without being excused by the council. 
If such vacancy occurs, said vacancy shall be filled as set forth in section 3.06 of this charter. 
(Amend. elec. 4-30-74; 4-5-86)  
Section 3.03. - Council to be judge of election, qualification. 
The city council shall be judge of the election and qualification of its own members, and other elected officials of the city.  
Section 3.04. - Compensation. 
The mayor and members of the city council of Lewisville shall each receive compensation in the sum of $50.00 for each meeting of the city council which they attend; they shall also be entitled to reimbursement of and for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties, when approved by the council. 
(Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 3.05. - Mayor pro-tem and deputy mayor pro-tem. 
The city council, at its first meeting after the annual election of councilmen, shall elect one of its number as mayor pro-tem and one of its number as deputy mayor pro-tem. The mayor pro-tem shall perform all the duties of the mayor, in the absence or disability of the mayor, and the deputy mayor pro-tem shall perform all the duties of the mayor, in the absence or disability of the mayor and mayor pro-tem. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92)  
Section 3.06. - Vacancies. 
All vacancies shall be determined and filled in accordance with the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, as they now exist or may hereafter be amended. Any vacancy occurring for which the unexpired term is twelve (12) months or less shall be filled within thirty days of the occurrence of the vacancy by appointment of a majority vote of the remaining councilmen mentioned under section 3.01 above. Any vacancy for which the unexpired term is for more than twelve (12) months must be filled by a majority of the qualified voters voting in a special election called for such purpose in accordance with the Texas State Constitution. All vacancies filled by appointment or election shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term of the office so filled. 
(Amend. elec. 4-30-74; 4-3-82; Res. No. 2102-5-96(R), §§ I, III, 5-6-96, elec. 5-4-96; Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01; Res. No. 4437-11-2017(R) , § 1, 11-20-17, elec. 11-7-17)  
Section 3.07. - Powers of the city council. 
All powers of the city, and the determination of all matters of policy, shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the foregoing, and among the other powers that may be exercised by the city council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
a.  Appoint and remove a city manager as hereinafter provided. 
b.  Establish, create, consolidate, or abolish, administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions. 
c.  Adopt the budget of the city. 
d.  Authorize the issuance and sale of bonds, by a bond ordinance. 
e.  Inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make investigations as to municipal affairs. To name and designate an "official newspaper" for the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
f.  Provide for such additional boards and commissions, not otherwise provided for in this charter, as may be deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this charter, by city ordinance, or by law. 
g.  Adopt and modify the zoning plan, and a building code, including electrical and plumbing codes, of and for the city; and to require building permits. 
h.  Adopt and modify the official map of the city. (The official map is, and shall be maintained by the city secretary, in the city hall in Lewisville, Texas.) 
i.  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the city planning commission, for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas. 
j.  Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the city planning commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole, or in part, by disaster. 
k.  Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the city. 
l.  Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits, and prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein; and provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within said limits; and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings, or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard, and prescribe the manner of their removal or destruction, within said limits. 
m.  Fix the salaries and compensation of the city officers and employees, to set up qualifications, rules, and standards of and for employees of the city. 
n.  Provide for a sanitary sewer and water system, and require property owners to connect their premises with sewer system, and provide for penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections. 
o.  Provide for sanitary garbage disposal, and set fees and charges therefor, and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges. To define nuisances; and, to prohibit same; and provide penalties for violations. 
p.  Provide for all necessary public utilities and set fees and charges therefor and provide penalties for misuses of same. 
q.  Exercise exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction, (including the right to close and abandon streets and alleys), in, upon, over and under, the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, highways, boulevards and public grounds of the city; and, provide for the improvement of same, as provided in Article 1105b, Chapter 9, Title 28, of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925, as now, or hereafter amended. 
r.  Compromise and settle any and all claims, demands, and lawsuits, of every kind and character, in favor of, or against, the City of Lewisville. 
s.  To require bonds, both special and general, of all contractors and others constructing or building for the city, and set up standards, rules and regulations therefor. 
t.  To pass ordinances defining and prohibiting misdemeanors and vagrancy; and, provide penalties for violations. 
u.  To provide and/or arrange for any and all "civil defense measures" and "public shelter measures" for the City of Lewisville, Texas, and for the citizens thereof, deemed necessary for public welfare. 
v.  To exercise, or delegate to the mayor, extraordinary and total executive powers, (on a temporary basis), during the existence and duration of any major public disaster, for the public welfare.  
Section 3.08. - City council not to interfere in appointments. 
Neither the city council, nor any of its members, shall direct the appointment of any person to office by the city manager, or by any of his subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager and neither the city council, nor any members thereof, shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately.  
Section 3.09. - Meetings of the city council. 
The city council shall hold at least two regular meetings in each month at a time to be fixed by it for such regular meetings, and may hold as many additional meetings during the month as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the city and its citizens. All meetings of the city council shall be public, and shall be held at the city hall, except that the city council may designate another place for such meetings. Special meetings shall be called by the city secretary upon request of the mayor, city manager, or a majority of the members of the council. 
All meetings shall be held in compliance with open meetings laws of the State of Texas and no closed or executive meetings shall be held unless the city council has first been convened in an open meeting or session for which lawful notice has been given and during which open meeting or session the presiding officer has publicly announced that a closed or executive meeting or session will be held and identified the section or sections under the open meetings laws of the State of Texas authorizing the holding of such closed or executive session. No final action or vote with regard to any matter considered in the closed meeting shall be made except in a meeting which is open to the public and where the general subject matter for consideration appears on the agenda of such public meeting. 
(Amend. elec. 4-30-74) 
State Law reference— Open meetings law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17.  
Section 3.10. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may compel the attendance of its members. Four (4) qualified members of the city council, including the mayor, or mayor pro-tem or deputy mayor pro-tem, shall constitute a quorum to do business, and the affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, resolution or exercise any power authorized by this charter. Minutes of the proceedings of all meetings of the city council shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times, and which shall constitute one of the archives of the city. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions or other action shall be taken by the "ayes" and "nays" and entered upon the minutes, and every ordinance, resolution or other action, upon its final passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose under full caption, and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of the city secretary. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92)  
Section 3.11. - Procedure for passage of ordinances. 
a.  The city council shall legislate by ordinance, and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be, "Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City of Lewisville, Texas:". The city attorney shall approve all ordinances adopted by the council, as to the legality thereof, or shall file with the city secretary his written legal objections thereto. Evidence of approval of an ordinance by the city attorney may be by notation on the ordinance itself, or by separate paper or instrument. Every ordinance enacted by the council shall be signed by the mayor, mayor pro-tem, or by two councilmen, and shall be filed with and recorded by the city secretary. Except as otherwise herein specifically provided, the descriptive caption of all ordinances shall be read in open meeting of the council on three (3) several days. All ordinances, shall take effect immediately upon final passage thereof. However, the requirements for reading ordinances on three (3) several days may be dispensed with, where an ordinance relating to the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety, or public welfare is adopted by the favorable vote of 4/5 of the five (5) councilmen mentioned under section 3.01 above, qualified and serving, and contains a statement of the nature of the emergency. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city secretary shall give notice of the enactment of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture for any violation of any of its provisions, and of every other ordinance required by law or this charter to be published, by causing the said ordinance, or its caption and penalty, to be published at least one (1) time within ten (10) days after final passage thereof in the official newspaper of the city. The affidavit of such publication by the publisher of such newspaper taken before any officer authorized to administer oaths and filed with the city secretary, shall be conclusive proof of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance, in all courts. Such ordinance shall take effect ten (10) days after the date of such publication and promulgation of such ordinance passed as an emergency measure under the preceding paragraph of this article shall take effect immediately on its publication. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city secretary, and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes or journal of council meetings. 
c.  The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected, amended, revised, codified, and printed in code form, as often as the council deems advisable and, such printed code, when adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same, or any part thereof, in a newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
(Amend. elec. 4-4-72; 5-5-89)  
Section 3.12. - Official bonds for city employees. 
The city manager and the city secretary and such other city officers and employees as the city council may require shall before entering upon the duties of their office, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in a sum to be determined by the city council payable to the City of Lewisville, and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of such persons, and upon the faithful accounting for all monies, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such persons, and such bonds, shall be signed as surety by some company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Texas; and, the premium of such bonds shall be paid by the City of Lewisville; and, such bonds must be acceptable to the city council. Such bond shall be maintained in full force and effect at all times during such person's tenure of office. 
(Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01)  
Section 3.13. - Investigation by the city council. 
The city council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, officer or employee of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena, or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).  
Section 3.14. - Audit and examination of city books and accounts. 
The city council shall cause an independent annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the city and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audit shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of accountants, who shall be selected by the city council, and who shall have no interest, direct or indirect in financial affairs of the city government or in any of its officers. The council may designate such accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding two (2) years, provided that the designation for any particular year shall be made not later than thirty (30) days before the end of such fiscal year. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from redesignating the same accountant or firm which has previously been designated to prepare an audit. If the State of Texas makes such an audit, the council may accept it as satisfying the requirement of this section. Such accountant, so selected, shall not maintain or keep any of the city's accounts or records. Such audit shall include a recapitulation of all internal audits made during the course of each fiscal year, and all audit reports shall be filed with the city council, shall be available for public inspection, and shall be made a part of the archives of the city. 
(Amend. elec. 4-30-74; 5-5-89)  
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
 
Section 4.01. - City manager. 
a.  Appointment and qualifications. The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the city, and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all the affairs of the city. He shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience and ability; and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City of Lewisville. No member of the city council shall, during the time for which he is selected, and for one (1) year thereafter, be appointed city manager. 
b.  Term and salary. The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term, but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council, by a vote of the majority of the entire council. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of such suspension or removal, in the city council. In the case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the council. 
c.  Duties of the city manager. 
1.  Appoint and remove any employee of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter. 
2.  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council, and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
3.  Prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year. 
4.  Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations as may seem desirable. 
5.  Perform such duties as may be prescribed by this charter or may be required of him by the city council, not inconsistent with this charter.  
Section 4.02. - Department of police. 
There shall be established and maintained a department of police, to preserve order within the city, and to secure the residents of said city from violence, and the property therein, from injury or loss. 
a.  Chief of police. The chief of police shall be the chief administrative officer of the department of police. He shall, with the approval of the city manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by the city council. The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager for an indefinite term. The chief of police shall be fully responsible to the city manager for the administration of his department, and for the carrying out and enforcement of the resolutions and ordinances of the city council. He may be removed from office by said city manager. 
b.  Special police. No person, except as authorized by general law, by this charter, or by the ordinances passed pursuant hereto, shall act as a special police or special detective.  
Section 4.03. - City secretary. 
The city council shall appoint the city secretary. The city secretary shall give notice of council meetings, shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of such meetings, shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a book kept and indexed for the purpose, all ordinances, and resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as the city council shall assign to him, and those elsewhere provided in this charter. 
(Amend. elec. 4-4-72; Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01)  
Section 4.04. - Municipal court. 
a.  There shall be established and maintained a court, designated as a "municipal court" for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter, be prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal or recorder's courts. 
b.  The judge of said court shall be appointed by the city council of the City of Lewisville, and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city council. 
c.  The city secretary or an assistant city secretary may be ex-officio clerk of said court. 
d.  The clerk of said court and his deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual, and necessary to be performed, by the clerks of courts, in issuing process of said courts, and conducting the business thereof. 
e.  The city council shall appoint one or more alternate judges who shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city council. In case of the disability or absence of the judge of the municipal court, the alternate judge shall have authority to act as judge of said court. 
f.  The appointment of the judge and any alternate judge may be terminated at any time by a majority of the city council. 
(Amend. elec. 4-4-72; 4-3-82; 5-2-92; Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 4.05. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a competent and duly qualified and licensed attorney, practicing law in the State of Texas, who shall be the attorney for the city (and may also be referred to as city attorney). He shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council and shall hold his office at the pleasure of the city council. The attorney for the city, or such other attorneys recommended by him, with the approval of the city council, shall represent the city in all litigation. He shall be the legal advisor of, and attorney and counsel for, the city and all officers and departments thereof. The city council may retain special counsel at any time it deems same appropriate and necessary. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92; Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01)  
Section 4.06. - Local health department. 
The city council shall establish a local health department in accordance with Chapter 121, Texas Health and Safety Code, V.T.C.A. as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Amend. elec. 4-3-82; 5-2-92) 
State Law reference— Health authority, powers and duties, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.021 et seq.  
Section 4.07. - Other departments. 
The city council may abolish or consolidate such offices and departments as it may deem to be to the best interest of the city, and may divide and subdivide the administration of any such departments as it may deem advisable; may create new departments, and may discontinue any offices or departments at its discretion, except those specifically established by this charter.  
ARTICLE 5. - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 
 
Section 5.01. - Elections. 
The regular city election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May, unless the Texas Election Code requires that this election be held on some other date, at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices, the terms of which expire in that year. The city council shall fix the hours and place for holding such election. The city council may, by resolution, order a special election, fix the time and places for holding same, and provide all means for holding such special election. Notice of the election shall be published as required by the Texas Election Code. In the order, ordinances, or resolution of the city council calling any election, at which more than one (1) councilman shall be elected, the city council shall, in calling such election, provide for a separate place on the ballot for each vacancy to be filled at such election, designating such places as Place No. One, Place No. Two, etc.; and in case an unexpired term is to be filled at such election, the place for the unexpired term shall be so designated. 
(Amend. elec. 4-30-74; 4-3-82; 5-5-89; 5-2-92; Res. No. 2102-5-96(R), §§ I, III, 5-6-96, elec. 5-4-96) 
State Law reference— Election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 41.001.  
Section 5.02. - Regulation of elections. 
The city council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, and for the prevention of fraud in such elections. Municipal elections shall be conducted by appointed election officials in accordance with any regulations made by the council or the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01)  
Section 5.03. - Filing for office. 
Any person having the qualifications set forth for councilman under section 3.02 of this charter shall have the right to file an application to have his name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for any elective office, and such application in writing, signed by such candidate and accompanied by his loyalty affidavit, as prescribed by the Texas Election Code shall entitle such applicant to a place on the official ballot. Each such person filing his application to have his name placed on the official ballot shall, in his application, specify the place for which he desires to become a candidate. 
(Amend. elec. 5-5-89)  
Section 5.04. - The official ballot. 
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designations, in the order determined in a drawing of lots, conducted by the city council. All official ballots shall be printed at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of any general or special election, and early voting shall be governed by the general election laws of the State of Texas. 
(Res. No. 2102-5-96(R), §§ I, III, 5-6-96, elec. 5-4-96)  
Section 5.05. - Election by majority. 
At any regular or special municipal election, the candidates in each place on the ballot who receive the majority of votes cast in such election shall be declared elected. Should no candidate receive a majority of votes for an office, the council shall immediately order a special election to be held on a date permitted by the provisions of the Texas Election Code. At this special election only the names of the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes at the regular election for the office shall be submitted to the voters and the candidate receiving the majority of votes in such special election shall be declared duly elected. 
(Amend. elec. 4-4-72; 4-30-74; 4-5-86; Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01; Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 5.06. - Laws governing city elections. 
a.  All city elections shall be governed by the constitution of the State of Texas, laws of the State of Texas applying to home rule city municipal elections, this charter, ordinances and resolutions of the city, in the order named. 
b.  All citizens qualified by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas to vote in the city, who satisfy the requirements for registration prescribed by law, and who shall be residents of the incorporated city limits of the City of Lewisville shall be qualified voters of the city within the meaning of this charter. 
(Amend. elec. 4-30-74)  
Section 5.07. - Conducting and canvassing elections. 
The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall be appointed by the city council. The election judges shall conduct the elections, determine, record and report the results as provided by the general election laws of Texas. Within five (5) days or as soon as practical after an election, the city council shall meet, open the returns, canvass and officially declare the result of the election as to candidates and questions, and issue certificates of election to candidates elected, as hereinbefore provided.  
Section 5.08. - Oath of office. 
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the following oath of affirmation to be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary. 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office ___________, of the City of Lewisville, State of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the Constitution and Laws of the United States and of this State and the Charter and Ordinances of this city; and I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm), that I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered, or promised to pay, contributed, nor promised to contribute any money or valuable thing, or promised any public office or employment as a reward for the giving or withholding a vote at the election at which I was elected, or if the office is one of appointment, to secure my appointment. So help me God." 
State Law reference— Oath, Vernon's Ann. Tex. Const. art. 16, § 1.  
ARTICLE 6. - RECALL OF OFFICERS 
 
Section 6.01. - Scope of recall. 
Any elected city official, whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the city or appointed by the city council to fill a vacancy shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the city on grounds of incompetency, misconduct, or malfeasance in office.  
Section 6.02. - Petitions for recall. 
Before the question of recall of such officers shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city, a petition demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary; which said petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least five percent (5%) of those who were qualified voters on the date of the last regular municipal election. Each signer of such recall petition shall personally sign his name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after his name his place of residence, giving name of street and number, or place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the month, and year, his signature was affixed. 
(Amend. elec. 5-5-89)  
Section 6.03. - Form of recall petition. 
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the city council of the City of Lewisville, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed, notice of the matters and things with which he is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF DENTON 
I, ___________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
Sworn and subscribed to before me this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	_____
Notary Public in and for Denton County, Texas." 
  
Section 6.04. - Various papers constituting petition. 
The petition may consist of one or more copies, or "subscription lists," circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other papers attached thereto. Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this article may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts of copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective, or be counted, which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of city secretary. All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary on the same day, and the said secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to his Lewisville address.  
Section 6.05. - Presentation of petition to city council. 
Within fifteen (15) days after the date of the filing of the papers constituting the recall petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present such petition to the city council of the City of Lewisville. 
(Amend. elec. 5-5-89)  
Section 6.06. - Public hearing to be held. 
The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the city council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the city council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.  
Section 6.07. - Election to be called. 
If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the city council to order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election, the date of which election shall be not less than forty-five (45) nor more than fifty-five (55) days from the date such petition was presented to the city council, or from the date of the public hearing, if one was held, or such other date as required by the current Texas Election Code. 
(Amend. elec. 5-5-89)  
Section 6.08. - Ballots in recall election. 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: 
"Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall"? 
b.  Immediately below each question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"YES" 
"NO"  
Section 6.09. - Result of recall election. 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be "NO," (that is, against the recall of the person named on the ballot), he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall, as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be "YES" (that is, for the recall of the person named on the ballot), he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office, and the vacancy shall be filled as vacancies in the city council are filled, (as provided in section 3.06 of this charter).  
Section 6.10. - Recall, restrictions thereon. 
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City of Lewisville within three (3) months after his election, nor, within three (3) months after an election for such officer's recall.  
Section 6.11. - Failure of city council to call an election. 
In case all of the requirements of this charter shall have been met and the city council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said city council by the provisions of this charter with reference to such recall, then the county judge of Denton County, Texas, shall discharge any of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of city secretary, or by the city council.  
ARTICLE 7. - LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
Section 7.01. - General power. 
The qualified voters of the City of Lewisville shall also have the power of direct legislation by initiative and referendum. 
(Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 7.02. - Initiative. 
The people of the City of Lewisville reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in exercise of such power may propose any ordinance except: (1) ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes, and (2) ordinances repealing ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes, not in conflict with this charter, the state constitution or state laws. Any initiated ordinance may, subject to the above, be submitted by the qualified voters of the City of Lewisville, by submitting a petition addressed to the city council which requests the submission of a proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of the qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least five (5) percent of those who were qualified voters on the date of the last regular municipal election of the city, and each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. The petition shall be signed in the same manner as recall petitions are signed, as provided in section 6.02 of this charter, and shall be verified by oath in the manner and form provided for recall petitions in section 6.03 of this charter. The petition may consist of one or more copies, as permitted for recall petitions in section 6.04 of this charter. Such petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary. Within fifteen (15) days after filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present said petition and proposed ordinance or resolution to the city council. Upon presentation to it of the petition and draft of the proposed ordinance or resolution, it shall become the duty of the city council, within ten (10) days after the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolution without alteration as to meaning or effect in the opinion of the persons filing the petition, or to call a special election to be held at the next available election date in accordance with the Texas Election Code at which the qualified voters of the City of Lewisville shall vote on the questions of adopting or rejecting the proposed legislation. No initiative petition shall be filed within three (3) months after an election on the same ordinance. 
(Amend. elec. 5-5-89)  
Section 7.03. - Referendum. 
Qualified voters of the City of Lewisville may require that any ordinance or resolution, with the exception of ordinances or resolutions authorizing the issuance of bonds or warrants, levying taxes or adopting a budget or making appropriations for the operation of the city, passed by the city council, be submitted to the voters of the city for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for this purpose within thirty (30) days after final passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within 30 days after its publication. Said petition shall be addressed, prepared, signed and verified as required for petitions initiating legislation as provided in section 7.02 of this charter and shall be submitted to the person performing the duties of city secretary. Immediately upon the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present said petition to the city council. Thereupon the city council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or resolution and, if it does not entirely repeal the same, shall submit it to popular vote as provided in section 7.02 of this charter. Pending the holding of such election, such ordinance or resolution shall be suspended from taking effect and shall not later take effect unless a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon at such election shall vote in favor thereof.  
Section 7.04. - Voluntary submission of legislation by the council. 
The city council may, upon its own motion, and by a majority vote of its members, submit to popular vote at any election, for adoption or rejection, any proposed ordinance, or resolution, or measure, or may submit for repeal, any existing ordinance, resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this article for "submission on petition," and may at its discretion call a special election for this purpose.  
Section 7.05. - Form of ballots. 
The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinances, resolutions or measures, shall set forth their nature sufficiently to identify them and shall also set forth upon separate lines the words: 
"FOR the ORDINANCE," and 
"AGAINST the ORDINANCE," or 
"FOR the RESOLUTION," and 
"AGAINST the RESOLUTION."  
Section 7.06. - Publication of proposed and referred ordinances. 
The person performing the duties of city secretary shall publish at least once in the official newspaper of the city the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other things relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election.  
Section 7.07. - Adoption of ordinances. 
If a majority of the qualified voters voting on any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon, or at any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order to the city council.  
Section 7.08. - Inconsistent ordinances. 
If the provisions of two (2) or more proposed ordinances or resolutions approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.  
Section 7.09. - Ordinances passed by popular vote, repeal or amendment. 
No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the city council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this article shall be repealed or amended, except by the city council, in response to a referendum petition, or by submission, as provided in section 7.04 of this charter.  
Section 7.10. - Further regulations by city council. 
The city council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this article, consistent herewith.  
Section 7.11. - Franchise ordinances. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of article 10 of this charter, pertaining to ordinances granting franchises, when valuable rights shall have actually accrued thereunder.  
ARTICLE 8. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING 
 
Section 8.01. - Platting of property. 
a.  Hereafter, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City of Lewisville, Texas, who may divide the same in two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision or any addition to the city, shall comply with the provisions of Section 212.004 et seq. of the Local Government Code of the State of Texas, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, and said Section 212.004 et seq., as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes. 
b.  The provisions of section 8.01a. above shall apply similarly to the owner of any tract of land situated with a maximum distance of two (2) miles beyond corporate limits of the City of Lewisville [see V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.021(3)]. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92) 
State Law reference— Subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq.; extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.  
Section 8.02. - Development of property. 
The city council shall cooperate with persons interested in the development of property within, or beyond, the city limits. No expenditure of public funds, however, shall be authorized for the development of privately owned subdivisions, situated within or beyond the corporate limits of the city; except, (where feasible for the city) for the extension of utilities or services to such areas. 
(Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01)  
Section 8.03. - Planning commission. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to appoint a city planning commission, in accordance with the general laws of the State of Texas, as provided for in Articles 1011a through 1011L of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas (T.28, Ch. 4) as now, or hereafter amended; and, the city council and City of Lewisville shall have all of the rights, privileges, powers, and authority given, permitted and granted, under the laws of the State of Texas, relative to zoning and planning in, for, and of, municipalities, and their environs. Such commission may also be designated and referred to as the "city zoning commission" or as the "city planning and zoning commission." The present city zoning commission of the City of Lewisville may continue to serve, (or, may be specially designated by the city council, as the city planning commission or city planning and zoning commission, and shall in such event, thereafter serve under such new title). 
State Law reference— Zoning regulations and planning, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.001—211.021, 371.041—371.045.  
Section 8.04. - Planning commission membership. 
The city council shall appoint a city planning commission of seven (7) members who shall be residents of the city and own real property therein who shall serve without compensation. Members shall be appointed at the first regular meeting of the city council in July for a two (2) year term with four (4) members to be appointed in each even numbered year and three (3) members to be appointed in each odd numbered year on a continuing basis. Membership shall be accompanied by active participation in the activities of the commission, and when any member is absent for three (3) consecutive regular meetings, such absence shall be referred to the city council for review. Vacancies occurring in the commission shall be filled within thirty (30) days by the city council for the remainder of any unexpired term. 
(Amend. elec. 4-30-74)  
ARTICLE 9. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal finance, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.001 et seq. 
 
Section 9.01. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the City of Lewisville shall begin on the first day of October, and shall end on the last day of September, of each calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92) 
Editor's note— The fiscal year was changed to begin on October 1, pursuant to authority granted in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.05 by ordinance number 1466-7-89, adopted on July 10, 1989. 
State Law reference— Fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.05.  
Section 9.02. - Preparation and submission of budget. 
The city manager shall, between sixty (60) and ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, submit to the council a proposed budget, which shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and shall contain the following: 
a.  A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the city for the fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous fiscal year in expenditure and revenue items, and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. 
b.  A consolidated statement of anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures for all funds. 
c.  An analysis of property valuations. 
d.  An analysis of the tax rate. 
e.  Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least five (5) years. 
f.  General fund resources in detail. 
g.  Special fund resources in detail. 
h.  Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department, and activity. 
i.  Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support summary No. h. above. 
j.  A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds. 
k.  A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued and amount outstanding. 
l.  A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds. 
(Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04) 
State Law reference— Budgets, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 102.001 et seq.  
Section 9.03. - Anticipated revenues compared with other years in budget. 
In preparing the budget, the city manager shall place in parallel columns, opposite the several items of revenue: The actual amount of each item for the last completed fiscal year; the estimated amount for the current fiscal year; and, the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Section 9.04. - Proposed expenditures compared with other years. 
The city manager in the preparation of the budget shall place in parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures: The actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year; the estimated amount for the current fiscal year; and, the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Section 9.05. - Budget a public record. 
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary, submitted to the city council and shall be public record. The city manager shall provide copies for distribution to all interested persons. 
State Law reference— Public records, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17a.  
Section 9.06. - Notice of public hearing on budget. 
At the meeting of the city council at which the budget is submitted, the city council shall fix the time and place of public hearing on the budget. The public hearing on the proposed budget shall be set for a date occurring after the 15th day after the budget is filed with the municipal clerk, but before the governing body makes its tax levy, and the city council shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the City of Lewisville, a notice of the hearing setting forth the time and place thereof at least five days before the date of such hearing. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92)  
Section 9.07. - Public hearing on budget. 
At the time and place set forth in the notice required by section 9.06, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained.  
Section 9.08. - Proceedings on budget after public hearing. 
After the conclusion of such public hearing, the city council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law; but, where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for an increase in the total anticipated revenues to at least equal such proposed expenditures. 
(Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, 5-8-01, elec. 5-5-01)  
Section 9.09. - Vote required for adoption. 
The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the whole city council.  
Section 9.10. - Date of final adoption. 
The budget shall be finally adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year; and, should the city council fail to so adopt a budget, the then existing budget together with its tax levying ordinance and its appropriation ordinance, shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 9.11. - Effective date of budget; certification; copies made available. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary and the county clerk of Denton County. The final budget shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced and copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations. 
(Res. No. 2102-5-96(R), §§ I, III, 5-6-96, elec. 5-4-96)  
Section 9.12. - Budget establishes appropriations. 
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.  
Section 9.13. - Budget establishes amount to be raised by property tax. 
From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax, shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the city, in the corresponding tax year; provided, however, that in no event shall such levy exceed the legal limit provided by the laws and constitution of the State of Texas.  
Section 9.14. - Contingent appropriation. 
Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount not more than three (3) percent of the total budget, to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditure. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the city manager and distributed by him, after approval of the city council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established emergencies, and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported.  
Section 9.15. - Estimated expenditures shall not exceed estimated resources. 
The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt service fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund (prospective income, plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions will permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the national committee on governmental accounting or some other nationally accepted classification.  
Section 9.16. - Other necessary appropriations. 
The city budget may be amended and appropriations altered in accordance therewith in cases of public necessity, the actual fact of which shall have been declared by the city council.  
Section 9.17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 2004, canvassing the results of an election held Sept. 11, 2004, repealed section 9.17 in its entirety. Former section 9.17 pertained to the department of taxation, and derived from Amend. elec. of May 2, 1992.  
Section 9.18. - Power to tax. 
The city council shall have the power under the provisions of the state law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon real and personal property within the city to the maximum provided by the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. The city council shall also have the power to levy occupation taxes on such occupations as consistent with the general laws of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference— Authority to tax, Vernon's Ann. Tex. Const. art. 11, §§ 4, 5; taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.  
Sections 9.19 through 9.23. - Deleted. 
(Amend. elec. 5-5-89; 5-2-92) 
State Law reference— Property taxation, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 1.01 et seq.  
Section 9.24. - Taxes; when due and payable. 
All taxes due the City of Lewisville shall be payable at the office of the city assessor-collector, and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall not be later than October 1st. Taxes shall be paid before February 1st, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty, interest and other collection costs as provided by the Texas Tax Code, Section 33.01 et seq., as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92)  
Section 9.25. - Tax liens. 
A lien is hereby created on all property, personal and real, in favor of the City of Lewisville, for all taxes, ad valorem, occupation or otherwise. Said lien shall exist from January 1st in each year, until the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims; and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can ever defeat such lien but, the city assessor-collector can pursue such property, and whenever found out, may seize and sell enough thereof to satisfy such taxes. All persons or corporations owning or holding personal property or real estate in the City of Lewisville on the first day of January of each year, shall be liable for all municipal taxes levied thereon for such year. The personal property of all persons owing any taxes to the City of Lewisville is hereby made liable for all of said taxes, whether the same be due upon personal or real property, or upon both.  
Section 9.26. - Issuance of bonds. 
a.  In keeping with the constitution of the State of Texas and not contrary thereto, the City of Lewisville shall have the right, authority and power to borrow money on the credit of the city for any public purpose not now or hereafter prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time warrants and other evidences of indebtedness as now authorized, or as may hereafter be authorized, to be issued by cities and towns, by the laws of the State of Texas. 
b.  Revenue bonds: The city shall have the right, authority and power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or facilities for any other self-liquidating municipal function not now or hereafter prohibited by any general laws of the state; and, to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon, and payable solely from the properties, or interest therein, acquired, and the income therefrom; and, same shall never be a "debt of the city." All revenue bonds issued by the city shall first be authorized by a majority of the qualified voters voting at an election held for such purpose. The council shall have authority to provide for the terms and form of any purchase agreement, contract, mortgage, bond or document, desired or necessary, for the issuance of revenue bonds, and the acquisition and operation of any such property or interest.  
Section 9.27. - City treasurer. 
The city manager shall appoint a competent person as city treasurer and such assistants as the city council shall deem advisable. The city treasurer shall perform the duties delegated to him by the city manager and those which may be imposed upon him by the laws of the State of Texas. The duties of city secretary and city treasurer may be performed by the same individual.  
ARTICLE 10. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Section 10.01. - Powers of the city. 
In addition to the city's power, right and authority, to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities, and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such utilities' operations, the city shall have all further rights, authorities, and powers as may now, or hereafter, be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The city also shall have the power to the full extent not otherwise prohibited by the Constitution of the State of Texas to acquire by condemnation or otherwise any properties or rights (of any nature, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible, including, without limitation, real property and interests therein, works, improvements, facilities plants, equipment, appliances, approvals, permits, licenses, franchises, leases, options, contract rights, certificates of convenience and necessity, and any and all other property or rights of any kind or nature whatsoever), systems, or business, in whole or in part, of any utility or other entity as necessary, appropriate or convenient to enable the city to provide utility service of any character within the city limits or in other areas permitted by law. The city council, by ordinance, may adopt all rules and regulations, both procedural and substantive, considered necessary, convenient or appropriate to enable the city to acquire, by condemnation or otherwise, any such property, system or business and to provide for the due process of law in connection therewith. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92)  
Section 10.02. - Franchise; power of city council. 
The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and extend, all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City of Lewisville. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at two (2) separate regular meetings of the city council, and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first reading; and no such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage; and, pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be made available for inspection in the City Secretary's office, the main library and through such other means of publication as may be directed by the city council. No public utility franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty (20) years; nor shall same be transferable, except with the approval of the city council, expressed by ordinance. 
(Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 10.03. - Franchise value not to be allowed. 
No value shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the City of Lewisville under this charter, in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the city, and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the city for public utility property which the city may acquire by condemnation, or otherwise.  
Section 10.04. - Right of regulation. 
All grants, removals, extensions or amendment of public utility franchises whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right and power of the city council of the City of Lewisville: 
a.  To repeal the ordinance, at any time, upon the failure of the grantee to comply with any provision of the ordinance, the franchise, the charter of the City of Lewisville, and applicable statute of the State of Texas, or the rule of any applicable governmental body; 
b.  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency; 
c.  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
d.  At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility, and to require annual, and other reports, including reports on operations within the City of Lewisville. 
e.  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
f.  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 10.05. - Grant not to be exclusive. 
No grant, contract, or franchise, to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility, for or in Lewisville, Texas, and no renewal or extension of such grant, contract or franchise, shall be exclusive.  
Section 10.06. - Consent of property owners. 
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility; but, nothing in this charter, or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law.  
Section 10.07. - Extensions. 
All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in section 10.04 of this charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.  
Section 10.08. - Other conditions. 
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Lewisville and the grantee, and the contractual rights, as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this charter, except that the power of the City of Lewisville to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for, to regulate the rates and services of a grantee which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the city council, or voters of the city, in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant.  
Section 10.09. - Accounts of municipally owned utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets and all liabilities, appropriately subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental, and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show actual capital cost to the city of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions and improvements and the source of funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any city government department. The city council shall cause an annual report to be made by a certified public accountant, and shall publish such report, showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such other data as the city council shall deem expedient.  
Section 10.10. - Sales of electricity, water and sewer services. 
a.  The city council shall have the right, power and authority to sell and distribute electricity and water, and to sell and provide for sewer services, and any other utilities, to any person, firm or corporation outside the limits of the City of Lewisville, and to permit them to connect with said system under contract with the city, under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best interests of the city; provided, the charges fixed for such services outside the city limits shall be reasonable when considered in the light of all circumstances, to be determined by the city council. 
b.  The city council shall have the right, power and authority to prescribe the kind of materials used within or beyond the limits of the City of Lewisville, where it furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to keep in good order and condition at all times and to make such rules and regulation as shall be necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for noncompliance with same.  
Section 10.11. - Regulation of rates and service. 
The city council shall have the absolute right, authority, and power after due notice and hearing, to regulate by ordinance, the rates and services of every public utility operating in the City of Lewisville; and shall have the power to employ, at the expense of the grantee, expert assistance and advice in determining a reasonable rate and equitable profit to the grantee. The city council shall also have the right, authority, and power to require at any time or times, detailed reports and financial statements on the operations of any such public utility, which reports and statements shall be in such form, and contain such information, as the council shall prescribe. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate rates, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1446c, § 17.  
ARTICLE 11. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 11.01. - Publicity of records. 
All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the city shall be open to inspection in accordance with the Open Records Act, Article 6252-17a of Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Amend. elec. 5-2-92) 
Public records act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-17a.  
Section 11.02. - Personal interest. 
No officer or employee of the City of Lewisville shall violate any provision of Chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code as it now exists or may hereafter be amended.(Amend. elec. 5-2-92) 
Standards of conduct, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6252-9d.  
Section 11.03. - Nepotism. 
No public official of the city shall appoint or vote for the appointment to any board, commission, corporation, authority, office, position or employment any individual related to such public official within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity or affinity as set forth in Chapter 573, Texas Government Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Amend. elec. 4-3-82; Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 11.04. - Provisions relating to assignment, execution and garnishments. 
The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation shall not be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors. 
State Law reference— Garnishment, Vernon's Ann. Tex. Const. art. 16, § 28; funds exempt, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.023.  
Section 11.05. - City not required to give security or execute bonds. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Lewisville is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the state courts but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings, same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law.  
Section 11.06. - Special provisions covering damage suits, etc. 
a.  The City of Lewisville, Texas, shall never be liable for any personal injury, whether resulting in death or not, unless the person injured, or someone in his behalf, or, in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death injury, shall file a notice in writing with the city manager or city secretary within one hundred eighty (180) days after the occurrence of such injury, stating specifically in such notice, when, where, and how the exact injury occurred, and the full extent thereof, together with the amount of damage claimed or asserted. The City of Lewisville, Texas, shall never be liable for claim for damage or injury to personal property unless the person whose personal property has been injured or damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the city manager or the city secretary within one hundred eighty (180) days after said damage or injury has occurred, stating specifically when, where, and how the injury or damage occurred and the full extent thereof, and the amount of damage sustained. 
b.  The City of Lewisville, Texas, shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to real property caused by the negligent act or omission of its officers, servants, agents or employees, unless the person whose real property has been injured or damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the city manager or city secretary within one hundred eighty (180) days after said damage or injury has occurred, stating specifically when, where, and how the injury or damage occurred, and the amount of damage claimed. The City of Lewisville, Texas, shall never be liable on account of any damage or injury to person or to personal property arising from or occasioned by any defect in any public street, highway, alley, grounds or public work of the City of Lewisville, Texas, unless the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall have been actually known to the city manager at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage, and proper diligence has not been exercised to rectify the defect. The notice herein required to be given to the city manager or the city secretary of the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall apply where the defect arose from any omission of the city itself, through its agents, servants or employees, or acts of third parties. 
c.  No provision of this section shall ever be so construed as to expand the ordinary liability of the city; and provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean that the City of Lewisville, Texas, waives any rights, privileges, defenses or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law, the constitution, and general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amend. elec. 5-5-89) 
State Law reference— Tort claims, notice, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.101.  
Section 11.07. - Rearrangement and renumbering. 
The city council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections and paragraphs of this charter, or any amendments thereto, as it shall deem appropriate; (but without changing the meaning or effect of any part hereof); and, upon the passage of any such ordinance, a copy thereof, certified by the city secretary, shall be forwarded to the secretary of state of the State of Texas, for filing.  
Section 11.08. - Judicial notice. 
This charter shall be deemed a public act, and shall have the force and effect of a general law, may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places, without further proof.  
Section 11.09. - Construction of charter. 
Any word or phrase in this charter which would appear to be gender specific, including but not limited to words such as "he," "his," "him," and "councilman," shall be read and construed as gender-neutral terms, and each charter provision using such a term shall be equally applicable to both males and females. 
(Res. No. 2102-5-96(R), §§ I, III, 5-6-96, elec. 5-4-96)  
Section 11.10. - Park board. 
The city council shall be and is, empowered, at its discretion, to appoint not less than five (5) nor more than nine (9) citizens and qualified voters of the City of Lewisville, who shall constitute its park board; and who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council; and for such term as may be lawfully established by ordinance. The park board shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council, and shall perform such duties as the city council may, from time to time, prescribe by ordinance.  
Section 11.11. - Public library. 
The city council shall have, and is given, the authority to establish and maintain a free public library within the city; and, to cooperate with any person, firm, association or corporation under such terms as the city council may prescribe, for the establishment of such free public library. 
(Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04) 
Cross reference— Public library, Ch. 10.5.  
Section 11.12. - Accepting gifts, etc. 
No officer or employee of the City of Lewisville shall ever accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor, or privilege, from any public utility corporation, or other corporation, person or persons, enjoying a grant, contract, franchise, privilege, or easement, from or with said city, during the term of office of such officer, or during such employment of such employee; except, as may be authorized by law, resolution or ordinance. Any officer or employee of the city who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be punished by any fine that may be prescribed by ordinance for this offense; and, shall, forthwith, be removed from office.  
Section 11.13. - Power to remit penalties. 
The governing body shall have the right to remit, in whole or in part, any fine or penalty belonging to the city, which may be imposed under any ordinance or resolution passed pursuant to this charter.  
Section 11.14. - Property not exempt from special assessments. 
No property of any kind, by whomsoever owned or held or by whatsoever institution, agency, political subdivision or organization, owned or held, whether in trust or by nonprofit organization, or corporation, or by "foundation," or otherwise, (except property of the City of Lewisville, Texas), shall be exempt in any way from any of the special taxes, charges, levies and assessments, authorized or permitted by this charter, for local improvements, for the public welfare.  
Section 11.15. - No lien on public property; contractors, etc. 
No lien of any kind or character can, and none shall ever exist, or be established, on or against the public buildings, property, public halls, parks, or public works of the City of Lewisville, Texas; and, all subcontractors, materialmen, mechanics, artisans, and laborers upon any public works or projects of the City of Lewisville are hereby required to notify the city in writing of all claims against it that they may have, on account of such work; and, when such notice has been timely, duly and properly given, the city shall retain an amount from any funds due the contractor, sufficient to satisfy all claims; provided, that such notice may be given at any time after such indebtedness becomes due, and before final settlement; and provided, further, that no contractor or subcontractor shall issue any "time checks" on, or on account of, any public works of said city.  
Section 11.16. - Disaster clause. 
In case of disaster, when a legal quorum of elected councilmembers cannot otherwise be assembled, due to multiple deaths or injuries, the surviving member or members of the elected council, (or highest surviving city official, if no elected official remains), must, within twenty-four (24) hours after such disaster, request assistance from the governor under the provisions of the Texas Disaster Act, Emergency Interim Public Office Succession Act, or other applicable state law. Within fifteen (15) days after such disaster, the normal rules may be suspended in order to call an election to fill the vacant positions in accordance with the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
(Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 11.17. - Separability clause. 
If any section or part of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter, nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section, or part of section, may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect, with the section, or part of section, to which such holding shall directly apply.  
Section 11.18. - Effect of this charter on existing law. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force under the city government of Lewisville and not in conflict with the provisions of this charter, shall remain in full force and effect under this charter until altered, amended or repealed by the council, after this charter takes effect; and, all rights of the City of Lewisville under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect for and to the City of Lewisville.  
Section 11.19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. No. 2681-5-2001(R), § III, passed at an election of May 5, 2001 and adopted May 8, 2001, repealed charter section 11.19 in its entirety. Former section 11.19 pertained to an interim municipal government.  
Section 11.20. - Applicability of general law. 
The constitution of the State of Texas, the statutes of said state applicable to home-rule municipal corporations, as now or hereafter enacted, this charter, and ordinances enacted pursuant hereto, shall, in the order mentioned, be applicable to the City of Lewisville; but, the city shall also have the power to exercise any and all powers conferred by the laws of the State of Texas upon any other kind of city, town or village, not contrary to the provisions of said "home-rule" statutes, charter, and ordinances; but, the exercise of any such powers by the City of Lewisville shall be optional with it, and it shall not be required to conform to the law governing any other cities, towns or villages, unless and until, by ordinance it adopts same.  
Section 11.21. - Amending the charter. 
Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter amended; but, no more often than once every two years, as provided by the laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 11.22. - Charter review commission. 
The city council shall appoint at its first regular meeting in July of 2009, and every fifth year thereafter, a charter review commission of five (5) citizens of the City of Lewisville. 
a.  Duties of the commission: 
1.  Inquire into the effectiveness of the city charter and determine whether any charter provisions require revision. To this end public hearings may be held. 
2.  Propose, if it deems desirable, amendments to this charter to improve the effective application of said charter to current conditions. 
3.  Report its findings and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the city council. 
b.  Action by the city council. The city council shall receive the final report presented by the charter review commission and shall consider any recommended amendments to said charter. The final report shall be made available for inspection in the City Secretary's office, the main library and through such other means of publication as may be directed by the city council. 
Term of office. The term of office of such charter review commission shall be six (6) months, and, if during such term no report is presented to the city council, then all records of the proceedings of such commission shall be filed with the city secretary and shall become a public record. 
(Amend. elec. 4-30-74; Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, 9-20-04, elec. 9-11-04)  
Section 11.23. - Retirement system and social security; group insurance. 
The city council shall have the power to provide for coverage of its appointed officer and employees under the workmen's compensation, retirement, and social security systems provided or permitted by laws of the State of Texas, for such officers and employees of the city; and for "group insurance coverage" of such officers and employees; the city council having the power to provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost thereof.  
Section 11.24. - Special powers under Article 1175:19. 
The city council and the City of Lewisville shall specially have all rights, powers and authority given and granted by and under Section 19, Article 1175 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, and all amendments thereof and thereto, (relative to nuisances within and outside of the city limits, and the prohibition thereof, etc.) 
State Law reference— Regulation of certain nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 215.072, 217.042, 341.903, 401.002.  
Section 11.25. - City depository. 
The provisions of the general laws of the State of Texas, governing the selection and designation of a city depository are hereby adopted as the law governing the selection and designation of a depository of and for the City of Lewisville. 
State Law reference— Depository, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 105.001 et seq.  
Section 11.26. - Tax debt arrearages. 
No money shall be paid by the City of Lewisville upon any claim, debt, demand, or account whatsoever, to any person, firm or corporation, who is in arrears to the City of Lewisville for taxes, or otherwise; and, the city shall be entitled to a counter-claim and offset against any such debt, claim, demand or account, in the amount of taxes or other debt in arrears, and no assignment or transfer of such debts, claims, demands, or accounts, after the said taxes or other debts are due, shall affect the right, authority and power of the city to offset the said taxes, or other debts, against the same.  
Section 11.27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. No. 3129-09-2004(R), § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 2004, canvassing the results of an election held Sept. 11, 2004, repealed section 11.27 in its entirety. Former section 11.27 pertained to the submission of charter to voters.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville, Texas, and may be so cited. 
Charter reference— Codification, § 3.11(c). 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal Code of Ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Agent. The word "agent" shall mean a person acting on behalf of another. 
Charter. The word "charter" shall mean the charter of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Lewisville in the State of Texas. 
City officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, employee, department, board, commission, or other agency, is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Lewisville, Texas." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or other agency shall mean and include such officer or any designee or authorized subordinate and shall also include the successor in function to such officer, employee, department, board, commission or agency. 
Code. The word "Code" shall mean this Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., Texas Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 4. 
Council. The words "council" or "city council" shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Lewisville. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean and refer to Denton and Dallas Counties, either singularly or collectively, whichever is applicable when taken in context. 
Fee. The word "fee" as used in this Code, shall mean a sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. 
Gender. A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender shall extend and be applied to both the masculine and feminine genders, and to firms, partnerships and corporations, etc. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Knowingly. The word "knowingly" imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or omission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission. 
License. The word "license" as used in this Code shall mean the permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nuisance. The word "nuisance" shall mean anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the community. 
Number. A word importing the singular may extend and be applied to the plural, and vice versa. 
Occupant. The word "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
Offense. The word "offense" shall mean any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code. 
Operator. The word "operator" as used in this Code shall mean the person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession. 
Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association or the state or any subdivision thereof, and including any trustee, receiver, assignee or personal representative thereof. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real, personal and mixed property. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The word "street" shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public places and sidewalks. 
Tenant. The word "tenant" applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." shall mean and refer to the latest edition or, supplement of Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. shall mean the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
Wilfully. The word "wilfully" when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" may include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. 
(Code 1990, §§ 1-3-1, 1-3-2) 
State Law reference— Definitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections; nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1990, § 1-3-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - Presentation as evidence. 
This Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect. 
(Code 1990, § 1-1-2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq.  
Sec. 1-5. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-6. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-7. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
(a)  The provisions appearing in this Code so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the City of Lewisville, Texas, 1990, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-9. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty of forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city herein repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1990, § 1-2-3)  
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeals. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the provision repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the provision repealed. 
(b)  This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
(Code 1990, § 1-2-3)  
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations. 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling an election. 
(17)  Any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements. 
(18)  Any ordinance levying a fee, rate, deposit or charge. 
(19)  Any ordinance regarding civil emergencies or disasters and emergency management. 
(20)  Any ordinance regarding cable television franchise and regulations. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. All ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Code 1990, § 1-2-1)  
Sec. 1-12. - Effect of amendments to Code. 
(a)  Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows: …." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters, or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-14. - Severability clause. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. 
(Code 1990, § 1-2-4)  
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 for violations of all such rules, ordinances and police regulations that govern fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, nor exceeding $500.00 for all other violations. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a specified penalty other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so specified shall be held to relate to the amended section, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(c)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed the amount authorized by section 12.23 of the Texas Penal Code does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(d)  Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds the amount authorized by section 12.23 of the Texas Penal Code shall require a culpable mental state of "criminal negligence." 
(Code 1990, §§ 1-4-1, 1-4-5; Ord. No. 3277-11-2005, § 1, 11-7-05) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Form of government and boundaries, § 1.01 et seq.; powers of the city, § 2.01 et seq.; city council, § 3.01 et seq.; administrative services, § 4.01 et seq.; general provisions, § 11.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration of the animal control regulations, § 3-41 et seq.; administration of the housing standards, § 4-171 et seq.; administration of the substandard building provisions, ch. 4, art. VII et seq.; administration of the fire prevention and protection regulations, § 5-26 et seq.; administration of the land development regulations, § 6-36 et seq.; administration of the unsanitary, unsightly conditions regulations, § 9-41 et seq.; administration of park regulations, § 10-26 et seq.; administration of the sign regulations, § 11-31 et seq.; administration of the industrial waste regulations, § 16-131 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Seal facsimile. 
The corporate seal provided and used by and for the city, in circular form having engraved thereon, the words, "City of Lewisville Seal," a facsimile of which is shown below, shall be and is hereby established and declared to have been and now to be the official seal of the city. The seal design was adopted by the city council on June 18, 1990.  

Seal 
(Code 1990, § 1-17-1) 
Charter reference— Seal, § 2.01.  
Secs. 2-2—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— City council, § 3.01 et seq.; recall, § 6.01 et seq.; mayor, § 3.01(b); powers in emergency, § 3.07(v); disasters, § 11.16; meetings, § 3.09; procedure for passage of ordinances, § 3.11; elections, § 5.01 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - STATE OF CIVIL EMERGENCY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , adopted July 2, 2012, added this div. 1 title to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 2-26. - State of civil emergency. 
The city council hereby gives, grants and delegates to the mayor or mayor pro tem in the mayor's absence, the authority to declare a state of civil emergency when necessary to protect the welfare, health, life and property of the inhabitants of the city, and further delegates to the mayor or mayor pro tem the power and authority to: 
(1)  Ask for interlocal law enforcement assistance as set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 362.002 et seq.; 
(2)  Declare all public buildings, public offices, public parks, public facilities closed and to order evacuation of same; 
(3)  Declare public streets and roadways closed and to limit use of same. 
(Code 1990, § 1-6-3) 
Cross reference— Curfew for minors, § 8-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Power and duty during civil emergencies, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq.  
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-27. - State law adopted. 
The provisions of the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A. Government Code, Chapter 418, as amended), as it may now or hereafter apply to the city, are adopted as part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , § 3, 7-2-12)  
Sec. 2-28. - Office of emergency management established. 
The office of emergency management is hereby created and established in accordance with Sections 2.02 and 4.01 of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Lewisville, Texas, and Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , § 3, 7-2-12)  
Sec. 2-29. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Continuity of government means the principle of establishing policies and procedures that allow city government to continue its essential municipal services and operations in case of a disaster or emergency. 
Continuity of operations means the continuation of essential municipal services and operations in the case of a disaster or emergency. 
Disaster means the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination, volcanic activity, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary action, other public calamity requiring emergency action, or energy emergency, and may warrant disaster assistance. The emergency operations center will be activated as appropriate during and after a disaster. 
Emergency means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property that is smaller in scope than a disaster but is larger in scope and more severe in terms of actual or potential damaging effects than an incident. Characteristics of an emergency include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Involves a large area, significant population, or important facilities; 
(2)  May require implementation of large-scale evacuation or in-place sheltering and implementation of temporary shelter and mass care operations; 
(3)  May require community-wide warning and public instructions; 
(4)  Requires a sizable multi-agency response operating under an incident commander; 
(5)  May require some external assistance from other local response agencies, contractors, and limited assistance from state or federal agencies; and/or 
(6)  The emergency operations center may be activated to provide general guidance and direction, coordinate external support, and provide resource support. 
Emergency management plan means the document adopted by the office of emergency management to maintain continuity of government, and in order to provide general guidance for emergency management activities of the city. 
Emergency management volunteer means any person who is not employed by the city who is duly registered, identified, and appointed by the office of emergency management, or by the city manager, or by the mayor, and who is assigned to participate in an emergency management activity. 
Emergency operations center means the physical location at which the coordination of information and city resources is located to support local disaster or emergency management activities. It is a specially equipped facility from which city officials exercise direction and control and coordinate necessary resources in a disaster or emergency situation. 
Incident means an emergency occurrence that is limited in scope and potential effect on lives and property, and is typically handled by one or two city response agencies acting under an incident commander. An incident may require limited external assistance from other local response forces. The emergency operations center is usually not activated during most incidents. 
Local state of emergency means a proclamation by the governor of a state of emergency and designation of the area involved, upon application of the mayor or city council during an emergency, pursuant to Chapter 433 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. 
Local state of disaster means an executive order or proclamation by the emergency management director declaring a state of local disaster, upon a finding by the emergency management director that a disaster has occurred or that the occurrence or threat of occurrence of a disaster is imminent. The order or proclamation must include: 
(1)  A description of the nature of the disaster; 
(2)  A designation of the area threatened; and 
(3)  A description of the conditions that have created the state of local disaster. 
Secondary emergency operations center means the physical location of a back-up facility that would be used if the primary emergency operations center is unavailable or has its capacity exceeded during an emergency operations center activation. 
(Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , § 3, 7-2-12)  
Sec. 2-30. - Organization. 
(a)  The mayor is hereby designated as the emergency management director of the city, pursuant to Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. The emergency management director serves as the governor's designated agent in the administration and supervision of the duties outlined in Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code on behalf of the city. 
(b)  The emergency management director may designate a person to serve as emergency management coordinator who shall serve as an assistant to the emergency management director for emergency management purposes. By this ordinance, the emergency management director designates the city's emergency management coordinator, who shall be hired by and shall report to the chief of the Lewisville Fire Department, as the emergency management coordinator referred to in Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code. 
(c)  The office of emergency management shall be directed by the city's emergency management coordinator, who shall serve as the primary point of contact for emergency management on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , § 3, 7-2-12)  
Sec. 2-31. - Duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director. 
(a)  The emergency management director shall exercise the powers granted to the governor under Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code, as amended, on an appropriate local scale. 
(b)  The emergency management director may declare a state of local disaster if he finds that a disaster has occurred or that the occurrence or threat of disaster is imminent. A state of local disaster may not continue for more than seven days except with the consent of the city council. The emergency management director or the city council may make application during an emergency to the governor for a proclamation of a state of emergency and designate the area involved, pursuant to Chapter 433 of the Texas Government Code, as amended. 
(c)  The emergency management director may exercise other powers and have additional duties and responsibilities, as may be necessary, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Issuance of proclamations, regulations or directives necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly to the general public. 
(2)  Ensure all proclamations, regulations or directives related to a local state of disaster or local state of emergency are filed promptly with the city secretary, unless circumstances as a result of the emergency or disaster prevent or impede such prompt filing, whereupon the proclamation, regulation or directive shall be filed as soon as practicable. 
(3)  Other powers, duties or responsibilities as specified in Chapter 418 of the Texas Government Code, city ordinance or resolution, or the emergency management plan, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , § 3, 7-2-12)  
Sec. 2-32. - Duties and responsibilities of the city manager for emergency management. 
The city manager shall have the following responsibilities for emergency management under this chapter: 
(a)  Marshal, assign and deploy all necessary personnel, equipment, supplies, and other available city resources, as needed, to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan, as well as to aid in responding to a disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Prepare and distribute to all appropriate city officials and employees a clear and complete statement of the disaster or emergency responsibilities of the departments within the city, including departmental support of the office of emergency management and the emergency operations center. This statement shall include, but is not limited to: NIMS compliance; a plan for the continuity of government; and a plan for the continuity of operations during the occurrence of a disaster or emergency. 
(c)  The city manager, or his designee, shall act as the manager of the city's emergency operations center during its activation and operation. 
(Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , § 3, 7-2-12)  
Sec. 2-33. - Duties and responsibilities of the office of emergency management. 
(a)  The office of emergency management shall be responsible to the emergency management coordinator in regard to all phases of emergency management activities. 
(b)  The office of emergency management is responsible for planning, coordinating, developing, operating and maintaining a comprehensive emergency management program in compliance with state and federal law, including all phases of emergency management activities. 
(c)  A current emergency management plan for the city shall be prepared and maintained by the office of emergency management. The emergency management plan will include methods of mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery as required by the State of Texas. The emergency management plan shall describe the city's emergency response organization and assign responsibilities for various emergency tasks. The emergency management plan shall provide a framework for specific city department functions during a disaster or emergency. The emergency management plan applies to all city officials, departments, and agencies. 
(d)  The office of emergency management shall coordinate its efforts with county, regional, state and federal emergency management programs. 
(e)  The office of emergency management shall coordinate the recruitment, training and supervision of emergency management volunteer personnel and agencies needed to augment the personnel, facilities and functions of the city for emergency management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , § 3, 7-2-12)  
Sec. 2-34. - Emergency operations center. 
(a)  The office of emergency management is responsible for developing and maintaining the emergency operations center. The emergency operations center shall be equipped and maintained to support the management of disasters and/or emergencies within the city. 
(b)  The office of emergency management shall maintain trained emergency operations center staff members in sufficient numbers who are available in the event of emergency operations center activation. Emergency operations center staff members may be city employees from any division of the city, or emergency management volunteers who are trained and assigned to the emergency operations center in the event of emergency operations center activation. 
(c)  The office of emergency management will conduct periodic training and exercises to evaluate and practice the functions that will be necessary during a disaster or emergency. 
(d)  The office of emergency management shall maintain a secondary emergency operations center for use in the event the primary emergency operations center is not available. 
(Ord. No. 3950-07-2012 , § 3, 7-2-12)  
Secs. 2-35—2-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to appoint boards, commissions, etc., § 3.07(f). 
Cross reference— Records management committee, § 2-171; park board, § 10-36 et seq.; library board, § 10-153; transportation board, § 15-181 et seq.; industrial waste hearing board, § 16-51 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-46. - Appointments to boards. 
(a)  The terms of persons on all boards of the city shall expire on June 30 or until the appointment of a successor. Appointments of persons to all boards shall be made to be effective on July 1 or the date the member's successor is appointed. Boards shall include, but not be limited to, board of adjustment, charter review commission, park board, industrial waste hearing board, transportation board, library board, and planning and zoning commission, and any other board established by the city council in the future. 
(b)  Appointments to fill vacancies occurring on the boards between terms may be filled within 30 days by the city council for the remainder of any unexpired term. Such appointment shall expire on June 30 of the year of expiration. 
(Code 1990, § 1-29-2; Ord. No. 3577-06-2008, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Cross reference— Library board, § 10-153.  
Sec. 2-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3305-01-2006, § 1, adopted Jan. 23, 2006, repealed § 2-47 in its entirety. Former § 2-47 pertained to the visitors bureau advisory committee and was derived from Ord. No. 2882-11-2002, §§ 1—5, adopted Nov. 18, 2002; Ord. No. 3222-07-2005, § 1, adopted July 11, 2005.  
Sec. 2-48. - Old Town design review committee. 
(a)  Committee. The Old Town design review committee shall consist of five members, each appointed by the city council. Members shall be appointed by places numbered 1 through 5, with places 1, 3 and 5 to be appointed in odd-numbered years, and places 2 and 4 to be appointed in the even-numbered years so that memberships will be staggered. Terms of office will be for a period of two years, with terms expiring on June 30. Initially, places 1, 3 and 5 will be appointed to full two-year terms; and places 2 and 4 will be appointed to one-year terms to maintain staggered positions. 
(b)  Qualifications. 
(1)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(2)  In the event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to serve for the unexpired term. Any member may be removed by the city council at any time. 
(3)  The five members of the Old Town design review committee shall consist of one person who owns real estate and resides in the Old Town design district or Old Town Center design district as defined in the city Old Town development ordinance, three city residents who also own real estate within the city, and one Old Town business representative who is employed within the Old Town Center design district or Old Town design district. 
(4)  The city manager, or her designee, shall hire a licensed architect or firm with experience in historic design and preservation to serve as advisor to the committee. The licensed architect or firm shall be present at all committee meetings but shall not be considered a member of the committee nor have a vote on any items before the committee. The licensed architect or firm shall exclusively serve as advisor(s) to the committee and shall not represent or separately advise any applicants on business before the committee. 
(c)  Meetings. 
(1)  Regular meetings: The Old Town design review committee shall meet on a monthly basis or as otherwise determined by the committee. 
(2)  Special meetings: The Old Town design review committee shall meet for a special meeting if called by the chairman or by written notice sent to the chairman or vice-chairman by three members of the committee. 
(3)  Three members of the Old Town design review committee shall constitute a quorum. 
(4)  City staff support to the committee will be as assigned by the city manager. 
(d)  Officers. The Old Town design review committee shall elect yearly the following officers: 
(1)  Chairman: The chairman shall preside at all meetings, and shall perform such other duties as usually pertain to his or her office or as may be instructed by the committee. 
(2)  Vice-chairman: The vice-chairman shall perform the duties of the chairman in his or her absence. 
(e)  Powers and duties of the committee. The Old Town design review committee is hereby charged with the duty and vested with the authority to: 
(1)  Enforce the Old Town design standards for new construction and renovations by hearing and deciding applications for letters of design approval. 
(2)  Propose amendments to the Old Town design standards to the city council from time to time. 
(f)  Decision by the Old Town design review committee. Three affirmative votes by members of the Old Town design review committee shall be required to approve a letter of design approval or to propose amendments to the Old Town design standards. 
(Ord. No. 2952-07-2003, §§ 1—6, 7-7-03; Ord. No. 3012-12-2003, § 1, 12-15-03; 0010-18-ORD , § I, 2-5-18) 
Editor's note— Section 2-48, pertaining to the Old Town design review committee, was originally codified as section 2-64 and has been renumbered as section 2-48 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 2-49—2-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3088-07-2004, § 1, adopted July 12, 2004, repealed section 2-47 in its entirety. Former section 2-47 pertained to terms of office, and derived from Ord. No. 1640-9-91, §§ 1—4, adopted Sept. 9, 1991.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT ADVISORY COMMITTEE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2183-12-96, adopted December 16, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—6 of said ordinance as §§ 2-51—2-56 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Membership; terms. 
(a)  The committee shall consist of at least seven but no more than nine members appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed to numbered places on the committee. 
(c)  Odd-numbered places shall be appointed in odd-numbered years, and even-numbered places shall be appointed in even-numbered years so membership will be staggered. 
(d)  Terms of office will be for a period of two years, with terms expiring on June 30. 
(e)  Initially, odd-numbered places were appointed for the full two-year term; and even-numbered places were appointed for a one-year term to maintain staggered positions. 
(Ord. No. 2183-12-96, § 1, 12-16-96; 0109-19-ORD , § 2, 3-4-19)  
Sec. 2-52. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Members shall be citizens or business owners in the city or citizens of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  In the event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to serve for the unexpired term. Any member may be removed by the city council for cause. 
(d)  If a replacement has not been designated by the end of the member's term, that member shall continue serving until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2183-12-96, § 2, 12-16-96; 0109-19-ORD , § 3, 3-4-19)  
Sec. 2-53. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. The committee shall meet as required. 
(b)  Special meetings. The committee shall meet for a special meeting if called by the chairman or by written notice sent to the chairman or vice-chairman by a majority of the committee's membership. 
(c)  A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. 
(d)  The member(s) absent from any meeting shall be so stated in the minutes of such meeting. In the absence of a quorum for a meeting, the chairman will submit, or cause to have submitted, a report to the city council stating all members absent. 
(e)  City staff support to the committee will be the director of planning and the grant coordinator. A representative of the community development department shall be in attendance at all meetings to provide staff assistance, reports, and recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 2183-12-96, § 3, 12-16-96)  
Sec. 2-54. - Officers. 
The committee shall elect yearly the following officers: 
(1)  Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings, and shall perform such other duties as usually pertain to his/her office or as may be instructed by the committee. 
(2)  Vice-Chairman. The vice-chairman shall perform the duties of the chairman in his/her absence. 
(Ord. No. 2183-12-96, § 4, 12-16-96)  
Sec. 2-55. - Powers and duties. 
The city council maintains the right to act independently on all matters pertaining to U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding for the city without CDBG committee consideration or recommendation. The committee may, however, serve in an advisory capacity to the city council in the following duties: 
(1)  To acquaint itself with and perform a continuous study, inspection, and selection of projects and activities eligible for CDBG funding in the city. 
(2)  To follow established planning guidelines as set by the city. 
(3)  To advise the director of planning, grant coordinator, city council, and city manager of recommendations and reasons therefore. 
(4)  To perform such other duties as directed by the city council or as required by the federal government. 
(Ord. No. 2183-12-96, § 5, 12-16-96; Ord. No. 3577-06-2008, § 2, 6-2-08)  
Sec. 2-56. - Subcommittees. 
(a)  Appointment. The committee, by a majority vote of the quorum present at any regular or special meeting, may appoint such members and citizens, as deemed necessary, to subcommittees to serve the purpose of the committee. 
(b)  Termination. The subcommittees may be terminated in the same manner as they are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2183-12-96, § 6, 12-16-96)  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3222-07-2005, § 1, adopted July 11, 2005, repealed div. 3, §§ 2-57—2-62, in its entirety. Former div. 3 pertained to the Old Town revitalization committee, and derived from Ord. No. 2604-9-2000, §§ 1—6, adopted Sept. 18, 2000; Ord. No. 2689-6-2001, § 1, adopted June 4, 2001; Ord. No. 2868-10-2002, § 1, adopted Oct. 21, 2002. 
 
Secs. 2-57—2-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Charter reference— Administrative services, § 4.01 et seq.; bond required, § 3.12; city manager, § 4.01; appointment of employees by city manager, § 4.01(c); department of police, § 4.02; special police, § 4.02(b); city secretary, § 4.03; city attorney, § 4.05; department of health and sanitation, § 4.06; city health officer, § 4.06(a); departments and officers, creation, § 4.07; preparation of budget, § 9.02; city treasurer, § 9.27. 
Cross reference— Texas municipal retirement system, § 2-131 et seq.; city secretary designated the records management officer, § 2-169; animal control officer, § 3-61 et seq.; chief of the fire department, § 5-51 et seq.; fire marshal, § 5-71 et seq.; librarian, § 10-154. 
State Law reference— Health authority, powers and duties, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 121.021 et seq.; gift to public servant, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 36.08—36.10. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-66. - Personnel guide. 
The personnel guide, outlining rules and regulations for all employees of the city, as amended from time to time, set forth in booklet form, shall be and remain on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1990, § 1-20-1)  
Secs. 2-67—2-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POLICE RESERVE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Special police, § 4.02(b). 
State Law reference— Police reserve forces, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012. 
 
Sec. 2-86. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to provide a trained group of civilian volunteer personnel which will be available to supplement the regular police force of the city in periods of emergency declared by the chief of police when the regular police force is not sufficient in number to control such emergency, and to assume and carry out the responsibilities of the city. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-1)  
Sec. 2-87. - Created. 
In order to accomplish the purposes of this division, there is hereby created and established a police reserve force of the city, to consist of no more than 50 members and to be organized, trained and utilized in accordance with the provisions of this division. Members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into active service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-2)  
Sec. 2-88. - Rules and regulations. 
The chief of police, with the approval of the city manager, shall promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the terms of this division, for the selection, conduct, training and use of the police reserve force and may prescribe an oath of office for members of the reserve. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-3)  
Sec. 2-89. - Uniform and insignia. 
The members of the police reserve force shall be provided such uniforms as the chief of police may authorize and the chief of police may issue identification cards and appropriate insignia which shall be returned upon termination of membership in the police reserve force. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-4)  
Sec. 2-90. - Compensation, benefits. 
Members of the police reserve force may serve without compensation. The city shall provide hospital and medical assistance to members of the police reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties, in the same manner as provided by the city for its full-time police officers, and reserve officers shall be eligible for death benefits as set out in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6228f; provided, however, that nothing in this division shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the police reserve force to become eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute, to which regular officers may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the full time duties of regular police officers. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-5) 
State Law reference— Benefits for survivors of officers who die in the line of duty, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6228f.  
Sec. 2-91. - Members fingerprinted; qualifications. 
All applicants for membership in the police reserve force shall be fingerprinted and the chief of police shall fully investigate and be responsible for receiving satisfactory proof of the good character, sober habits and adequate physical ability of each applicant. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-6)  
Sec. 2-92. - Training and duty regulations. 
Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education minimum standards established for all reserve law enforcement officers identical to the standards so established which must be fulfilled before a person appointed as a reserve police officer may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-7) 
State Law reference— City council to approve appointment of police reserve officer to carry weapon, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012.  
Sec. 2-93. - Bearing of arms. 
The chief of police may authorize members of the police reserve force to carry arms while engaged in or participating in official duty assignments authorized by the chief of police. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-8)  
Sec. 2-94. - Power of arrest. 
The members of the police reserve force shall have no power to arrest beyond that of a citizen's except when on official authorized duty to assist the regular police department. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-9)  
Sec. 2-95. - Personal interest. 
No officer or member of the police reserve force shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract, franchise or sale of goods or services to the police department while an active member of the police reserve force. Any wilful violation of this section shall constitute dismissal from membership in the reserve unit. 
(Code 1990, § 1-22-12)  
Secs. 2-96—2-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, § 4.04; municipal court judge, § 4.04(b), (e). 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous offenses, ch. 8. 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq.; municipal court procedure, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Special expense fees. 
(a)  There is hereby enacted a special expense fee as set out in section 2-201 for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense under V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 38.11 relating to the offense of failing to appear, or for an offense under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 149 relating to traffic violations or for an offense in connection with Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 17.04 relating to the requisite of a personal bond. 
(b)  Fees for citation dismissal for completion of driver safety course shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fee imposed. There is hereby enacted a special expense fee as set out in section 2-201 to cover the cost of administration of a request to complete a driving safety course in order to have a citation dismissed in the municipal court under Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 143. 
(2)  Collection. Fees shall be collected by the municipal court at the time of the request and thereafter shall be deposited by staff in the city treasury. 
(3)  No refunds. If a person requesting a driving safety course does not take the course, the person is not entitled to a refund of the fee. 
(Code 1990, § 1-29-1(B)) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy special expense fees, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.06.  
Sec. 2-112. - Municipal Court of Record No. 1. 
(a)  Designation. In accordance with the provisions of the City Charter and [V.T.C.A.,] Government Code § 30.01321 et seq., there is hereby created a municipal court of record in the city, which is hereby designated "Municipal Court of Record No. 1." 
(b)  Judges. The Municipal Court of Record No. 1 shall be presided over by a chief judge, who shall be appointed by and removed from office by the city council. The city council shall also appoint one or more alternate judges as it deems necessary. Such alternate judges shall be appointed and removed in the same manner as the chief judge. The chief judge and all alternate judges shall be appointed for a term of two years and shall receive compensation as determined by the city council. 
The presiding judge of the Municipal Court No. 1 shall have the authority to appoint a temporary judge when the presiding judge or any associate judge is temporarily unable to act. The temporary judge shall have the same qualifications and have the same powers and duties as the judge being replaced. The presiding judge shall determine the term of the temporary judge, but in no case shall the appointment continue past the period of disability. The temporary judge shall be compensated in the same manner as an alternate judge. 
(Ord. No. 2259-9-97, §§ 1, 2, 9-15-97; Ord. No. 3046-04-2004, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2259-9-97, adopted Sept. 15, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ 1, 2 of said ordinance as § 2-112 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-113. - Building security fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created, as authorized by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017, the municipal court building security fund, which shall be administered under the direction of the city council. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the city Municipal Court of Record No. 1 shall pay a security fee, as set out in section 2-201, as a cost of court to be collected by the clerk of the court. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, a person is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, the municipal court building security fund may be used only to finance the following items, when used for the purpose of providing security services for the city Municipal Court of Record No. 1: 
(1)  The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Handheld metal detectors; 
(3)  Walkthrough metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)  Signage; 
(8)  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
(9)  Locks, chains, or other security hardware; or 
(10)  Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2330-4-98, §§ 1—4, 4-6-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2330-4-98, adopted Apr. 6, 1998, amended § 2-201 by title only. For purposes of classification, §§ 1—4 of said ordinance were included herein as § 2-113 at the discretion of the editor and the provisions of § 2 were partially incorporated into § 2-201.  
Sec. 2-114. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Creation. 
(1)  There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now known as the fund, pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(2)  The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of $4.00. 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on convictions for an offense committed on or after ordinance is adopted. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the director of finance to be deposited in the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city, including: 
a.  Computer systems; 
b.  Computer networks; 
c.  Computer hardware; 
d.  Computer software; 
e.  Imaging systems; 
f.  Electronic kiosks; 
g.  Electronic ticket writers; or 
h.  Docket management systems. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2506-10-1999, §§ 1—3, 10-18-99)  
Sec. 2-115. - Juvenile case manager fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created the juvenile case manager fund. The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(b)  All juvenile case manager fees collected by the municipal court shall be deposited into the juvenile case manager fund established under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The juvenile case management fund may be used only to finance the salary and benefits of a juvenile case manager that is employed by the municipal court under section 2-116 of this Code and Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, article 45.056(a). 
(Ord. No. 3512-11-2007, § 1, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 2-116. - Juvenile case manager. 
The city council hereby authorizes the municipal court to employ one or more full-time or part-time juvenile case managers, as needed, to provide services in cases involving juvenile offenders before the court consistent with the court's statutory powers. 
(Ord. No. 3512-11-2007, § 1, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 2-117. - Juvenile case manager fee. 
There is hereby created a juvenile case manager fee, as authorized by Texas Code of Criminal Procedure sections 102.0174 and 45.056, as amended by H.B. 1575, 79th Tex. Leg. 2005, which fee may be found in section 2-201 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 3512-11-2007, § 1, 11-19-07)  
Sec. 2-118. - Applicability of fee. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a defendant who is convicted of a "fine only misdemeanor offense" in municipal court shall pay the juvenile case manager fee as a cost of court. For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted of an offense if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the defendant by the court; or 
(2)  The disposition of a defendant's case is deferred under section 45.051, 45.0511, 45.052 or 45.053 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  The municipal court judge may waive the juvenile case manager fee in cases of demonstrated financial hardship on the part of a convicted defendant if the defendant is indigent, has insufficient resources or income to pay the fee, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine, costs or fees. 
(Ord. No. 3512-11-2007, § 1, 11-19-07)  
Secs. 2-119—2-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Charter reference— Retirement system, etc., § 11.23. 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-66 et seq. 
State Law reference— Texas Municipal Retirement System, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Participation—Generally. 
(a)  The city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments of the city, participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq.; and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above departments participate in such system. 
(c)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(d)  In accordance with the provisions of the statute, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of six percent of the earnings of each employee of such departments. 
(e)  The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by such board under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq., and the city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city, the prior service rendered to the city by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and other reports and certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq., or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Code 1990, § 1-21-1; Ord. No. 2076-12-95, § V, 12-4-95)  
Sec. 2-132. - Same—Effective January 1, 1982. 
Effective January 1, 1982, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 854.202(f), 854.204, 854.405, 854.406 and 854.410, the city adopts the following plan provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System: 
(1)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department of this city and who is not already a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall become a member of the system as a condition of employment, provided such person is then under 60 years of age. 
(2)  Any member, after one year from the effective date of membership, shall be eligible for service retirement who has attained the age of 50 years and has completed 25 years of creditable service with this city or who has attained the age of 60 years and has completed at least ten years of creditable service with participating municipalities which have adopted the plan provisions of this section, or who has become eligible for service retirement under any other applicable provision of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 
(3)  The membership of any member who has completed at least ten years of creditable service with this city and other participating municipalities which have adopted the plan provisions cited in this section shall not terminate because of absence from service. 
(4)  Any person who is an employee of a participating department of this city on January 1, 1982, but who at the date of his employment was under 60 years of age but did not become a member of Texas Municipal Retirement System because he was then above the maximum age then prescribed by law for initial membership in the system, shall become a member of the system at the effective date the ordinance from which this section is derived, unless he has already become a member under other provisions of the governing act, and shall be allowed prior service credit for each month of creditable service performed for this city subsequent to the date such person was precluded from membership and prior to the effective date of his membership. Such prior service credit as was most recently used in calculating prior service credits or updated service credits in the system for current member employees of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1233, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 2-133. - Same—Effective September 1, 1987. 
Effective September 1, 1987, pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 854.202(f), 854.204, 854.405, 854.406 and 854.410 the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, shall herein be referred to as the "system": 
(1)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity, if the member has at least 25 years of credited service in that system performed for one or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or have adopted a like provision under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.202(f). 
(2)  If a "vested member," as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.204(b), shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed with the system elect to leave the accumulated deposits on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as would have been payable had the member lived and retired at that date under a joint and survivor annuity (Option 1) payable during the lifetime of the member and continuing thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse. 
(3)  At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (2) of this section applies may, upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of any benefits otherwise payable under this section. In the event such a surviving spouse shall die before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse. 
(4)  The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force on September 1, 1987, pursuant to the V.T.C.A., Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 
(5)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a "standard occupational disability annuity" under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.468 or an "optional occupational disability retirement annuity" under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.410 upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system, provided that the system's medical board has certified to the board of trustees that the member is physically or mentally disabled for further performance of the duties of the member's employment; that the disability is likely to be permanent; and that the member should be retired. Any annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.409. 
(6)  The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5) of this section are in lieu of the disability program heretofore provided for under V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 854.301 through 854.309. 
(Ord. No. 1375, § 1, 8-3-87)  
Sec. 2-134. - Military service credit authorized. 
(a)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.502, the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.502(b) and 853.503, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service under this section, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00. The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ration in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 1495-11-89, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-89)  
Sec. 2-135. - Prior service credit for probationary service. 
(a)  Any employee of this city who is a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System and who performed service as a probationary employee for this city prior to September 1, 1989, for which the employee did not receive credited service in the system because the person, as a probationary employee was not enrolled as a member of the system during the period of probationary employment, is hereby allowed to obtain prior service credit for the period of such probationary service (not in excess of six months), pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.303. 
(b)  To obtain prior service credit allowable under subsection (a) of this section any employee entitled thereto shall file a detailed written statement of the service claimed with the city secretary by November 6, 1990. 
(c)  As soon as practicable after the employee has filed a claim the prior service credit under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.303, the city personnel officer shall, if officer determines that such service was performed as claimed, verify the prior service allowable (not exceeding six months) and the average monthly compensation paid the member during the period of probationary employment, and shall certify to the board of trustees of the system the creditable prior service approved, and the average monthly compensation paid to the person by the city during the period of probationary employment. 
(Ord. No. 1495-11-89, §§ 1—3, 11-6-89)  
Sec. 2-136. - Increase in retirement annuities effective January 1, 1982. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1982, on the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before January 1, 1982. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 1232, § 2, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 2-137. - Supplemental death benefits fund, participation. 
The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System beginning on the first day of the calendar month following written notification to the system of the adoption of this section, for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for each of the city's employees who are members of such system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 855.314 for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1190, § 1, 3-19-79)  
Sec. 2-138. - Initial increases in annuities in effect effective January 1, 1976. 
(a)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203 and subject to approval by the board of trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in such act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below specified in all monthly benefits payable by Texas Municipal Retirement System after January 1, 1976, to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service of such employee to this city, and in effect prior to the date last above mentioned. 
(b)  Each such monthly benefit for the month of January 1976, and each month thereafter, shall be increased by 50 percent above the amount of the regular benefit (as distinguished from any supplemental or distributive benefit) in effect for the month of December 1975. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 2, 12-15-75)  
Sec. 2-139. - Increase in retirement annuities effective January 1, 1988. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1988, on terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before January 1, 1988. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the city accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 1376, § 2, 8-3-87)  
Sec. 2-140. - Increase in retirement annuities effective January 1, 1990. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1990, on terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before January 1, 1990. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the city accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 1493-11-89, § 2, 11-6-89)  
Sec. 2-141. - Increase in retirement annuities effective January 1, 1991. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1991, on terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before January 1, 1991. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the city accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 1580-11-90, § 1, 11-5-90)  
Sec. 2-141.1. - Increase in retirement annuities effective January 1, 1992. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of the retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before January 1, 1992. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 1657-11-91, § II, 11-18-91)  
Sec. 2-141.2. - Increase in retirement annuities effective January 1, 1996. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203], the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the City. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before January 1, 1996. 
(c)  An increase in annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 2076-12-95, § III, 12-4-95) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2076-12-95, adopted December 4, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of § III as § 2-141.2 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-141.3. - Increase in retirement annuities effective January 1, 1997. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203], the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section. 
(c)  An increase in annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(f)  The increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1997, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.404(e)], provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.404(d)]. 
(Ord. No. 2178-12-96, §§ 2, 3, 12-2-96) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2178-12-96, adopted December 2, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ 2, 3 of said ordinance as § 2-141.3 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-142. - Initial allowance of updated service credits effective January 1, 1976. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 854.203, each member of Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1, 1976, by reason of service in the employment of the city, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in such Act) in an amount that is 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member, calculated as provided in such act. The updated service credit hereby allowed shall be in lieu of and in substitution for all prior service credits, special prior service credits and antecedent service credits, if any, heretofore allowed such member by reason of service with the city. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of the Act, the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(c)  Subject to approval of the board of trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service credits hereby granted shall be and become effective January 1, 1976. 
(Ord. No. 1134, § 1, 12-15-75)  
Sec. 2-143. - Authorization of updated service credits effective January 1, 1982. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1982, on the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401 through 853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1, 1982, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d) in the amount that is 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1232, § 1, 11-16-81)  
Sec. 2-144. - Authorization of updated service credits effective January 1, 1988. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1988, on the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401 through 853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1, 1988, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d) in an amount that is 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member, calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1987, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401, the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date of aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1376, § 1, 8-3-87)  
Sec. 2-145. - Authorization of updated service credits effective January 1, 1990. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401 through 853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1, 1989, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d) in an amount that is 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1493-11-89, § 1, 11-6-89)  
Sec. 2-146. - Authorization of updated service credits effective January 1, 1991. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401 through 853.403, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1, 1990, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit," as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d) in an amount that is 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member, calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is eligible for Updated Service Credits on the basis of service with this city, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1990, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601. 
(c)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1580-11-90, § 1, 11-5-90)  
Sec. 2-147. - Authorization of updated service credits effective January 1, 1992. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 853.401 through 853.404, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1, 1991, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d). 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, and who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1991, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member, calculated as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c). 
147.3(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from January 1, 1992, on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1657-11-91, § I, 11-18-91)  
Sec. 2-147.1. - Authorization of updated service credits effective January 1, 1996—General. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code, Title 8, §§ 853.401 through 853.404, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the TMRS Act), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)]. 
(b)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member, calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)]. 
(c)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(d)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d)], the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after January 1, 1996, on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2076-12-95, § I, 12-4-95) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2076-12-95, adopted December 4, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of § I as § 2-147.1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-147.2. - Same—Transferred service. 
On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601], any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2076-12-95, § II, 12-4-95) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2076-12-95, adopted December 4, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of § II as § 2-147.2 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-147.3. - Authorization of updated service credits effective January 1, 1997. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code, Title 8, Subtitle G, §§ 853.401 through 853.404, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit," as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(d)]. 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601], any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member, calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.402(c)]. 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.401(d)], the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(f)  The initial allowance of updated service credit hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 1997, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.404(e)], provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act [V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.404(d)]. 
(Ord. No. 2178-12-96, §§ 1, 3, 12-2-96) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2178-12-96, adopted December 2, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ 1, 3 of said ordinance as § 2-147.3 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-148. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any incorporated city or town in this state and for which the person has not otherwise received credited service in the system. The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(b)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1665-1-92, § I, 1-6-92)  
Sec. 2-149. - Credit for employees who have terminated previous memberships. 
Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code, tit. 8, subtit. G, § 853.004, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is an employee of this city on the 5th day of May, 1997, who has terminated a previous membership in such system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, but who has at least 24 months of credited service as an employee of the city since resuming membership, to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five percent of such amount for each year from date of such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at date of termination of the earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as an employee of the city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and hereby assumes the obligations arising out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. The five-percent-per-annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in such municipality accumulation fund; and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his or her individual account in the employees' saving fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 1864-12-93, § 1, 12-6-93; Ord. No. 1870-1-94, § 1, 1-17-94; Ord. No. 2219-5-97, § 1, 5-5-97) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1864-12-93, adopted Dec. 6, 1993, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as § 2-149.  
Sec. 2-150. - Deposits by employees. 
All employees of the city who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits to the system at the rate of seven percent of their individual earnings. 
(Ord. No. 2178-12-96, § 4, 12-2-96) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2178-12-96, adopted December 2, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of § 4 of said ordinance as § 2-150 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-151 - Twenty-year retirement. 
Pursuant to the provisions of section 854.202(g), Texas Government Code, the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "system"): 
(1)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under section 854.202(g), Texas Government Code. 
(2)  Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has: 
a.  Prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and 
b.  Held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, chapter 551, Texas Government Code. 
(3)  The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2970-09-2003, § 1, 9-15-03)  
Secs. 2-152—2-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference— Records management program, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.021 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission shall mean the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 
Department head shall mean the officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Director and librarian shall mean the executive and administrative officer of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 
Essential record shall mean any record of the city necessary to resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the city. 
Municipal records shall mean all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business. Such records shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
Permanent record shall mean any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers shall mean the persons designated under section 2-174. 
Records management shall mean the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management committee shall mean the committee established in section 2-171. 
Records management officer shall mean the person designated in section 2-169. 
Records management plan shall mean the plan developed under section 2-172. 
Retention period shall mean the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, §§ 1, 2, 7-16-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-167. - Records declared public property. 
All municipal records are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 3, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-168. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal government records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 4, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-169. - Records management officer—Designation. 
The city secretary, and the successive holders of such office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 5, 7-16-90) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-66 et seq.  
Sec. 2-170. - Same—Duties. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department in its implementation. 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures. 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense. 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city. 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies. 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city. 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation of a manual of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation. 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations. 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records. 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program. 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article. 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of the municipal government is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law. 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition. 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13) of this section. 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 6, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-171. - Records management committee. 
A records management committee consisting of the city secretary/records management officer, city attorney, library director, public services director, municipal court clerk, police chief, fire chief, community development director, finance director, parks and leisure services director and personnel director, or their designated representatives, is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program. 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements, if needed. 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer. 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules. 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 7, 7-16-90) 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-46 et seq.  
Sec. 2-172. - Records management plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed and disposed of in accordance with that plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 8, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-173. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his staff are responsible. 
(3)  Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 9, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-174. - Records liaison officers—Designation. 
Each department head shall designate a member of his staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison officer for his department. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 10, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-175. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules. 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments. 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 11, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-176. - Records control schedules—Development. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedules shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be reviewed and approved by the department head and forwarded for review and approval by the members of the records management committee. The recommendation of the records management committee will then be forwarded for final approval by the city attorney, the finance director and the records management officer. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the defined director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 12, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-177. - Same—Implementation; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-177 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 13, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-178. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 14, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-179. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-172, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-172. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 15, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-180. - Micrographics. 
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of municipal records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming, and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with Texas State Library and Archives Commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 16, 7-16-90)  
Sec. 2-181. - Electronic storage of records. 
The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the electronic storage of municipal records, including policies to ensure that all electronic storage of the city's records is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the electronic storage of local government records established under the Local Government Records Act and of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. All electronic storage of the city's records will be identified to the records management officer and subject to review by the records management officer for compliance to the established policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1551-7-90, § 17, 7-16-90)  
Secs. 2-182—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FEES 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Fee schedule. 
This section contains the fees, rates and charges which are prescribed by the city. Some fees may necessitate an additional charge for sales tax or have sales tax included, as required by state law. 
Fee 	Amount 
	
ADMINISTRATIVE: 
Returned check fee. Checks, drafts or instruments tendered to the city for amounts owed to the city which are returned unpaid through the city depository as uncollected funds (excluding any occurrence resulting from any documentable depository error or omission), each 	State of Texas returned check fee amount 
Stop payment fee 	Equal to the current bank contract stop payment fee amount 
Bank draft payment discount 	1.50 per account per month 
Copies of readily available information (TAC stands for Texas Administrative Code, title 1, part 3, chapter 70, as amended 	
 Standard paper copy, per page 	
 Less than 30 pages 	0.00 
 Each page after the first 30 pages 	0.10 
 Nonstandard size copy (per TAC) 	
Diskette, each (per TAC) 	1.00 
Magnetic tape (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Data cartridge (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Tape cartridge (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Rewritable CD (CD-RW) (per TAC) 	1.00 
Non-rewritable CD (CD-R) (per TAC) 	1.00 
Digital video disc (DVD) (per TAC) 	3.00 
JAZ drive (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Other electronic media (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
VHS video cassette, each (per TAC) 	2.50 
Audio cassette, each (per TAC) 	1.00 
Oversized paper copy (e.g.: 11 inches × 17 inches, greenbar, bluebar, not including maps and photographs using specialty paper) (per TAC) 	0.50 
Specialty paper (e.g.; mylar, blueprint, blueline) 	Actual cost 
Other 	Actual cost 
Labor charge (per TAC) 	
 For programming (per TAC) 	28.50 per hour 
 For locating, compiling and reproducing (per TAC) 	15.00 per hour 
 Overhead charge (per TAC) 	20% of labor charge 
Microfiche or microfilm charge (per TAC) 	
Paper copy (per TAC) 	0.10 per page 
Fiche or film copy (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Remote document retrieval charge (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Computer resource charge (per TAC) 	
Mainframe (per TAC) 	10.00 per CPU minute 
Midsize (per TAC) 	1.50 per CPU minute 
Client/server (per TAC) 	2.20 per clock hour 
PC or LAN (per TAC) 	1.00 per clock hour 
Miscellaneous supplies (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Postage and shipping charge (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Photographs (per TAC) 	Actual cost as calculated in accordance with TAC 111.69(5) 
Maps (per TAC) 	Actual cost as calculated in accordance with TAC 111.69(4) 
Other costs (per TAC) 	Actual cost 
Outsourced/contracted services (per TAC) 	Actual cost for the copy. May not include development costs 
Certification fee of documents (regardless of number of pages) 	3.00 
Electronic data transfers. Electronic data transfers to any magnetic media (all data to be provided by requestor), per transfer 	150.00 
Associated fees for the generation of any readily available data processing lists will be waived for all governmental entities. 	
Poly envelopes for banknote certified copies 	2.00 
City Hall 3rd floor reception area 	
 Rental fee (per hour; two-hour minimum) 	150.00 
 Deposit 	500.00 
Generation of any readily available data processing lists, per copy 	25.00 
Special event fees: 	
 Administration fee 	25.00 
 Carnival 	250.00 
 Circus 	250.00 
Lewisville Independent School District 	
 Parks and recreation fees for Lewisville Independent School District will be equal to 50% of the lowest posted fee 	
 City-operated events shall be exempt from all fees 	
 All Rock the Block party trailer events shall be exempt from all fees 	
 No waiver of fees shall be granted except by the city council 	
Outdoor amusement 	250.00 
Barricading: 	
 First two street closures 	125.00 
 Each additional closure 	20.00 
 Each additional traffic control sign 	2.50 
 Next-day inspection for multi-day closures 	52.00 
 Pedestrian barricade rental (only includes devices picked up and returned to the Kealy Complex - does not include delivery, set-up, or take-down - delivery, set-up, and take-down would be billed at the established hourly rate) 	2.00/device per day 
 Special event crowd protection barricading per street segment (includes: crew leader top of range overtime rate; heavy equipment operator top of range overtime; maintenance worker top of range overtime; tandem dump truck; equipment trailer (30,000 GVW); and forklift) 	3,000.00 
 Parks and leisure services personnel, per man-hour 	Top of range overtime rate for a maintenance worker plus 18% 
 Police personnel, per man-hour, 2-hour minimum 	Step One overtime rate for a police captain 
 Police vehicle stand-by, per hour. 2-hour minimum 	20.00 
 Public works personnel, per man-hour 	Top of range overtime rate for a maintenance worker plus 18% 
 Fire department staffing, per man-hour 	Base pay overtime rate for a Step 2 Fire Captain 
 Firefighting apparatus, stand-by (plus staffing), per hour 	70.00 
 Emergency medical apparatus, stand-by (plus staffing), per hour 	41.50 
 Building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire prevention and health permit fees will be separate and in addition to the above-listed fees 	
Cable systems: 	
 Telecommunications system, per linear foot of fiber optic 	1.00 
 CATV system: 	
 Filing fee 	1,000.00 
 Franchise fee 	5% of gross quarterly receipts 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 1 st Submittal - (all) - Less than 5 acres 	75.00 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 1 st Submittal - (all) - 5 to 10 acres 	100.00 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 1 st Submittal - (all) - More than 10 acres 	150.00 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 2 nd Submittal - (all) - Less than 5 acres 	50.00 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 2 nd Submittal - (all) - 5 to 10 acres 	75.00 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 2 nd Submittal - (all) - More than 10 acres 	100.00 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 3 rd + Submittal - (all) - Less than 5 acres 	25.00 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 3 rd + Submittal - (all) - 5 to 10 acres 	50.00 
Engineering Site Plans/Modified Site Plans/Concept Plans - 3 rd + Submittal - (all) - More than 10 acres 	75.00 
Engineering site plan/Modified Site Plan/Concept Plan 	
Less than one acre 	250.00 
1.00-4.99 acres 	400.00 
5.00-24.99 acres 	400.00, plus $30.00 per acre 
25.00 and up 	750.00, plus $30.00 per acre 
Final plat: 	
 Single-family 	200.00 
 Plus, per lot 	5.00 
 Commercial, industrial and multifamily 	200.00 
 Plus, per acre 	30.00 
(On replats, additional charge based on Denton County filing fee for each page to be filed in Denton County Plat Records.) 	
Development and construction variance/Alternative Standards request fee 	350.00 
IH-35E Corridor Overlay District Streetscape Improvement Fee-in-Lieu: Provisions for payment of a proportional fee in lieu of the required Streetscape improvements between the curb and property line within the Core Sub-district. If the Development is phased or the Sidewalk improvements need to match the timing of a programmed city capital project affecting that Street frontage, a fee in lieu of making the required improvements may be paid as outlined herein. 	Based on construction cost estimates provided to the City for review; proportional to linear Street frontage along the subject property 
Zoning Change/Special Use Permit request: 	
 Less than 0.5 acre 	150.00 
 0.5—4.99 acres 	250.00 
 5.00—24.99 acres 	400.00 
 25.00—49.99 acres 	750.00 
 50.00—99.99 acres 	1,000.00 
 100 acres and more 	1,500.00 
Zoning District Change/Special Use Permit Request Sign 	35.00 
Lender/realtor certification fee 	20.00 
Municipal Setting Designations (MSD) Application fee 	1,500.00 
Zoning verification letter fee 	50.00 
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT: 
Oil/Gas Drilling: 	
 Gas well application fee (per well, per bore) 	10,000.00 
Oil/Gas Road Repair Fee: 	
 Concrete (piped water) (per lane mile) 	7,401.00 
 Concrete (hauled water) (per lane mile) 	22,203.00 
 Asphalt (piped water) (per lane mile) 	9,165.00 
 Asphalt (hauled water) (per lane mile) 	27,495.00 
Temporary right-of-way use permit 	500.00 
Annual right-of-way use permit 
(Includes city easements. A single permit fee will be charged where multiple easements are located no further than 200 feet from each other.) 	10,000.00 per pipe per crossing 
Seismic survey permit 	1,000.00 
Permit to operate a gas production facility 	975.00 
Capital recovery fees (water/sewer): 	
 Water capital recovery fee 	See exhibit A at the end of this section 
 Sewer capital recovery fee 	See exhibit A at the end of this section 
Engineering division: 	
Colocation Fee for Network Nodes on Service Poles 	
 Annual fee for each service pole 	20.00 
Network Nodes Application Fee: 	
 For each application containing up to five network nodes 	500.00 
 For each additional network node beyond five 	250.00 
Network Node Annual Site Rental Fee: 	
 For each network node site 	250.00* 
* adjusted on an annual basis, by an amount equal to one-half of the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index 
Node Support Pole Application Fee: 	
 For each node support pole 	1,000.00 
Transport Facility Application Fee: 	
 For each application containing up to five network nodes 	500.00 
 For each additional network node beyond five 	250.00 
Transport Facility Monthly Rental Fee: 	
 For each network node site 	28.00* 
*not to exceed the monthly aggregate per-note fee 
Photostatic copies: 	
 22" x 34" black & white per sheet 	6.00 
 22" x 34" color per sheet 	7.00 
 Larger than 22" x 34" black & white per linear foot 	3.00 
 Larger than 22" x 34" color per linear foot 	4.00 
Bidding documents: 	
 50—100 sheets 	50.00 
 101—200 sheets 	85.00 
 201 or more sheets 	130.00 
Published manuals: 	
 Master water distribution map (b/w) 	7.00 
 Master sanitary sewer collection system map (b/w) 	7.00 
 Comprehensive drainage study map 	6.00 
 Drainage criteria manual (gray book) 	12.00 
 Comprehensive drainage study (tan book) 	15.00 
Traffic control devices: 	
 Pole/Signage (does not include Old Town signs) - Current pricing includes installation: 	
 Pole (paid separate from signs) 	126.90 
 Street name signs (includes two signs per pole) 	81.20 
 30" stop sign 	49.22 
 Speed limit sign 	53.59 
 Pole/signage (Old Town signs) - current pricing includes installation: 	
 Black pole - powder-coated (paid separate from signs) 	156.90 
 Street name signs (includes two signs per pole) 	115.00 
 30" stop sign 	51.72 
 Speed limit sign 	56.09 
 Administrative costs: 	
 Abandonment of real property 	150.00 
 State driveway application 	50.00 
 State water and/or sewer connections (permit within state right-of-way) 	50.0 
 Sanitary sewer escrow handling 	250.00 
 Public and semi-public construction escrow handling 	250.00 
 Letter of map revision 	50.00 
 Floodplain map amendment 	50.00 
 Construction inspection fees: 	
 Private developments 	3.5% of construction cost 
 Public and private projects—After hours inspection, four-hour minimum, per hour 	Top of range overtime rate for a engineering construction inspector plus 18% 
 City construction projects—After hours inspection, four-hour minimum, per hour 	Top of range overtime rate for a engineering construction inspector plus 18% 
 Escrow for sanitary sewer: 	
  T.V. inspection, per linear foot 	2.00 
Building inspection division: 	
Single-family rental permit surcharge fee 	50.00 
Building Permits: 	
 Accessory building (residential and commercial) 	100.00 
 Finish out mixed use commercial 	See commercial step rate 
 Finish out mixed use residential (per square foot): 	
 Fee 	0.56 
 Minimum 	50.00 
 Add/alt/finish - commercial 	See commercial step rate 
 Add/alt/finish - residential (per square foot): 	
 Fee 	0.56 
 Minimum 	50.00 
 Miscellaneous building permit 	45.00 
 New construction - apartment 	See commercial step rate 
 New construction - commercial 	See commercial step rate 
 New construction - residential (per square foot) 	0.56 
 Shell building 	See commercial step rate 
 New construction shell - mixed use building 	See commercial step rate 
 Sales trailer 	100.00 
 Carport/canopy/patio cover 	100.00 
 Deck > 30" above grade 	45.00 
 Interior demolition 	50.00 
 Entire building demolition 	50.00 
 Pool demolition 	50.00 
 Driveway 	50.00 
 Patio, walkways, parking lots (residential) 	50.00 
 Patio, walkways, parking lots (commercial) 	100.00 
 House/building moving 	10.00 
 Retaining wall > 48" tall 	45.00 
 Roof: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	200.00 
 Siding 	45.00 
 Solar panels 	70.00 
 Foundation repair 	45.00 
 Swimming pool: 	
 Residential 	300.00 
 Commercial 	300.00 
 Window replacement 	45.00 
 Reinspection fee: 	
 First reinspection fee 	50.00 
 Second reinspection fee 	75.00 
 Third reinspection fee 	100.00 
Electrical Permits: 	
Electrical: 	
 Per square foot 	0.035 
 Minimum (residential) 	50.00 
 Minimum (commercial) 	100.00 
 Miscellaneous electrical: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
 Electrical meter: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
 Electrical panel: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
 Electrical cell tower 	100.00 
Fence Permits: 	
Fence: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
 Screening wall 	100.00 
Plumbing Permits: 	
 Irrigation: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
 Plumbing: 	
 Per square foot of floor area 	0.035 
 Minimum (residential) 	50.00 
 Minimum (commercial) 	100.00 
 Miscellaneous plumbing: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
 Water heater: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
 Plumbing line repair: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
 Plumbing gas test: 	
 Residential 	50.00 
 Commercial 	100.00 
Mechanical Permits: 	
Mechanical: 	
 Per square foot of floor area 	0.035 
 Minimum (Residential) 	50.00 
 Minimum (commercial) 	100.00 
 Miscellaneous mechanical: 	
 Minimum (residential) 	50.00 
 Minimum (commercial) 	100.00 
 HVAC: 	
 Minimum (residential) 	50.00 
 Minimum (commercial) 	100.00 
Sign Permits: 	
 Sign 	100.00 
 Old Town sign 	100.00 
 Banner sign 	50.00 
 Old Town banner sign 	50.00 
 Grand opening sign 	25.00 
 Old Town grand opening sign 	25.00 
Plan review: 	
 Additional plan review, per hour, one-hour minimum 	50.00 
Contractor registration or renewal (all types) (Plumbing and electrical contractor registrations are exempt from this fee) 	80.00 
Irrigation permit (new) 	80.00 
Construction trailer 	100.00 
Certificate of Occupancy: 	
 Fee for certificate of occupancy 	100.00 
Miscellaneous inspection fees: 	
 Inspections outside normal business hours, per hour, two-hour minimum 	Top of range overtime rate for a building inspector plus 18% 
 Reinspection fees, per hour, one-hour minimum 	Top of range overtime rate for a building inspector plus 18% 
 Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated, per hour, 1-hour minimum 	Top of range overtime rate for a building inspector plus 18% 
 Preliminary plat: 	
 Single-family 	200.00 
  Plus, per lot 	5.00 
 Commercial, industrial and multifamily 	200.00 
  Plus, per acre 	30.00 
 Final and/or replats: 	
 Single-family 	200.00 
  Plus, per lot 	5.00 
 Commercial and industrial 	200.00 
  Plus, per acre 	30.00 
 Zoning board of adjustments, per request 
plus overtime rates of non-exempt city staff required to attend after-hours meetings 	100.00 
 General development ordinance 	25.00 
 Zoning ordinance 	25.00 
 General development and zoning ordinance updates, per year 	17.50 
 Sign ordinance 	10.00 
 Fence ordinance 	10.00 
 Minimum housing standards ordinance 	10.00 
 Electrical code adoptive ordinance 	3.00 
 Complete zoning map, per sheet 	5.00 
 Enlarged zoning map, per sheet 	5.00 
 Land use plan 	2.00 
 Plat copy, per sheet 	5.00 
 Water connection fees: 	
 Water meter cost: 	
  ¾" 	Actual cost of meter 
  1" 	Actual cost of meter 
  1½" 	677.00 
  2" 	988.00 
 Installation cost: 	
   5/8 "—1" 	37.50 
  1½"—2" 	75.00 
  Administrative charge 	25.00 
  Administrative charge for address correction per address listing 	50.00 
 Water meter box with lid: 	Actual cost 
 Tapping cost 	Applicant responsibility 
 Meter cost for 3" meter and above 	Applicant responsibility 
 Labor cost 	Applicant responsibility 
 Reconnect fees 	25.00 per occurrence 
 Tampering fee. In the event the user or customer or their agent restores the water, sewer, garbage or recycling service after service has been disconnected by the city, or if the user or customer or their agent tampers with the water meter or service line appurtenances in any manner, a tamper fee shall be collected in addition to the reconnect fee provided by this article. 	
 First occurrence 	25.00 
 Second occurrence 	50.00 
 Third and subsequent occurrences 	75.00 
 Meter bench testing fees. Actual charges by testing company (varies by size) plus city labor and equipment charges for meter removal and replacement: 	
 Residential 	73.50 
 Commercial 	125.00 
 Sewer administrative charge: An administrative charge shall be assessed when a new sewer connection is requested and service is to be provided by the city. 	
 Administrative charge 	15.00 
 Letter of design approval request 	0.00 
 Old Town development plan submittal (letter of design approval included): 	
 Less than one acre 	250.00 
 1.00—4.99 acres 	400.00 
 5.00—24.99 acres 	400.00, plus $30.00 per acre 
 25.00 and up acres 	750.00, plus $30.00 per acre 
 Appeal fee for letter of design approval or variance from Old Town development plan 	500.00 
 Old Town Development Ordinance document 	25.00 
 Old Town master plan document 	25.00 
Pick up fee for deceased animals from Lewisville veterinarians and pet stores: 	
Per dog 	50.00 
Per cat 	25.00 
Per other animal 	10.00 
FINANCE: 
Tiered activation service fee: A nonrefundable fee to cover the cost of establishing or transferring utility services within the city 	
 Next business day or later 	No fee 
 Same day (application made prior to noon) 	30.00 
 Same day (application made after noon, evening, or weekend) 	50.00 
Water rates: 	
This section contains the fees, rates and charges which are prescribed by the city: 	
Water administration fee 	25.00 
Denton County fresh water supply District 1-A: 	Current Charge 
 Wholesale water sales (maximum demand charge) 	308,606 
 Wholesale water sales (monthly demand charge) 	25,717 
 Wholesale water sales (volume per 1,000 gallons) 	1.89 
 Sewer Wholesale rate (volume per 1,000 gallons) 	2.60 
 Industrial Surcharge: 	
 The factors per 1,000 gallons for the industrial surcharge ordinance are $0.003574 per mgl of BOD and $0.003097 per mgl of TSS for industrial/commercial customers whose sewage strengths exceed maximum allowance of 240 mgl. 	
The monthly rates or charges for retail service furnished by the city water works system shall be as follows: 	
Meter Size 	Current Charge 
 ¾-inch 	15.83 
 1-inch 	23.07 
 1½-inch 	43.65 
 2-inch 	72.51 
 3-inch 	155.05 
 4-inch 	270.51 
 6-inch 	600.58 
 8-inch 	1,062.64 
 10-inch 	1,656.69 
 Volumetric rate 	3.26 
New customers: 	
 All new residential customers shall be charged a flat fee per month until the winter average can be established. 	25.02 
 All residential customers transferring their service to a new address in the city shall be charged a sewer charge based on their winter average at the prior service address until a new winter average is established at the new address. 	
Sewer rates: 	
 Single-family dwelling: 	
 Current customers' rates shall be based upon the four-month winter average of monthly water consumption billed in the most recent December, January, February and March for such dwellings and charged: 	
 Monthly minimum bill (2,000 gallons) 	9.58 
 Volume charge per 1,000 (over 2,000 gallons) 	3.86 
 Non-single-family dwelling: 	
 Rates shall be based upon 100 percent of each month's water consumption and charged: 	
 Monthly minimum bill (2,000 gallons) 	9.49 
 Volume charge per 1,000 (over 2,000 gallons) 	3.82 
Sewer only customers: 	
 In instances where dwellings are not served by the city waterworks system, the charge for services furnished by the city sanitary sewer system shall be a flat fee per dwelling unit per month. 	25.02 
 Industrial Surcharge: 	
 The factors per 1,000 gallons for the industrial surcharge ordinance are $0.003366 per mgl of BOD and $0.002917 per mgl of TSS for industrial/commercial customers whose sewage strengths exceed maximum allowance of 240 mgl. 	
Transported liquid waste: 	
 The rate for sewage transported by vehicle from within the corporate limits of the city is $8.95 for the first 2,000 gallons. Points of collection are restricted to portable sanitary units and septic systems approved by the city. A volume charge of $3.60 per 1,000 gallons, in excess of 2,000 gallons, shall be in addition to the basic rate charged. The city may refuse any waste if material is non-conforming with pretreatment standards as adopted by the city. 	
Wastewater effluent sale 	The posted price for wholesale interruptible raw water offered by the City of Dallas 
 Treated wastewater effluent rates: 	
 Treated wastewater effluent customers shall be charged a volume charge per 1,000 gallons of usage as follows: 	
 Solid waste disposal (additional charge pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.061 et seq.): 	
 Per month, per residential billing unit 	0.10 
Customer deposit for water and/or sewer and/or garbage: Customer deposit shall include the garbage deposit. 	
 ¾" 	75.00 
 1" 	100.00 
 1½" 	150.00 
 2" 	350.00 
 3" 	500.00 
 4" 	500.00 
 6" 	550.00 
 8" 	875.00 
 10" 	1,200.00 
 3" construction meter 	1,250.00 
 Garbage only deposit 	10.00 
 Meter verification fee (after two in 12-month period) 	10.00 
Fire Prevention Division: 	
Vacant Building Initial Registration Fee: 	$75.00 
Vacant Building Yearly Inspection Fee (Residential): 	$25.00 
Vacant Building Reinspection Fee (Residential): 	$25.00 per visit 
Vacant Building Yearly Inspection Fee and Reinspection Fee (Commercial): 	See Certificate of Annual Inspection Permit fees as designated herein 
Pump simulator rental: 	
 If driven off-site 	Rental fee plus additional government mileage rate plus one hour of base pay overtime rate for a Fire Captain 
Certificate of annual inspection permit: 	
 Assembly group A, per square foot (minimum 20.00, maximum 250.00) 	0.01 
 Business group B, per square foot (minimum 25.00, maximum 275.00) 	0.011 
 Educational group E, per square foot (minimum 20.00, maximum 250.00) 	0.01 
 Factory industrial group F, per square foot (minimum 25.00, maximum 300.00) 	0.012 
 High hazard group H, per square foot (minimum 50.00, maximum 425.00) 	0.017 
 Institutional group I, per square foot (minimum 50.00, maximum 175.00) 	0.007 
 Mercantile group M, per square foot (minimum 30.00, maximum 350.00) 	0.014 
 Residential group R1 and R4, per square foot (minimum 20.00, maximum 200.00) 	0.008 
 Storage group S, per square foot (minimum 25.00, maximum 300.00) 	0.012 
 Reinspection fee (after 2nd inspection) 	Original fee + 50% 
 Apartment complex 	50.00 per building 
 Multifamily unit inspection 	75.00 per unit + 50.00 per building as stated above 
 Reinspection fee for multifamily 	40.00 per building or violation 
Acceptance test/new installation of special fire protection systems: 	
 Sprinkler system (per riser/system) 	125.00 + 0.012/square feet 
 Remodel/alteration: 	
 0—40 heads 	50.00 
 41 or more heads 	100.00 
 Automatic extinguishing system (per system) 	75.00 
 Fire alarm system (per building/floor) 	100.00 + 2.00 per device 
 Standpipe system (per system) 	100.00 
 Reinspection fee for new/acceptance tests of special fire protection systems 	50% of original fee 
Mechanical trench burn: 	
 Burning fee, per day 	200.00 
Fire prevention permit fees: 	
 Tents/air-supported structures 	50.00 
Fire hydrant flow test 	50.00 
Explosives/blasting agents 	50.00 
Fireworks 	50.00 
Fumigation/thermal insect. fog 	50.00 
Places of assembly 	50.00 
Miscellaneous permits (access control) 	50.00 
Flammable/combustible liquids/tanks 	50.00 
Liquefied petroleum gases 	25.00 
Christmas tree lots 	50.00 
Temporary food service: 	
 Base fee 	50.00 
 Plus, for each additional day (not to exceed ten consecutive days) 	10.00 
 Off-premises alcohol sales permit 	Permit fee shall be one-half of the amount of the state fee for the permit issued for the premises. 
 Mixed beverages in restaurants by food and beverage certificate holders only permit 	Permit fee shall be one-half of the amount of the state fee for the permit issued for the premises, except when said fee is waived by state law. 
 Mixed beverages in restaurants by food and beverage certificate holders only late hours permit 	Permit fee shall be one-half of the amount of the state fee for the permit issued for the premises, except when said fee is waived by state law. 
 Private club late hours permit 	Permit fee shall be one-half of the amount of the state fee for the permit issued for the premises, except when said fee is waived by state law. 
Itinerant merchants (valid for six months): 	
 Base fee 	40.00 
 Plus, per additional person 	10.00 
Garage Sale Permits: 	
 Occasional sales, garage sales, (two sales within 12-month period) 	0.00 
Temporary real estate signs, annually 	50.00 
Sign variance fee, per variance 	350.00 
Plan checking fee 	½ of the sign permit fee on all illuminated signs with a display surface greater than 100 square feet 
Fence variance fees, per variance 	350.00 
Health and Code Enforcement Division: 	
 Lewisville Independent School District and all 501(c)(3) organizations are exempt from food inspection fees 	
 Health Permit Fees - Risk 1 (1 inspection/year): prepackaged, non-time/temperature control for safety (TCS) food 	250.00 
 Health Permit Fees - Risk 2 (2 inspection/year): limited menu, no complex food processes 	300.00 
 Health Permit Fees - Risk 3 (3 inspections/year): extensive menu, complex/specialized food processes 	350.00 
 Health Permit Fees - Risk 4 (4 inspections/year): highly susceptible populations 	350.00 
Mobile vendor permit: 	
 Per vehicle, annually 	300.00 
 Per cart, annually 	200.00 
Pool health permit: 	
 Per pool 	150.00 
Swimming Pool Operator's Class Fee 	100.00 
Backflow fees: 	
 Annual backflow testing fee 	25.00 per device 
 Annual backflow tester registration 	100.00 
Waste Hauler fees: 	
 Waste Hauler Permit Fee, per Truck 	200.00 
ANIMAL CONTROL DIVISION: 
Adoption fee for sterilized animals 	
 Adoption fee is waived for US Veterans if they meet all the other requirements for adoption, and at the time of adoption, present one of the following documents that pertain to their military service: 	
 Military ID; 	
 Form DD214 Military Discharge Certificate; 	
 Honorable Discharge Certificate; 	
 Letter from a U.S. Military Center in St. Louis, Missouri; or 	
 Letter from the Maryland Department of Veterans Affairs Services and Benefits Program. 	
The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to temporarily reduce the fee for adoption of animals in association with a special animal adoption event or upon the determination that such reduction is necessary to increase adoption rates in order to reduce overcrowding or capacity issues at the animal shelter. 	
The City Manager or his/her designee is authorized to reduce or not charge the adoption fee with respect to the adoption of an animal that has remained impounded for a period of more than 12 consecutive days upon a finding that such reduction is necessary to create an incentive to adopt said animal in order to reduce overcrowding or capacity issues at the animal adoption center. 	
Adoption fee, per animal 	90.00 
Adoption fee, per pet animal 	20.00 
Adoption fee, potbellied pig 	25.00 
Micro-chipping fee, per animal/public program 	15.00 
Rabies vaccination/processing fee 	50.00 
Rabies vaccination coupon, per animal 	8.00 
Impound fees (standard), per animal: 	
 First offense 	10.00 
 Second offense 	15.00 
 Third offense 	20.00 
 Fourth offense 	25.00 
Nonvaccinated impound, per animal: 	
 First offense 	25.00 
 Second offense 	100.00 
Daily handling fee (dogs, cats, etc.) including confinement, per day per animal 	5.00 
Euthanasia fee 	40.00 
Quarantine fees, per day, per animal 	10.00 
Livestock fees: 	
 Impound, per animal 	35.00 
 Handling, per animal, per day 	10.00 
 Permit: 	
  Agricultural animals, per site 	25.00 
  Chickens, per year 	10.00 
  Other, per year 	5.00 
Regulated animal, per animal 	25.00 
Prohibited animal exhibitor, per event, not to exceed ten days 	25.00 
Potbellied pig permit, per animal 	25.00 
Dangerous dog, per animal 	100.00 
Change of address of dangerous dog 	25.00 
Trap deposit, per trap 	50.00 
Duplicate license tag, per tag 	1.00 
Guard dog tag, per dog 	5.00 
(Additional handling fees are added as of 12:01 p.m. each day the animal is at the shelter.) 	
All animal/pet registrations are waived for animals participating in city-sponsored special events 	
Animal registration: 	
 Sterilized animals 	7.00 per animal, per year 
 Unsterilized animals 	30.00 per animal, per year 
 Sterilized animals 	21.00 per animal, per 3 years 
 Unsterilized animals 	90.00 per animal, per 3 years 
COMMUNITY SERVICES DIVISION: 
Tree preservation: Provisions for removal and replacement of protected trees. Protected trees, if removed, shall be replanted on a 1:1 ratio per caliper inch. If protected trees are removed and not replaced, penalties for removal shall be paid according to the following chart: 	
 Size of caliper removed 	Cost of removing protected trees (per tree) 
 5—9" 	500.00 
 10—14" 	1,000.00 
 15—24" 	1,500.00 
 25+" 	2,000.00 
Fire Department: 	
Pump Simulator rental: 	
 Four hour minimum block 	1500.00 per four hour block 
 If driven off site 	Rental fee plus additional government mileage rate plus one hour of base pay overtime rate for a Fire Captain 
Fire training tower rental (available to fire departments and related agencies only): 	
 Facility use only—Facility use without live fire activity (four hour minimum) 	30.00 per hour 
 Non-fire prop use—Four hour minimum 	50.00 per hour 
 Live fire training—Four hour minimum. Must meet NFPA 1401 Guidelines. If LFD is providing the instruction, a minimum of 3 instructors are required at the LFD instructor rate. 	125.00 per hour 
 One LFD facility supervisor (trained LFD personnel to monitor live fire training and facility clean-up) 	Overtime rate for a fire captain/per hour/per instructor 
 Flashover training—3 Instructors provided. Requesting agency must provide materials. (OSB/Particle Board). One burn per hour with one hour added to the day to cover set up and clean up. 	175.00 per hour 
 Non-live fire training—Training by request—Instruction for firefighters not employed by the city, instructed by city firefighters and not involving live fires 	
 LFD instructors (LFD personnel trained and approved to conduct miscellaneous training) 	Overtime rate for top of range fire captain. 
Ambulance service: 	
 Nonemergency lake response fee 	432.00 per nonemergency response 
 Per patient transported (nonresident) 	Cost of service per transport (as defined in the fire department's standard operating procedure related to annual ambulance rate calculation). 
 Per patient transported (resident) 	Cost of service per transport (as defined in the fire department's standard operating procedure related to annual ambulance rate calculation) minus a 25% discount. 
 O 2 therapy including disposable supplies and pulse oximetry 	50.00 
 Drug/medication therapy including IV fluids 	Cost + 150% 
 Disposable supplies 	Cost + 150% 
 Additional crew members required for patient care 	Base pay overtime rate for a Step 2 fire captain/hour 
 Incident report (per copy) 	2.00 
 Per patient (when definitive therapy is administered, but patient is not transported) 	150.00 
 Fire/ambulance report fee requests for 30 pages of information or less is free of charge. Requests for over 30 pages is $0.10 per page 	
 Mileage charge added to basic ambulance transport fees, per mile 	12.00 
Fire training tower rental (available to fire departments and related agencies only): 	
 Facility use only—Facility use without live fire activity (four hour minimum) 	25.00 per hour 
 Facility use (driver/engineer training, New hire process, rappelling, non-fire prop use, etc) 	25.00 per hour 
 Materials (lumber, roofing material, etc) 	Current market price 
 Panel construction (pre-constructed prop panels) 	22.00 per panel 
 Non-fire prop use—Four hour minimum plus the cost or replacement of materials used. 	25.00 per hour 
 Panel construction (pre-constructed prop panels) 	22.00 per panel 
 Live fire training—Four hour minimum 	67.00 per hour 
 One LFD facility supervisor (trained LFD personnel to monitor live fire training and facility clean-up) 	Overtime rate for a Step 2 fire captain/per hour/per instructor 
 Repair and maintenance (recovery cost for repairs and [facility maintenance]) 	20.00 per hour 
 Materials (pallets, hay, lumber, roofing material) 	Current market price 
 Flashover training—Up to 15 students 	161.00 per hour 
 Phase I—Classroom instruction (one instructor) 	Base pay overtime rate for a Step 2 fire captain/per hour/per instructor 
 Phase II—Simulation—Minimum of three LFD instructors (up to 15 students) 	Base pay overtime rate for a Step 2 fire captain/per hour/per instructor 
 Repair and maintenance (Recovery cost for repairs and [facility maintenance]) 	20.00 per hour 
 Materials (pallets, hay, lumber, etc) 	Current market price 
 Training by request, provided by LFD instructors—Instruction for firefighters not employed by the city, instructed by city firefighters. If the training involves live fire, three instructors will be required 	First instructor per hour: $20.00 + base pay overtime rate for a step 2 fire captain. Additional instructors per hour: Base pay overtime rate for a step 2 fire captain. Plus the cost or replacement of materials 
 Non-live fire training—Training by request—Instruction for firefighters not employed by the city, instructed by city firefighters and not involving live fires 	
 LFD instructors, two minimum (LFD personnel trained and approved to conduct miscellaneous training) 	First instructor per hour: $20.00 + base pay overtime rate for a step 2 fire captain. Additional instructors per hour: Base pay overtime rate for a step 2 fire captain. Plus the cost or replacement of materials 
 Materials (pallets, hay, lumber, etc.) 	Current market price 
 Repair and maintenance 	20.00 per hour 
 Materials (items shall be reimbursed at current market prices): 	
  Hay (per bail) 	Current market price 
  Lumber (2 × 4 × 8) 	Current market price 
  Lumber (2 × 4 × 10) 	Current market price 
  Plywood (½ × 4 × 8 CDX) 	Current market price 
  Particle board ( 5/8 × 4 × 8) 	Current market price 
  Roof felt (15 lbs) 	Current market price 
  Roof shingles (Bundle) 	Current market price 
Police Department: 	
 Sky Tower 	
 Minimum 8 hours Rental 	167.40 
 Hourly rate after first 8 hours up to 72 hours maximum 	8.25 
 On-line accident reports 	8.50 
 Challenge coins to City of Lewisville personnel 	10.00 each (includes applicable sales tax) 
 Individual fingerprinting 	10.00 (includes applicable sales tax) 
 Lewisville residents 17 and under 	Free 
PARKS AND LEISURE SERVICES DEPARTMENT: 
Park Dedication Fee (cash in lieu of) 	Fair Market Value 
Primitive Campsite: 	
 Up to 6 campers 	10.00 per campsite per night plus park entrance fee 
Primitive Group Campsite: 	
 25 to 50 campers 	50.00 per campsite per night plus park entrance fee 
 51 to 75 campers 	75.00 per campsite per night plus park entrance fee 
 76 to 100 campers 	100.00 per campsite per night plus park entrance fee 
 Memorial tree 	The city's cost from the supplier for the tree plus $50.00 administrative fee for planting 
 Memorial bench 	The city's cost from the supplier for the bench plus $250.00 administrative fee for installation on a concrete pad 
 Memorial brick 	The city's cost from the supplier for the brick plus $25.00 administrative fee for installation 
 Park development fee rate 	1,000.00 for each new dwelling unit 
Youth athletics co-sponsored leagues 	
 City resident registration, per participant 	4.00 
 Non-city registration, per participant 	16.00 
Facility fees: 	
 Athletic fields (1½-hour maximum for single reservation): 	
  Field with lights turned on (fee is per hour of light use or fraction thereof) 	35.00 
  Field with lights turned off (fee is per hour of non-lighted use or fraction thereof) 	20.00 
Tennis Court rental 	4.00 
Tournament Rates: 	
Turf fields 	200.00 per field/per day 
(Parks Crew Fees-included in rentals before 3:30 p.m.; Park Crew Fees will be charged at overtime rates after 3:30 p.m.) 	50.00 per court/per day 
Tennis Courts 	
Walking or Running Events (5Ks, Walks, etc.): 	
 Pavilion and Trail 	500.00 per event 
 (use of additional space such as turf fields or other amenities will charged as listed; Parks Crew Fees-included in rentals before 3:30 p.m.; Park Crew Fees will be charged at overtime rates after 3:30 p.m.) 	
Lake Park entrance: 	
 Entry fee - per commercial bus (more than 26 seats) 	30.00 per day 
 Entry fee - per small commercial van or bus (between 10—25 seats) 	20.00 per day 
 Resident general admission, per vehicle 	3.00 per day 
 Nonresident general admission, per vehicle 	10.00 per day 
 Entry for events with special events permit, per vehicle 	3.00 per day 
 Resident senior citizen (60 years or older), per vehicle 	1.00 per day 
 Nonresident senior citizen (60 years or older), per vehicle 	5.00 per day 
 Resident season pass, per vehicle 	25.00 per day 
 Nonresident season pass, per vehicle 	50.00 per day 
 Entrance fee per vehicle with rental of pavilion or picnic areas (must be pre-purchased) (minimum of 20) 	3.00 per day 
 Resident senior citizen (60 years or older) season pass, per vehicle 	12.50 
 Nonresident senior citizen (60 years or older) season pass, per vehicle 	25.00 
 Boat dealer season pass for demo/maintenance vehicles and accompanying customers (each vehicle) 	30.00 
Campground: 	
 Site with electric, general, per day 	20.00 
 Site with electric, senior citizen (60 years or older), per day 	10.00 
 Site without electric, general, per day 	10.00 
 Site without electric, senior citizen (60) years or older), per day 	5.00 
 Premium site with electric, general, per day 	22.00 
 Premium site with electric, senior citizen (60 years or older), per day 	11.00 
 Cancellation fee (more than two weeks before first day) 	10.00 
 Cancellation fee (less than two weeks before first day) 	$10.00 plus one night's stay 
 Late fee, per day 	5.00 
 Late checkout (If not checked out by 1:00 p.m., user's will be charged for another day) 	Same full-day rate as charged previous day 
Lake Park Pavilion (Connor): 	
 Rental fee (per day) 	150.00 plus entrance fee 
 Deposit (refunded by mail) 	100.00 
 Cancellations (reservation is cancelled at least 30 days in advance) 	Rental fee and deposit minus a 10.00 cancellation fee will be refunded 
 Cancellations (reservation cancelled less than 30 days in advance) 	All rental fees are retained 
Lake Park Pavilion (Pike): 	
 Rental fee (per day) 	50.00 plus entrance fee 
 Deposit (refunded by mail) 	50.00 
 Cancellations (reservation is cancelled at least 30 days in advance) 	Rental fee and deposit minus a $10.00 cancellation fee will be refunded 
 Cancellations (reservation cancelled less than 30 days in advance) 	Deposit plus $10.00 cancellation fee retained 
Lake Park group picnic areas: 	
 Rental fee (per day) 	25.00, plus entrance fee 
 Newsletter mailing fee 	5.00 
Hedrick House: 	
 Facility deposit 	300.00 
 Rental fee (four-hour minimum) 	200.00 
 Rental fee for each hour exceeding the four-hour minimum 	100.00 per hour maximum additional hour rental is 12 
 Hedrick House (reservations will be allowed one year in advance of desired date): 	
 Cancellation fee - if cancellation occurs at least 30 days in advance 	Rental fee and deposit minus a $10.00 cancellation fee will be refunded 
 Cancellation fees (retained from deposit): 	
 If cancellation occurs less than 30 days 	Minimum rental fee plus $10.00 processing fee is forfeited 
 If cancellation occurs less than two weeks in advance of the rental date 	Entire deposit plus $10.00 processing fee is forfeited 
 Failure to pick up keys at designated time (deducted from deposit) 	25.00 
 Late key return (deducted from deposit) 	10.00 per day 
 Failure to return chairs to proper storage (deducted from deposit) 	25.00 
 Alarm system activation (non-emergencies) (deducted from deposit) 	25.00 
 Use of facility during non-reservation times (deducted from deposit) 	100.00 per hour or portion thereof 
Glenmore Savage Community Room (cannot be reserved more than two months in advance): 	
 Rental fee (two-hour minimum) 	50.00 per hour 
 Failure to submit rental fee within two weeks of reservation date 	Minimum rental fee is forfeited 
 Deposit due upon reservation 	300.00 
 Facility damage fee 	Dependent on cost to repair damage 
 Cancellation fee if reservation is cancelled at least 30 days in advance of event 	Rental fee and deposit minus a $10.00 cancellation fee will be refunded 
 Cancellation fee if reservation is cancelled less than 30 days in advance of event 	Minimum rental fee and a $10.00 cancellation fee is forfeited 
Central Park: 	
 Band shell (reservations begin January 1st for current calendar year): 	
 Rental per day (capacity 50 people) 	75.00 
 Deposit (refund by mail) 	50.00 
 Picnic shelters (2) (reservations begin January 1st for current calendar year): 	
 Rental per day (capacity 25 people) (per shelter) 	50.00 
 Deposit (refeund by mail) (per shelter) 	50.00 
 Cancellation fee(s) (If the reservation is cancelled at least two weeks prior to the event) 	Rental fee and deposit minus a $10.00 cancellation fee will be refunded 
Tower Bay: 	
 Self-pay parking, per day 	10.00 
 Resident season pass, per vehicle 	25.00 
 Nonresident season pass, per vehicle 	50.00 
Skate Park: 	
  Event Rental: For approved events with proper permits and insurance (per hour rental) (four hour minimum); (Parks Crew Fees-included in rentals before 3:30 p.m.; Park Crew Fees will be charged at overtime rates after 3:30 p.m.) 	100.00 per hour 
Aquatic facilities: 	
Aquatic parks 	
 Resident family pass (up to six people) 	175.00 
Swimming pools: 	
 Opening day 	All guests admitted free 
 Father's Day 	Fathers admitted free with a paid child's admission 
 Fourth of July 	Free admission with a military ID 
  Old Town Aquatic Center 	3.00 per person 
 Admission 	3.00 
 Twilight Admission (Monday—Friday 7:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.) 	2.00 
 Resident (proof of residency required) 	2.00 
 Under 3 years of age 	Free 
 Partybrella (including 20 park admissions) 	60.00 
 Partybrella (no additional park admissions) 	25.00 
 Private Rental (300 person max, includes all staffing costs) 	300.00 
 Private Rental Deposit 	100.00 
 Family Season Pass (resident, up to 6 family members) 	175.00 
 Season pass 	65.00 
 Resident season pass 	50.00 
Sun Valley Aquatic Park: 	
 Admission 	5.00 
 Resident (proof of residency required) 	4.00 
 Twilight Admission (Monday—Friday 7:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.) 	3.00 
 Under 3 years of age 	Free 
 Season Pass 	65.00 
 Season Pass (resident) 	50.00 
 Family Season Pass (resident, up to 6 family members) 	175.00 
 Private Rental (700 person max, includes all staffing costs) 	500.00 
 Private Rental Deposit 	100.00 
 Partybrella (including 20 park admissions) 	100.00 
 Partybrella (no additional park admissions) 	25.00 
Sun Valley tennis courts: 	
  Single room—Rental fee per hour 	15.00 
  Double room—Rental fee per hour (one hour minimum) 	25.00 
Frederick P. Herring Recreation Center: 	
 Classrooms (cannot be reserved more than one month in advance): 	
 Cancellation fee(s) (If the reservation is cancelled at least two week prior to the event) 	10.00 
 Cancellation fee(s) (If the reservation is cancelled less than two week prior to the event) 	10.00 + all rental fees 
 Racquetball and handball court rentals for leagues, tournaments 	
  One court 	10.00/hour 
  All courts 	35.00/hour 
  After hours 	125.00/hour 
 Gym rentals for leagues, tournaments by outside entities: 	
  Half court 	25.00 
  Full court 	50.00 
  After hours 	175.00/hour 
  Tables and chairs 	25.00 
Frederick P. Herring Recreation Center Memberships - Residents 	
 Adult (day/month/annual) 	2.00/12.00/50.00 
 Youth under 18 and Seniors over 60 (day/month/annual) 	1.00/5.00/25.00 
 Family (annual) 	75.00 
 Up to 6 members in a family - two adults plus youth or seniors living in the same household 	
Frederick P. Herring Recreation Center Memberships - Non-Residents 	
 Adult (day/month/annual) 	3.00/18.00/75.00 
 Youth under 18 and Seniors over 60 (day/month/annual) 	2.00/8.00/35.00 
 Family (annual) 	90.00 
 Up to 6 members in a family - two adults plus youth or seniors living in the same household 	
 Add on Memberships: 
Additional family members (annual) 	5.00 
L.L. Woods Park: 	
 Picnic shelters (2) (reservations begin January 1 st for the current calendar year): 	
 Rental per day (capacity 40 people) (per shelter) 	50.00 
 Deposit (refunded by mail) (per shelter) 	50.00 
 Cancellation fee if the reservation is cancelled at least 30 days prior to the event 	Rental fee and deposit minus a 10.00 cancellation fee will be refunded 
 Cancellation fee is the reservation is cancelled less than 30 days prior to the event 	Rental fee and a 10.00 cancellation fee retained 
Ellis Park: 	
 Picnic shelters (2) (reservations begin January 1 st for the current calendar year): 	
 Rental per day (capacity 25 people) (per shelter) 	50.00 
 Deposit (refunded by mail) (per shelter) 	50.00 
  Cancellation fee if the reservation is cancelled at least 30 days prior to the event 	Rental fee and deposit minus a 10.00 cancellation fee will be refunded 
  Cancellation fee is the reservation is cancelled less than 30 days prior to the event 	Rental fee retained 
Parks and Recreation: 	
Fee Waivers with a Provision that the Parks and Recreation Director is Authorized to Implement the Waivers at His/Her Discretion 	
 ? Reduced pricing at Old Town Aquatic Center and Sun Valley Aquatic Park for the month of August if attendance is consistent with historic downward trend that occurs after July 4 	
  ¦ Old Town Aquatic Center - Fee: $2.00 	
  ¦ Sun Valley Aquatic Park - Fee: $3.00 	
 ? Dollar Days - $1 entry fee to aquatic facilities or Herring Recreation Center if attendance/membership is down or to kick off a membership drive 	
 ? Reduced league fees for teams that bring another new team into the league - Purpose is to encourage increased participation in adult sports leagues 	
 ? Reduced camp registration fee to parents who register their child for every week of camp offered (Example - 6 weeks of Break Out Camp offered: First 5 weeks - Full price; Week 6 - ½ price) - Will be used if registration for camps is lagging and the camps are not full one month prior to the start of summer 	
 ? Resident rates for companies operating in Lewisville 	
 ? Rainy day/broken equipment passes for days when a patron's visit is cut short 	
 ? Give-A-Way and Promotional Registrations - Provide program and activity registration vouchers to organizations seeking auction items or department booths at local events looking for raffle items - The number of registrations to be offered will be established during the budget process 	
 ? The Lewisville Way, Jr. Certificate - An on-the-spot award/card for free entry to a pool or recreation facility that will be handed out by staff when a youth, 18 and under, demonstrates the qualities of The Lewisville Way - A finite number that can be distributed in a single fiscal year will be established by the director of Parks and Recreation 	
 ? Perfect Partners - Partnership with a non-profit such as Keep Lewisville Beautiful, Kyle's Place, or Food Bank - Offer discounted entry into the aquatic center if the patron brings an item (to be determined by the City and the partner) to donate to the non-profit. Days will be established in January and integrated into the pool schedule - Limit two events per year 	
 ? Sweat equity trade for groups such as Kyle's Place, Keep Lewisville Beautiful, Chin Community Ministries, Scouts, etc. - Groups can earn money towards an entry, membership, program registration, etc. by working in the parks and recreation system at ¼ of the rate established for volunteer service hour by Independent Sector (currently $24.14) 	
 ? Scholarship Days - Earmark revenue earned during targeted days for scholarships for youth/families that cannot normally afford to participate in fee-based programs 	
LLELA: 	
 LLELA classroom rental 	25.00 per hour 
 LLELA entry fee 	5.00 per day 
 LLELA entry fee - per commercial bus (more than 26 seats) 	30.00 per day 
 LLELA entry fee - per small commercial van or bus (between 10—25 seats) 	20.00 per day 
 LLELA Pavilion Rental 	50.00 
Thrive Recreation Center Memberships - Residents 	
 Adult (day/month/annual) 	6.00/18.00/210.00 
 Youth under 18 and Seniors over 60 (day/month/annual) 	4.00/12.00/25.00 
 City Employee (annual) 	25.00 
 Family (annual) 	
 Up to 6 members in a family - two adults plus youth or seniors living in the same household 	275.00 
 Corporate (annual) 	
 Up to 5 employees in the company - additional employees can purchase additional memberships at residential rates 	1,000.00 
Thrive Recreation Center Memberships - Non-Residents 	
 Adult (day/month/annual) 	8.00/27.00/315.00 
 Youth under 18 and Seniors over 60 (day/month/annual) 	6.00/18.00/40.00 
 Family (annual) 	
 Up to 6 members in a family - two adults plus youth or seniors living in the same household 	415.00 
 Corporate (annual) 	
 Up to 5 employees in the company 	1,500.00 
 Add on Memberships: 	
  Additional family members (month/annual) 	5.00/20.00 
  Adventure Land (10 visits) 	30.00 
Thrive Rentals: 	
 Community Room (per hour) 	
 Entire room 	450.00 
 Room 1 	200.00 
 Room 2 	150.00 
 Room 3 	150.00 
 Deposit 	100.00 
 Party Room (per hour) 	100.00 
 Deposit 	$50.00 
 Game Room (per hour) 	100.00 
 Deposit 	50.00 
 Multipurpose Room (per hour) 	100.00 
 Deposit 	50.00 
 Arts & Crafts (per hour) 	125.00 
 Deposit 	75.00 
 Catering kitchen (per hour) 	100.00 
 Deposit 	50.00 
 Gym (per hour): 	
  Entire gym 	600.00 
  One court 	300.00 
  Deposit 	150.00 
 Lounges (per hour) 	100.00 
 Deposit 	50.00 
 Exercise rooms (per hour) 	
  Room A 	125.00 
  Room B 	100.00 
  Deposit 	50.00 
 Aquatic Center (per hour) 	800.00 
  Entire facility (per hour) 	1,000.00 
  Deposit 	600.00 
 Rental cancellation: 	
  Cancellation 30 days prior to rental date 	10.00 cancellation fee 
  Cancellation less than 30 days prior to rental 	10.00 cancellation fee plus deposit 
Youth sports practice fee, per person, per season 	5.00 
Spooktactular Trails and Funny Bunny Festival, Motorcycle Toy Run 	
 10 x 10 activity/game booth 	150.00 
 Printed brochures/literature displayed on our information table 	50.00 
Doggie Dive In, Senior Health Fair, Ducky Derby, Family Fun Pumpkin Walk 	
 10 x 10 booth 	100.00 
NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES: 
 
Commercial Step Rate - 
Valuation is calculated utilizing the most recently published International Code Council Building Valuation Data Table 
1997 UBC - Step Rate Table: 
Total Valuation 	Total Permit Fee 
$1.00 to $10,000.00 	$125.00 
$10,001.00 to $25,000.00 	$125.00 for the first $10,000.00 
plus $14.00 for each additional $1,000.00 
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 	$391.25 for the first $25,000.00 
plus $10.10 for each additional $1,000.00 
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 	$643.75 for the first $50,000.00 
plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00 
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 	$993.75 for the first $100,000.00 
plus $5.60 for each additional $1,000.00 
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 	$3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00 
plus $4.75 for each additional $1,000.00 
$1,000,001.00 and over 	$5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00 
plus $3.15 for each additional $1,000.00 
 
Fee 	Amount 
COMMUNITY RELATIONS AND TOURISM: 
Special Event Permit: 	
 Event Planning 	25.00 per hour 
 Professional Marketing 	40.00 per hour 
Batteries (per box) 	20.00 
Curtain, Classroom Blackout 	25.00 
Hazer (with 2-litre bottle of fluid) 	60.00 
Hazer Fluid (2-liter bottle) 	50.00 
Lighting Gel (per sheet) 	10.00 
Mirror, Portable 	15.00 
Music Stands 	2.50 
Plaza Lighting Rig (daily) 	250.00 
Piano, Upright 	50.00 
Plot Restore 	120.00 
Popcorn Machine 	15.00 
Portable Walls, 8' (each) 	20.00 
Projector/Cart/Screen 	100.00 
Rebooking Fee 	25.00 
Rigging Package 	100.00 
Screen, portable (table top) 	50.00 
Tape, Gaff 	16.00 
Artisan exhibitor 10 x 10 	200.00 
Artisan exhibitor 10 x 20 	300.00 
Artisan exhibitor 10 x 30 	400.00 
Commercial services exhibitor 10 x 10 	325.00 
Commercial services exhibitor 10 x 20 	400.00 
Commercial services exhibitor 10 x 30 	500.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 10 	125.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 20 	225.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 30 	325.00 
On-site concessionaire (sales) 10 x 20 	375.00 plus 20% commission 
On-site concessionaire (sales) 10 x 30 	475.00 plus 20% commission 
On-site concessionaire (sales) 10 x 40 	575.00 plus 20% commission 
Food exhibitor (sampling only) 10 x 10 	250.00 
Food exhibitor (sampling only) 10 x 20 	350.00 
Food exhibitor (sampling only) 10 x 30 	450.00 
Corner placement guarantee 	75.00 
Holiday Stroll: 	
Artisan/Retail Exhibitor 10 x 10 	200.00 
Artisan/Retail Exhibitor 10 x 20 	300.00 
Artisan/Retail Exhibitor 10 x 30 	400.00 
Non-profit 10 x 10 	125.00 
Non-profit 10 x 20 	225.00 
Non-profit 10 x 30 	325.00 
Food exhibitor packaged (sampling) 10 x 10 	250.00 
Food exhibitor packaged (sampling) 10 x 20 	350.00 
Food exhibitor packaged (sampling) 10 x 30 	450.00 
On-site concessionaire food sales 10 x 20 	400.00 
On-site concessionaire food sales 10 x 30 	500.00 
On-site concessionaire food sales 10 x 40 	600.00 
Colorpalooza - A Celebration of Spring: 	
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 10 	125.00 
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 20 	185.00 
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 30 	235.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 10 	75.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 20 	115.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 30 	175.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 10 	150.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 20 	250.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 30 	375.00 
On-site Concessionaire food sales 10 x 20 	225.00 
On-site Concessionaire food sales 10 x 30 	325.00 
On-site Concessionaire food sales 10 x 20 	425.00 
Events not listed with expected attendance of less than 1,000 people: 	
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 10 	45.00 
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 20 	65.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 10 	40.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 20 	55.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 10 	70.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 20 	55.00 
On-site food concessionaire 10 x 20 	125.00 
On-site food concessionaire 10 x 30 	175.00 
Events not listed with expected attendance of 1,000 to 10,000 people: 	
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 10 	100.00 
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 20 	160.00 
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 30 	210.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 10 	75.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 20 	115.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 30 	150.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 10 	150.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 20 	250.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 30 	350.00 
On-site concessionaire 10 x 20 	225.00 
On-site concessionaire 10 x 30 	325.00 
On-site concessionaire 10 x 40 	425.00 
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 10 	200.00 
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 20 	300.00 
Artisan/Retail exhibitor 10 x 30 	400.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 10 	150.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 20 	250.00 
Non-profit exhibitor 10 x 30 	350.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 10 	250.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 20 	350.00 
Food Exhibitor (pre-packaged) 10 x 30 	450.00 
On-site concessionaire 10 x 20 	400.00 plus 20% sales 
On-site concessionaire 10 x 30 	500.00 plus 20% sales 
On-site concessionaire 10 x 40 	600.00 plus 20% sales 
Commercial services exhibitor 10 x 10 	325.00 
Commercial services exhibitor 10 x 20 	400.00 
Commercial services exhibitor 10 x 30 	500.00 
Electricity 110v/30 amps or less 	60.00 
Electricity 110v/31—60 amps or less 	110.00 
Electricity 220v/60 amps or less 	160.00 
Electricity 220v/61 to 100 amps 	310.00 
Concert Grand Piano Rental 	
 First day 	375.00 
 Plus, each additional day 	50.00 
 If needed, re-tuning fee 	120.00 
Arts Center: 	
MCL Grand - Performance Hall Rentals: 	
 Prime day* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	462.00 
 Hourly prime day rentals by a local not-for-profit (3—5 hours, or added to 6-hour rental) 	79.00 
 Tech Day, prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	462.00 
 Off-prime* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	330.00 
 Hourly off-prime* rental by a local not-for-profit (3—5 hours, or added to a 6-hour rental) 	56.00 
 Tech Day, off-prime rental by a local not-for-profit (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	330.00 
 Prime day rental by a local commercial* user (6 hours) 	528.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local commercial user (3—5 hours, or added to a 6-hour rental) 	90.00 
 Tech Day, prime day rental by a local commercial user (12 hours in conjunction with a performance rental) 	528.00 
 Off-prime* rental by a local commercial user (6 hours) 	396.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local commercial user (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	68.00 
 Tech Day, off-prime rental by a local commercial user (2 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	396.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit** (6 hours) 	561.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit user (3—5 hours, or added to 6-hour rental) 	96.00 
 Tech Day, prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit user (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	561.00 
 Off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	429.00 
 Off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit (3—5 hours, or added to a 6-hour rental) 	74.00 
 Tech Day, off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	429.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	660.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (3—5 hours, or added to 6-hour rental) 	112.00 
 Tech Day, prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	660.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	495.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a non-local commercial user (3—5 hours, or added to 6-hour rental) 	85.00 
 Tech Day, off-prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	495.00 
MCL Grand - Black Box Theater: 	
 Prime day* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	231.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (3—5 hours or added to a 6-hour rental) 	40.00 
 Tech Day, prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (12 hours in conjunction with a performance rental) 	231.00 
 Off-prime* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	165.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local not-for-profit (3—5 hours or added to a 6-hour rental) 	28.00 
 Tech Day, off-prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	165.00 
 Prime day rental by a local commercial* user (6 hours) 	264.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local commercial user (3—5 hours, or added to a 6-hour rental) 	44.00 
 Tech Day, prime day rental by a local commercial user (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance) 	264.00 
 Off-prime rental by a local commercial user (6 hours) 	198.00 
 Hourly off-prime day rental by a local commercial user (3—5 hours, or added to a 6-hour rental) 	34.00 
 Tech Day, off-prime day rental by a local commercial user (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	198.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit** (6 hours) 	281.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit (3—5 hours, or added to 6-hour rental) 	50.00 
 Tech Day, prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	281.00 
 Off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	215.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit (3—5 hours, or added to a 6-hour rental) 	36.00 
 Tech Day, off-prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	215.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	330.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (3—5 hours, or added to 6-hour rental) 	55.00 
 Tech Day, prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	330.00 
 Off-prime rental by non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	248.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a non-local commercial user (3—5 hours, or added to 6-hour rental) 	42.00 
 Tech Day, off-prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (12 hours, in conjunction with a performance rental) 	248.00 
MCL Grand - Recital Hall: 	
 Prime day* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	185.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local non-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	31.00 
 Off-prime* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	132.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local non-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to 6-hour rental) 	22.00 
 Prime day rental by a local commercial* user (6 hours) 	211.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	30.00 
 Off-prime rental by a local commercial user (6 hours) 	158.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	26.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit** (6 hours) 	224.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	37.00 
 Off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	172.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours, or added to a 6-hour rental) 	29.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	264.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	44.00 
 Off-prime rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	198.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	33.00 
MCL Grand - Center Courtyard: 	
 Center Courtyard Rental: Prime day* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	185.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	31.00 
 Off-prime* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	132.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to a six-hour rental) 	22.00 
 Prime day rental by a local commercial* user (6 hours) 	211.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	35.00 
 Off-prime rental by a local commercial user (6 hours) 	158.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	26.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit user (6 hours) 	224.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	37.00 
 Off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit user (6 hours) 	172.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by non-local not-for-profit user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	29.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	264.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental 	44.00 
 Off-prime rental by non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	198.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a non-local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	33.00 
MCL Grand - Arts Classroom: 	
 Prime day* rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	120.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	20.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (up to 12 hours) 	225.00 
 Off-prime rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	84.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	14.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by a local not-for-profit (up to 12 hours) 	160.00 
 Prime day rental by a local commercial user (6 hours) 	138.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	23.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by a local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	260.00 
 Off-prime rental by a local commercial user (6 hours) 	76.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	17.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by a local commercial user (Up to 12 hours) 	200.00 
 Prime day rental by non-local not-for-profit user (6 hours) 	132.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by non-local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to 6-hour rental) 	24.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by non-local not-for-profit (up to 12 hours) 	270.00 
 Off-prime rental by non-local not-for-profit user (6 hours) 	48.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by non-local not-for-profit user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	18.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by a non-local not-for-profit user (up to 12 hours) 	205.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	168.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by non-local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	28.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by non-local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	315.00 
 Off-prime rental by non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	126.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by non-local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	21.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by non-local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	235.00 
MCL Grand - Art Gallery: 	
 Prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	174.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to 6-hour rental) 	29.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	348.00 
 Off-prime rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	124.00 
 Full-day off-prime day rental by local not-for-profit 	249.00 
 Prime day rental by a local commercial* user (6 hours) 	198.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by a local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	33.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	396.00 
 Off-prime rental by local commercial user (6 hours) 	149.00 
 Hourly off-prime day rental by local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	24.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	297.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	210.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by a non-local not-for-profit (Up to 12 hours) 	420.00 
 Off-prime rental by non-local not-for-profit user (6 hours) 	162.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by non-local not-for-profit 	323.00 
 Prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	281.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by non-local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	495.00 
 Off-prime rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	186.00 
 Hourly off-prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	31.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by non-local commercial user (up to 12 hrs) 	372.00 
MCL Grand - Summer Camp: 	
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Prime day rental by local not-for-profit (8 hours) 	2,640.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Hourly prime day rental by local not-for-profit (beyond 8 hours) 	330.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Off-prime rental by local not-for-profit (8 hours) 	1,914.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Hourly off-prime rental by local not-for-profit (beyond 8 hours) 	238.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Prime-day rental by local commercial user (8 hours) 	3,010.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Hourly prime day rental by local commercial user (beyond 8 hours) 	376.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Off-prime rental by local commercial user (8 hours) 	2,297.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Hourly off-prime rental by local commercial user (beyond 8 hours) 	297.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Prime-day rental by non-local not-for-profit user (8 hours) 	3,194.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Hourly prime-day rental by non-local not-for-profit user (beyond 8 hours) 	403.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Off-prime rental by non-local not-for-profit (8 hours) 	2,488.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Hourly off-prime rental by non-local not-for-profit (beyond 8 hours) 	322.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Prime day rental by non-local commercial user (8 hours) 	3,775.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Hourly prime-day rental by non-local commercial user (beyond 8 hours) 	471.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Off-prime rental by non-local commercial user (8 hours) 	3,630.00 
 Run of House (all rental areas) - Hourly off-prime rental by non-local commercial user (beyond 8 hours) 	370.00 
MCL Grand - Lobby: 	
 Prime-day rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	264.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to 6-hour rental) 	44.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by local not-for-profit (up to 12 hours) 	528.00 
 Off-prime day rental by a local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	220.00 
 Hourly off-prime day rental by local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	36.00 
 Full-day off-prime day rental by local not-for-profit 	440.00 
 Prime-day rental by a local commercial user (6 hours) 	330.00 
 Hourly prime-day rental by local commercial user (up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	55.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	660.00 
 Off-prime day rental by a local commercial user (6 hours) 	275.00 
 Hourly off-prime rental by local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to a 6-hour rental) 	47.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	550.00 
 Prime-day rental by non-local not-for-profit user (6 hours) 	358.00 
 Hourly prime day rental by non-local not-for-profit (up to 5 hours added to 6-hour rental) 	59.00 
 Full-day prime-day rental by non-local not-for-profit (up to 12 hours) 	715.00 
 Off-prime day rental by non-local not-for-profit (6 hours) 	303.00 
 Hourly off-prime day rental by non-local not-for-profit (Up to 5 hours added to 6-hour rental) 	51.00 
 Full-day off-prime rental by non-local not-for-profit (up to 12 hours) 	605.00 
 Prime day rental by non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	413.00 
 Hourly prime-day rental by non-local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to 6-hour rental) 	68.00 
 Full-day prime day rental by non-local commercial user (up to 12 hours) 	825.00 
 Off-prime day rental by a non-local commercial user (6 hours) 	358.00 
 Hourly off-prime day rental by non-local commercial user (Up to 5 hours added to 6-hour rental) 	47.00 
 Full-day off-prime day rental by non-local commercial user (up to 12 hrs) 	715.00 
*Definition of Terms: 
  Prime day = Thursday, Friday, Saturday or Sunday 
  Off-prime = Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday 
  Local = An individual residing in Lewisville or a business located in Lewisville 
  Non-local = An individual or a business not residing in Lewisville 
  Commercial user = An individual user or a for-profit business user 
  NFP = Not-for-profit organization 
Deposit Required at Time of Execution of Facility Use Agreement: 
 User must pay a deposit of 50 percent of the total of rental fees at the time of signing of facility use agreement. 
 Balance of fees due two weeks prior to date of event. 
Refund Policy: If user cancels the event: 
• 90 or more days before date of event, entitled to full refund of deposit. 
• More than 30 but less than 90 days before date of event, entitled to 50 percent refund of deposit. 
• 30 days or less before date of event, no refund is available. 

MCL Grand - Equipment Rental: 	
 Raised platform (drum riser, staging set-up, choir riser use) each 	36.00 
 Wayne Ferguson Plaza Sound Package: 2 line arrays, 2 subs, pagoda (power distribution). Does not include audio engineer. Only available if Wayne Ferguson Plaza Stage activation is confirmed, commercial rate 	600.00 
 Steinway Concert Grand Piano (first day, includes one event specific tuning.) Added day rentals and tunings are an additional cost per fee schedule. 	300.00 
 Boston Baby Piano (first day, includes one event specific tuning.) Added day rentals and tunings are an additional cost per fee schedule. 	150.00 
 Upright Piano (per rental, up to 7 days). Event specific tuning is not included but can be added at piano tuning rate. Piano is tuned quarterly. 	50.00 
 Piano Tuning 	120.00 
 Additional days rental of either Grand Piano (per day) 	50.00 
 Black Box Platform - Removal and restoration of platforms and black box chairs. May also include use of banquet tables and chairs for event (no cloths included) 	500.00 
 In-ear monitor rental (per line/unit rented per day) 	50.00 
 Table cloth (each) 	8.00 
 Orchestra Shell rental (includes rental and installation/deinstallation) 	450.00 
 Marley Dance Floor rental (includes rental and installation/deinstallation) 	450.00 
 Non-consecutive, multi-day use of equipment reset fee (does not apply to Orchestra Shell or Marley Floor) 	50.00 
 Pipe and drape (per lateral bar) 	5.00 
 Control board operator (lights or sound) (each, per hour) (six-hour minimum calls required on all stand-alone, one-day rentals. Four-hour minimum calls on all multi-day, consecutive-day rental events) 	30.50/hour (4-hour minimum) 
 Master electrician or audio engineer (This service can be arranged by MCL Grand staff but will be contracted separately by the engineer and the presenter. Prices vary based upon services requested) 	Market Price 
 Rigger/weather watcher (Wayne Ferguson Plaza stage activation, hourly after 8 hours, up to 16 hours) 	50.00/hour (4-hour minimum) 
 Porter service during events (4-hour minimum, per porter) - Most events require 2 porters; 1 male, 1 female 	15.00/hour (4-hour minimum, per porter) 
 Stackable banquet chairs (each) 	2.50 
 Tables (rounds, classroom, serving) (each) 	5.00 
 Banquet Package A (10 - 13 rounds, 80 - 104 banquet chairs) 	240.00 
 Banquet Package B (14 - 17 rounds, 112 - 136 banquet chairs) 	336.00 
 Banquet Package C (144 - 160 banquet chairs) 	432.00 
 Room reset fee (per change) 	120.00 
 Portable bar (each) 	60.00 
 Performance Hall Projector and screen (per day) 	120.00 
 Followspots (per day, each) 	60.00 
 Wireless Microphones (handheld) (each per day) 	48.00 
 Wireless Microphones (lapel/body mic) (each per day) 	48.00 
 Stage Monitors (each per day) 	18.00 
 Wired Microphones 	12.00 
 Plain Easel (each) 	3.00 
 White Board Easel 	5.00 
 Markers 	1.00 
 Lighting Gel (per sheet) 	8.00 
 Spike Tape (per roll) 	10.00 
Other Fees: 	
 Cleaning/damage deposit 	300.00 
 Security deposit (for events in Art Gallery, as required) (per event) 	1,000.00 
 Other equipment or professional services not listed here can be offered for actual cost plus 20% 
Arts Center Manager shall be authorized to negotiate lease contracts that adjust fees by up to 20 percent to allow for market conditions, or that waive certain fees if doing so is considered to be a business necessity. Contracts that include a fee reduction or waiver must be approved in advance by the City Manager's Office 
Wayne Ferguson Plaza 
 Wayne Ferguson Plaza Rental including stage activation (up to 8 hours). Includes stage activation labor and weather monitoring (mandatory) and standard lighting package: 	
 Non-profit 	1,250.00 
 Commercial 	1,500.00 
 Additional hours: 	
 Non-profit 	25.00 
 Commercial 	50.00 
 Stand-up Wedding Rental (includes space reservation only, as described in Facility Use Guidelines) 	50.00 
Vendor Fees for City Events: 	
All fees are waived for the city for city-designated events 	
Commercial outdoor amusement 	250.00 
Farmers Market: 
  Farmers Market Vendor, per week (10 x 10) 	15.00 
  Farmers Market Vendor, per week (10 x 10) (if paid at least 10 days in advance) 	12.00 
  Farmers Market Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	25.00 
  Farmers Market Nonprofit Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	Free 
  Farmers Market Kickoff Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	50.00 
  Farmers Market Kickoff Nonprofit Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	Free 
Sounds of Lewisville: 
  Sounds of Lewisville Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	25.00 
  Sounds of Lewisville Food Vendor (10 x 10) 	25.00 
  Sounds of Lewisville Food Exhibitor Vendor (packaged items) (10 x 10) 	25.00 
  Reel Lewisville Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	25.00 
  Reel Lewisville Food Vendor (10 x 10) 	25.00 
  Reel Lewisville Food Exhibitor Vendor (packaged items) (10 x 10) 	25.00 
Western Days Festival: 
  Western Days Paid Attraction (10 x 20 or smaller, with 110v/60 amp electricity) 	150.00, plus 20% of gross sales 
  Western Days Paid Attraction (between 10 x 20 and 30x30, with 110v/60 amp electricity) 	350.00, plus 20% of gross sales 
  Western Days Paid Attraction (larger than 30x30, with 110v/60 amp electricity 	1,000.00, plus 20% of gross sales 
  Western Days Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	150.00 
  Western Days Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 20) 	250.00 
  Western Days Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 30) 	350.00 
  Western Days Nonprofit Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	100.00 
  Western Days Nonprofit Exhibitor (10 x 20) 	200.00 
  Western Days Nonprofit Exhibitor (10 x 30) 	300.00 
  Western Days Food Exhibitor Vendor (packaged items) (10 x 10) 	200.00 
  Western Days Food Exhibitor Vendor (packaged items) (10 x 20) 	300.00 
  Western Days Food Exhibitor Vendor (packaged items) (10 x 30) 	400.00 
  Western Days On-Site Food Vendor (10 x 20) 	350.00, plus 20% of gross sales 
  Western Days On-Site Food Vendor (10 x 30) 	450.00, plus 20% of gross sales 
  Western Days On-Site Food Vendor (10 x 40) 	550.00, plus 20% of gross sales 
  Western Days Retail/Exhibitor Corner Placement Guarantee 	50.00 
 "Holiday at the Hall" Festival: 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Paid Attraction (10 x 20 or smaller, with 110v/60 amp electricity) 	150.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Paid Attraction (between 10 x 20 and 30x30, with 110v/60 amp electricity) 	350.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Paid Attraction (larger than 30x30, with 110v/60 amp electricity) 	1,000.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	150.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 20) 	250.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Retail/Exhibitor (10 x 30) 	350.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Nonprofit Exhibitor (10 x 10) 	100.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Nonprofit Exhibitor (10 x 20) 	200.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Nonprofit Exhibitor (10 x 30) 	300.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Food Exhibitor Vendor (packaged items) (10 x 10) 	200.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Food Exhibitor Vendor (packaged items) (10 x 20) 	300.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Food Exhibitor Vendor (packaged items) (10 x 30) 	400.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" On-Site Food Vendor (10 x 20) 	350.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" On-Site Food Vendor (10 x 30) 	450.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" On-Site Food Vendor (10 x 40) 	550.00 
  "Holiday at the Hall" Retail/Exhibitor Corner Placement Guarantee 	50.00 
Other Vendor Charges: 	
 Vendor Late Registration Fee 	50.00 
 Electricity 110v/30 amps or less (1 standard outlet, 2 plugs) 	50.00 
 Electricity 110v/31-60 amps (2 standard outlets, 4 plugs) 	100.00 
 Electricity 220v/60 amps or less 	150.00 
 Electricity 220v/61-100 amps 	300.00 
 Vendor Tent Rental (10 x 10) 	75.00 
LIBRARY DIVISION: 
Overdue item per day (applies to books, DVDs/Blu-Rays, Binge Boxes, audiobooks, music CDs, kits, Book Club in a Bag items, and Storytime Backpacks - Maximum overdue charge not to exceed replacement cost or $10.00, whichever is less) 	0.25 
Lost or damaged specialty kit or piece of specialty kit 	Replacement cost plus a $5.00 non-refundable processing fee 
Overdue specialty kit, per day (Maximum overdue charge not to exceed replacement cost or $40.00, whichever is less) 	3.00/day (maximum $40.00) 
Overdue Laptop, per hour or any portion of an hour 	10.00 
 Maximum overdue charge not to exceed replacement cost or $50.00 if returned within 24 hours 	
Overdue Wi-Fi hotspots and tablets, per day 	3.00 
 Maximum overdue charge not to exceed replacement cost 	
Overdue inter-library loan items, per day 	3.00 
 Maximum charge not to exceed lending library replacement cost and fee 	
Account notices, mailed: 	
 If needed, sent registered mail 	Postage 
Lost laptop, Wi-Fi hotspot, or tablet 	Replacement cost plus a $5.00 non-refundable processing fee 
 Maximum charge not to exceed replacement cost 	
Overdue inter-library loan items, per day 	3.00 
 Maximum charge not to exceed lending library replacement cost and fee 	
Lost or damaged items 	Replacement or repair cost of item plus a $5.00 non-refundable processing fee 
Lost library card replacement 	1.00 
Library Maker Space: 	
 3D Printing, filament, per gram 	0.10 
Copies and printouts: 	
 Black and white, per page 	0.15 
 Color, per page 	0.50 
Faxes, per page 	0.50 
Damages to property 	assessed at actual cost 
Accumulated fines of $5.00 or more will result in the loss of library privileges for the individual until the charges are paid 	
POLICE DIVISION: 
Accident reports (per report) 	6.00 
 Additional fee to certify accident report 	2.00 
 Downloaded accident reports (per report) 	5.00 
Alarm system permit or renewal of permit, per 12-month period 	50.00 
False alarms: robbery, residential/commercial 	150.00 
 (Above charges are incurred after one false robbery alarm.) 	
 False alarm on an alarm system that does not have a valid alarm system permit with the city 	50.00 
(If paid within 30 calendar days of the date on the notice of the fee assessment, the payment of this fee shall be applied toward an alarm system permit or renewal of permit on the subject alarm system.) 
 Other false alarms (within a 12-month period) 	50.00, if the location has had more than three but fewer than six prior false alarms; 
75.00, if the location has had more than five but fewer than eight prior false alarms; 
100.00, if the location has had eight or more prior false alarms. 
Police academy training: 	
 8-hour course rate per student 	25.00 
 16-hour course rate per student 	35.00 
 24-hour course rate per student 	45.00 
 32-hour course rate per student 	55.00 
 40-hour course rate per student 	65.00 
Firearms simulator: 	
2-hour rental (LPD facility representative included to operate simulator) 	300.00 
Long-term firearms simulator rental (maximum 40 hours during the fiscal year); LPD facility representative included to operate the simulator 	3,500.00 
Driving Simulator: 	
 2-hour rental (LPD facility representative included to operate simulator) 	300.00 
 Every hour (continuous) fee thereafter 	75.00 
 Long-term driving simulator rental (maximum 40 hours during the fiscal year); LPD facility representative inclueed to operate the simulator 	3500.00 
Sexually-oriented business license 	500.00 
Wrecker fees 	Posted with police chief 
Outdoor firing range: 	
 4-hour minimum guarantee plus one LPD facility representative (trained LPD personnel to monitor range use and clean up) 	25.00 per hour 
Long-term outdoor range use (40 hour maximum during fiscal year); plus one LPD facility representative (during business hours, no trained LPD personnel to monitor range use necessary if renting department provides a firearms instructor and clean up) 	800.00 
 LPD facility representative fee 	(Step one overtime rate for a police captain per hour) 
Indoor firing range: 	
 Option 1: 	
  4-hour minimum guarantee; static targets only plus one LPD facility representative (trained LPD personnel to monitor range use and clean up) 	40.00 per hour 
  LPD facility representative fee 	(Step one overtime rate for a police captain per hour) 
 Option 2: 	
  4-hour minimum guarantee; LPD facility representative on site, turning and "running man" target system use 	60.00 per hour 
 Option 3: 	
  Long-term indoor range use (40-hour maximum during fiscal year); static targets only plus one LPD facility representative (during business hours, no trained LPD personnel to monitor range use necessary if renting department provides a firearms instructor and clean up) 	1,000.00 
 Option 4: 	
  Long-term indoor "running man" target system use (40-hour maximum during the fiscal year); LPD facility representative on site operating target system 	1,200.00, plus LPD facility representative fee 
Parking Violations in Old Town Entertainment District: 	
 Two-hour parking violation 	25.00 
 Twenty-minute parking violation 	25.00 
 Overnight parking violation 	25.00 
 Back-in parking violation 	25.00 
 Loading zone violation 	25.00 
 Loading/Unloading on specific portion of West Main Street violation 	25.00 
 Improper parking in marked space/Failure to park in marked space 	25.00 
 Immobilization device fee (parking violations in Old Town Entertainment District) 	50.00 
Valet Parking: 	
 Valet parking license application fee 	25.00 
 Fee for queuing within the right-of-way 	250.00 
per parking space 
MUNICIPAL COURT: 
Special expense fee: 	
 Issuance and service of warrants 	50.00 
 Administration of requests for citations to be dismissed upon completion of a driving safety course 	10.00 
Administrative transcription fee 	25.00 
 Court procedures transcript fees shall be the actual cost incurred for transcription 	
Security fee 	3.00 
Technology fee 	4.00 
Each failure to appear offense 	30.00 
Collection agency fee 	30% of balance 
Juvenile case manager fee 	4.00 
Municipal Court: Credit Card Convenience Fees: 	
 In Person Transactions 	2.95% of transaction amount 
 Internet and Interactive Voice Recognition (IVR) Transactions 	$5.00 for transactions 
< $100.00 
5% of transactions $100.00 or greater 
Appellate filing fee for parking citation 	25.00 
CITY SECRETARY'S OFFICE: 
Late payment fee for parking citation 	35.00 
PUBLIC SERVICES DEPARTMENT: 
Industrial pre-treatment 	Ordinance No. 
3734-01-2010 
Stormwater Fees 	Ordinance No. 
3770-05-2010 
 Bacteriological analysis of water: 	
  Samples tested for public water supplies for the purpose of complying with state department of health requirements, per sample 	27.50 
  Samples collected from private water supplies or by private businesses for the purpose of internal quality control or from utility lines under construction, per sample 	27.50 
  Recheck samples done to replace samples which were reported as unsuitable for analysis due to excessive silt or heavy noncoliform growth 	0 
   (Samples collected as rechecks on positive coliform samples shall be charged at the same rate as the original sample.) 	
  Samples collected from the city distribution system at the request of an individual or business due to their concern for the bacteriological quality of their drinking water 	0.00 
 Chemical analysis: 	
  Chemical analysis (within the capabilities of the laboratory) performed on water samples from public and private water supplies, per parameter 	2.50 
 Industrial pre-treatment: 	
  The actual fees, as charged to the city for outside laboratory 	
  Pretreatment sampling/inspection fee 	45.00 
  Pretreatment permitting fee 	200.00 
 Environmental assessment fee 	52.00 
 Stormwater drainage utility charges: 	
  Single-family residential monthly charge per residential equivalent unit ("ERU"), or dwelling unit 	$4.00 
  Minimum single-family residential monthly charge for improved parcels 	The charge for the residential class for each fiscal year less any applicable credits 
  Non-single-family residential monthly charge per 1,000 square feet ("SF") of impervious area 	$1.43 
(less any applicable credits) 
Solid waste 	
 
Commercial Refuse Storage Cart Rates: 
Container 	Rate 
96 gallon cart, collected 1 x week (per cart/month) 	27.89 
Additional 96 gallon cart, collected 1 x week (per cart/month); 4 cart maximum 	6.47 
Redelivery rate for nonpayment (per occurrence) 	68.29 
Replace stolen/missing cart (one-time fee) 	84.10 
 
Commercial Front End Loader (FEL) Container Rates: 
FEL NON-COMPACTOR COLLECTION: 
Container Type/Size 	1x Week 	2x Week 	3x Week 	4x Week 	5x Week 	6x Week 	7x Week 	Extra
Pickup 
2 cy 
container 	81.05 	142.08 	203.12 	264.16 	325.20 	386.24 	447.25 	32.32 
3 cy 
container 	92.34 	160.64 	228.93 	297.27 	365.69 	446.18 	502.19 	38.06 
4 cy 
container 	103.31 	178.89 	254.47 	330.07 	405.63 	481.23 	556.83 	46.41 
6 cy 
container 	124.01 	214.15 	304.29 	394.42 	484.55 	574.69 	664.83 	54.70 
8 cy 
container 	143.17 	247.86 	352.55 	457.21 	561.92 	666.58 	771.28 	70.31 
Casters/ 
Locks 	13.64 							
 
  
FEL VERTICAL COMPACTOR COLLECTION: 
Container Type/Size 	1x Week 	2x Week 	3x Week 	4x Week 	5x Week 	6x Week 	7x Week 	Extra
Pickup 
2 cy 
compactor 	197.11 	394.20 	591.32 	788.42 	985.50 	1,182.60 	1,380.22 	50.90 
3 cy 
compactor 	225.93 	451.85 	677.80 	903.69 	1,129.58 	1,355.51 	1,581.44 	54.90 
4 cy 
compactor 	254.89 	509.47 	764.22 	1,018.96 	1,273.72 	1,528.41 	1,783.18 	62.54 
6 cy 
compactor 	312.39 	624.76 	937.15 	1249.52 	1,,561.89 	1,874.27 	2,186.65 	77.60 
8 cy 
compactor 	396.57 	793.18 	1,190.99 	1,586.34 	1,982.92 	2,379.50 	2,776.08 	98.88 
 
  
FEL VERTICAL COMPACTOR RENTAL: 
Container Size 	Rate per Month 
4 cy compactor 	303.82 
6 cy compactor 	328.44 
 
COMMERCIAL ROLL-OFF (RO) CONTAINER RATES: 
RO NON-COMPACTOR: 
Container Size 	Haul Rate
per Pull 	Disposal Rate
Per Ton 	Delivery Rate 	Rental Rate 
10 cy container 	194.58 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
12 cy container 	194.58 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
18 cy container 	271.63 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
20 cy container 	271.63 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
24 cy container 	286.96 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
30 cy container 	309.93 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
40 cy container 	391.10 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
 
  
RO COMPACTOR: 
Container Size 	Haul Rate
per Pull 	Disposal Rate Per Ton 	Delivery Rate 	Rental Rate 
10 cy compactor 	264.31 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
12 cy compactor 	264.31 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
15 cy compactor 	279.27 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
17 cy compactor 	289.22 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
18 cy compactor 	296.49 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
20 cy compactor 	304.17 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
24 cy compactor 	324.10 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
25 cy compactor 	329.08 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
27 cy compactor 	342.49 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
30 cy compactor 	354.01 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
34 cy compactor 	370.50 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
35 cy compactor 	374.34 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
38 cy compactor 	399.05 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
40 cy compactor 	410.34 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
42 cy compactor 	418.00 	25.18 	111.41 	185.98 
 
COMPACTOR UNIT RENTAL RATES: 
Unit Type 	Rate 
Box Only 	200.94 
Self-contained unit 	456.83 
Compactor head and box 	456.83 
 
COMMERCIAL MISCELLANEOUS RATES: 
Service Description 	Rate 
Compactor cleaning fee 	246.35 
Trip charge 	112.29 
Compactor removal 	112.29 
Container relocation 	112.29 
Exchange of compactors 	112.29 
Liners for roll-off containers 	64.15 
Service reinstatement fee 	58.66 
Special services, negotiated services, or any other services not specifically stated within the fee ordinance 	Quoted cost plus 17.46% 
 
MULTI-FAMILY RECYCLING RATES: 
Container 	Rate per Apartment Unit 
2 cubic yard front loader 	1.10 
4 cubic yard front loader 	1.10 
6 cubic yard front loader 	1.10 
8 cubic yard front loader (up to three containers) 	1.10 
Recycling bin for each apartment unit 	0.20 
Replacement apartment bin 	12.95 
 
RESIDENTIAL TRASH AND RECYCLING COLLECTION RATES: 
Service 	Container 	Rate Per Month 
Once a week trash collection; two 39-gallon bags allowed outside cart 	WM 96-gallon cart 	12.62 
Once a week recycling collection; nothing allowed outside cart 	WM 96-gallon cart 	Included 
Once a week Bulky Waste collection 	Resident container/bundled or large item set-out; maximum 3 CY 	Included 
Once a week Yard Waste collection 	Resident bundle, residential container set out; maximum 3 CY 	Included 
Senior citizen, same service as above 	Same set-out containers; can request smaller cart but will pay same rate 	10.10 
Special carry-out trash/recycling service (does not include Bulky Waste and Yard Waste) 	Same set-out containers; can request smaller cart but will pay same rate 	12.62 
Second trash or recycling cart 	WM 96-gallon cart 	5.51 
Replacement of damaged cart 	WM 96-gallon cart 	Free 
Replacement of missing/stolen cart (1-time charge) 	WM 96-gallon cart 	71.60 
 
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE ENHANCEMENT OPTIONS RATES: 
Service Enhancement Option 	Rate per Month 
Once a week Yard Waste Collection Program (delivery of Yard Waste to reuse, composting, or other non-disposal facility) 	2.81 
At Your Door HHW collection (unlimited) 	1.32 
Once a month unlimited Yard Waste and Bulky Waste collection 	2.26 
Recyclebank incentive program 	0.73 
  
EXHIBIT "A"  
FORMULAS FOR DETERMINING CAPITAL RECOVERY FEES 
Water Capital Recovery Fee = 	Meter Equivalent Factor in LUE for specific water meter size x Fee Per LUE from Schedule 
Sewer Capital Recovery Fee = 	Meter Equivalent Factor in LUE for specific water meter size x Fee Per LUE from Schedule 
  
FORMULAS FOR DETERMINING WATER AND WASTEWATER MAIN EXTENSION FEES 
For individuals and developers: 
Extension fees shall be determined by the following calculation: 
	
Extension fee = 	Cost of Project/Total Acreage + Imbedded Interest 
	
The imbedded interest shall be determined by the following calculation: 
	
Imbedded interest = 	Cost of project/Total Acreage x Number of Days Outstanding x Daily Interest Rate 
  
SCHEDULE OF CAPITAL RECOVERY FEES PER LUE 
Water 	Sewer 
$2,614 	$2,724 
 
Meter Size 	LUE 	Capital Recovery Fee 	Total 
		Water 	Wastewater 	
3/4" 	1 	$2,614 	$2,724 	$5,338 
1" 	1.7 	$4,444 	$4,631 	$9,075 
1-1/2" 	3.3 	$8,626 	$8,989 	$17,615 
2" 	6.7 	$17,514 	$18,251 	$35,765 
3" 	16 	$41,824 	$43,584 	$85,408 
4" 	28 	$73,192 	$76,272 	$149,464 
6" 	61.3 	$160,238 	$166,981 	$327,219 
8" 	106.7 	$278,914 	$290,651 	$569,565 
10" 	166.7 	$435,754 	$454,091 	$889,845 
12" 	220 	$575,080 	$599,280 	$1,174,360 
 
(1)  The city shall assess a capital recovery fee for water and sewer in association with new development and construction. If modification of an existing unit increases the potential for use of water and sewer services, a fee shall be assessed. The fee shall be calculated by the living unit equivalent method (or LUE) in which water and sewer usage is determined by a factor relative to one- and two-family dwellings. The capital recovery fee for water and sewer shall be per the schedule shown above. The following guideline has been established to provide a standard for the capital recovery fee determination. 
(2)  The meter equivalence shall be determined by the size of the required water meter at the city's delivery point with the exception of one- and two-family dwellings installing a NFPA 13D or townhouses with NFPA 13R type of fire sprinkler systems. 
(3)  Where a NFPA 13D or 13R fire sprinkler system is installed in accordance with section 2-201 Exhibit A(2), impact fees and water and sewer usage shall be based on the meter size required excluding the fire sprinkler system water demand (i.e., a 3/4" meter required without a fire sprinkler system vs. a l" meter requirement when a fire sprinkler system is installed would only be charged (LUE) and minimum water and sewer usage rates for the 3/4" meter). 
The maximum water impact fee per LUE, as determined in the July 2018 Five-Year Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Review, is $2,614.89. The maximum wastewater impact fee per LUE, as determined in the July 2018 Five-Year Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Review, is $3,949.72. 
(Code 1990, § 1-29-1; Ord. No. 1517-2-90, § I, 2-5-90; Ord. No. 1644-9-91, §§ II, III, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 1662-12-91, § I, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 1669-2-92, § I, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 1703-7-92, § I, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 1716-9-92, § I, 9-14-92; Ord. No. 1738- 11-92, §§ 1, 3, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 1740-11-92, § 1, 11-16-92; Ord. No. 1793-4-93, § III, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 1836-9-93, § 1, 9-13-93; Ord. No. 1848-9-93, § 2, 9-20-93; Ord. No. 1854-10-93, § 2, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 1871-1-94, § I, 1-17-94; Ord. No. 1964-9-94, § 1, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 1977-10-94, § 1, 10-3-94; Ord. No. 2000-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2004-2-95, § 1, 2-20-95; Ord. No. 2025-6-95, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 2050-9-95, § 1, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 2061-10-95, § 1, 10-2-95; Ord. No. 2067-11-95, § 1, 11-6-95; Ord. No. 2098-4-96, § 1, 4-1-96; Ord. No. 2150-9-96, § I, 9-16-96; Ord. No. 2166-10-96, § 1, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 2212-4-97, § I, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 2217-5-97, § I, 5-5-97; Ord. No. 2230-6-97, § I(1—5), 6-16-97; Ord. No. 2260-9-97, § I(1, 2), 9-15-97; Ord. No. 2269-10-97, § 1, 10-6-97; Ord. No. 2280-11-97, § I, 11-17-97; Ord. No. 2293-12-97, § I, 12-15-97; Ord. No. 2306-1-98, § 1, 1-5-98; Ord. No. 2312-2-98, § I, 2-2-98; Ord. No. 2319-2-98, § I, 2-16-98; Ord. No. 2330-4-98, § 2, 4-6-98; Ord. No. 2341-6-98, § I, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 2386-9-98, § 1, 9-28-98; Ord. No. 2394-11-98, § 2, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 2432-4-99, § 1, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 2433-4-99, §§ 1, 2, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 2435-4-99, § 1B, 4-19-99; Ord. No. 2507-10-99, § 1, 10-18-99; Ord. No. 2508-10-99, § 1, 10-18-99; Ord. No. 2516-11-99, §§ 1, 2, 11-15-99; Ord. No. 2616-10-2000, § 1, 10-16-00; Ord. No. 2617-10-2000, § 1, 10-16-00; Ord. No. 2626-11-2000, §§ 1, 2, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 2632-12-2000, § I, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 2637-12-2000, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-00; Ord. No. 2641-1-2001, § 2, 1-8-01; Ord. No. 2655-3-2001, § I, 3-5-01; Ord. No. 2671-4-2001, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 2696-7-2001, § 1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. 2699-7-2001, § IE, F, 7-16-01; Ord. No. 2716-8-2001, § I, 8-27-01; Ord. No. 2725-9-2001, § 1, 9-17-01; Ord. No. 2753-12-2001, § I, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2768-01-2002, § 2, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2767-01-2002, § 1, 1-7-02; Ord. No. 2870-11-2002, § 1, 11-4-02; Ord. No. 2924-04-2003, § I, 4-7-03; Ord. No. 2945-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 2950-07-2003, § 1, 7-7-03; Ord. No. 2977-09-2003, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 2988-10-2003, § 1, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2989-10-2003, § 1, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 3077-06-2004, §§ 1—3, 6-7-04; Ord. No. 3117, § 9, 9-13-04; Ord. No. 3126-09-2004, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 3127-09-2004, § 1, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 3164-01-2005, § I, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 3169-02-2005, § I, 2-7-05; 3178-02-2005, § I, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 3192-03-2005, § 2, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 3193-03-2005, § I, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 3223-07-2005, § I, 7-11-05; Ord. No. 3225-07-2005, §§ I, II, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 3252-09-2005, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 3253-09-2005, § I, 9-19-05; Ord. No. 3258-10-2005, § I, 10-3-05; Ord. No. 3268-10-2005, §§ 1—3, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3288-12-2005, § 1, 12-5-05; Ord. No. 3289-12-2005, § I, 12-5-05; Ord. No. 3306-01-2006, § I, 1-23-06; Ord. No. 3316-02-2006, § I, 2-20-06; Ord. No. 3317-02-2006, § I, 2-20-06; Ord. No. 3377-09-2006, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 3383-10-2006, § I, 10-16-06; Ord. No. 3402-12-2006, § I, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 3403-12-2006, § I, 12-18-06; Ord. No. 3420-03-2007, § 1, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 3427-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 3431-04-2007, § 2, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 3455-06-2007, § 1, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 3468-07-2007, § 1, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 3469-07-2007, §§ 1—3, 7-2-07; Ord. No. 3476-08-2007, § 1, 8-6-07; Ord. No. 3495-09-2007, §§ I, II, 9-17-07; Ord. No. 3523-12-2007, § I, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 3603-09-2008, §§ I, II, 9-15-08; Ord. No. 3633-12-2008 , § I, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 3665-03-2009 , § I, 3-16-09; Ord. No. 3690-06-2009 , § I, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 3697-07-2009 , § I, 7-20-09; Ord. No. 3716-10-2009 , §§ I, II, 10-19-09; Ord. No. 3724-12-2009 , § I, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 3759-04-2010 , §§ I, II, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 3771-05-2010 , § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 3806-09-2010 , §§ I, II, 9-20-10; Ord. No. 3826-12-2010 , §§ I—VII, 12-20-10; Ord. No. 3851-04-2011 , § I, 4-4-11; Ord. No. 3857-05-2011 , § I, 5-2-11; Ord. No. 3868-06-2011 , § I, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 3876-07-2011 , § I, 7-18-11; Ord. No. 3891-09-2011 , §§ I, II, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 3907-11-2011 , § I, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 3911-12-2011 , § I, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 3929-04-2012 , § 2, 3-5-12; Ord. No. 3960-09-2012 , §§ 1, 2, 9-17-12; Ord. No. 3971-12-2012 , § 1, 12-3-12; Ord. No. 3992-05-2013 , § 2, 5-6-13; Ord. No. 4019-09-2013 , § I, II, 9-16-13; Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 1, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 4094-07-2014 , § I, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 4127-10-2014 , §§ I, II, 10-6-14; Ord. No. 4133-11-2014 , § I, 11-3-14; Ord. No. 4136-11-2014 , § I, 11-17-14; Ord. No. 4161-03-2015 , § I, 3-2-15; Ord. No. 4162-03-2015 , §§ I, II, 3-2-15; Ord. No. 4180-06-2015 , § I, 6-1-15; Ord. No. 4196-08-2015 , § I, 8-3-15; Ord. No. 4217-10-2015 , §§ I, II, 10-5-15; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 3, 4-18-16; Ord. No. 4316-09-2016 , §§ I, II, 9-9-16; Ord. No. 4341-12-2016 , § 1, 12-5-16; Ord. No. 4401-08-2017 , § I, 8-7-17; Ord. No. 4418-09-2017 , § 1, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 4420-09-2017 , §§ I, II, 9-18-17; Ord. No. 4426-10-2017 , § 3, 10-2-17; Ord. No. 4429-10-2017 , § II, 10-16-17; Ord. No. 4443-11-2017 , §§ I, II, 11-20-17; Ord. No. 4454-12-2017 , § 1, 12-18-17; Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , §§ 3, 4, 12-18-17; 0004-18-ORD , § III, 1-8-18; 0011-18-ORD , § III, 2-5-18; 0032-18-ORD , § 8, 6-4-18; 0043-18-ORD , § III, 7-2-18; 0059-18-ORD , § III, 9-10-18; 0066-18-ORD , §§ I, II, 9-17-18; 0075-18-ORD , § 4, 10-15-18; 0096-19-ORD , § 1, 1-7-19; 0157-19-ORD , §§ I, II, 9-16-19; 0167-19-ORD , §§ I.A, II.A, B, 10-21-19; 0173-19-ORD , § II, 11-18-19; 0174-19-ORD , §§ I, II, 11-18-19; 0188-19-ORD , § 1, 12-16-19; 0197-20-ORD , § I, 3-2-20) 
Editor's note— Section V of 0167-19-ORD states: The fees listed in section II.A. of this ordinance shall become effective on January 1, 2020. The fees listed in section II.B. of this ordinance shall become effective on November 1, 2019. 
 
Sec. 2-202. - Waiver of fees for school district. 
The following fees shall be waived for the Lewisville Independent School District: 
(1)  Building inspection: 
a.  Building permit fee. 
b.  Plan check fee. 
c.  Plumbing permit fee. 
d.  Electrical permit fee. 
e.  Mechanical permit fee. 
f.  Water connect fee. 
g.  Sewer connect fee. 
(2)  Fire prevention: 
a.  Annual inspection. 
b.  Sprinkler system. 
c.  Fixed fire extinguishing system. 
d.  Fire alarm system. 
e.  Paint booths. 
(3)  Capital recovery: 
a.  Water capital recovery fee. 
b.  Sewer capital recovery fee. 
(4)  Planning and zoning: 
a.  Zoning requests (fee varies). 
b.  Board of adjustment fees. 
(5)  Subdivision: 
a.  Site plan fee. 
b.  Platting fee. 
(6)  Health and code enforcement: 
a.  Health permit fees. 
b.  Fence fees. 
c.  Sign fees. 
d.  Backflow prevention inspection and testing fees. 
(Code 1990, § 3-1-6; Ord. No. 1644-9-91, § III, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 3.8, 1-20-92; 0158-19-ORD , §§ I, II, 9-16-19)  
Sec. 2-203. - Waiver of fees for persons in owner occupied single-family dwelling units who meet community development block grant property and income requirements. 
The following fees shall be waived for new water and sanitary sewer connections for persons living in owner occupied single-family dwellings who meet community development block grant property and income requirements: 
(1)  Capital recovery: 
a.  Water capital recovery fee. 
b.  Sewer capital recovery fee. 
(2)  Meter cost: 
a.  Meter cost fee. 
b.  Meter box and lid fee. 
(3)  Installation cost: 
a.  Meter installation fee, if applicable. 
(4)  Administrative charge: 
a.  Administrative charges. 
(Ord. No. 2391-11-98, § 1(b), 11-2-98)  
Sec. 2-204. - Waiver of fees for Upper Trinity Regional Water District and Denton County Transportation Authority. 
The following community development department fees shall be waived for Upper Trinity Regional Water District and Denton County Transportation Authority: 
(1)  Temporary right-of-way use permit. 
(2)  Annual right-of-way use permit. 
(Ord. No. 4116-09-2014 , § I, 9-15-14)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 1999-2-95, § I, adopted February 6, 1995, amended Ch. 3 in its entirety to read as set forth herein. Prior to such amendment, Ch. 3 consisted of §§ 3-1—3-15, 3-41—3-44, 3-61—3-65, 3-81—3-85, 3-101, 3-102, 3-121—3-127, 3-147—3-152, 3-169—3-183, and 3-201—3-203. Said sections pertained to animals and derived from §§ 5-2-1—5-2-54 of the 1990 Code. 
Cross reference— Animals prohibited from entering public pools, § 4-476. 
State Law reference— Animal care and control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Agricultural animal shall mean species of animals which are normally suited for, kept, or used on a farm, ranch or similar setting for agricultural purposes, such as animal husbandry, food or food production, production of fiber or clothing material, riding, driving, pulling, hauling, commerce, or similar purpose. For purposes of this chapter, the following or similar species of animals shall be considered to be agricultural animals, regardless of age, breed, or sex, unless otherwise stated herein or determined by the animal control officer: 
(1)  Alpacas; 
(2)  Buffalo; 
(3)  Chinchillas; 
(4)  Domesticated honey bees; 
(5)  Domesticated rabbits; 
(6)  Emus; 
(7)  Family Cervidae; 
(8)  Fowl; 
(9)  Livestock; 
(10)  Llamas; 
(11)  Ostriches; 
(12)  Rheas. 
Animal shall mean any living creature, including, but not limited to, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, birds, fish, insects, arachnids, but specifically excluding human beings. 
Animal control authority shall mean a municipal animal services office with authority over the area where an animal is kept. 
Animal control officer shall mean the person employed by the city to represent and act for the city in the impoundment of animals, controlling of at large animals, enforcement of this chapter and applicable state regulations, and as otherwise authorized herein, or designee. 
Animal shelter shall mean a facility that keeps or legally impounds at large, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals. For purposes of this chapter, the term "city animal shelter" shall mean the Leonard B. Judd Animal Shelter. 
Animal waste shall mean feces, urine, litter, bedding, spoiled food, or other animal matter which causes foul odors, attracts vermin or encourages their reproduction. 
At large or running at large shall mean an animal that is not physically confined or physically restrained at all times in one of the following methods: 
(1)  Securely confined upon property lawfully occupied by its owner, within a fence, wall, kennel, corral, pen, or similar enclosure. The enclosure must be constructed, maintained and secured in a manner which prevents the animal from leaving therefrom at any time or reaching beyond the boundaries of the property at any time. For purposes of this chapter, the use of "invisible fences" or other similar containment system or device shall not be considered to be adequate physical confinement or restraint for an animal; or 
(2)  Securely confined upon property lawfully occupied by its owner within a house, garage, barn or similar structure. The structure must be constructed, maintained and secured in a manner which prevents the animal from leaving therefrom at any time and from reaching outside of the structure at any time; or 
(3)  Securely restrained upon property lawfully occupied by its owner with a rope, chain, leash, tie-out or other restraint as prescribed by this chapter. The animal shall be securely restrained upon the property in a manner which prevents the animal from leaving therefrom at any time or reaching beyond the boundaries of the property at any time; or 
(4)  Securely restrained upon any premises in the city with a rope, chain, leash, tie-out or other type of lead as prescribed by this chapter. One end of such lead shall be securely attached to a properly fitted collar, halter, harness, or similar device being worn by the animal, the other end shall be securely held in the grasp of a person who is able to effectively control the animal's actions; or 
(5)  Securely restrained by being held in the grasp of a person who is able to effectively control the animal's actions; or 
(6)  Securely confined within the enclosed compartment of a motor vehicle or trailer in a manner which prevents the animal from exiting or reaching outside of the vehicle or trailer at any time; or 
(7)  Securely confined within a carrier or other device sufficient to keep the animal from leaving or falling from the open bed of a pickup, flatbed, or similar vehicle in a manner which prevents the animal from exiting the vehicle or reaching outside of the vehicle at any time. 
This definition does not apply to: 
(1)  An animal in any city-designated dog park so long as it is in compliance with all other requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  An indigenous wild or feral animal; 
(3)  An animal used by a peace officer or law enforcement purposes; or 
(4)  A search and rescue dog participating in authorized search and rescue activities or search and rescue training. 
Basic grooming shall mean those acts necessary to maintain an animal's eyes, ears, beaks, hooves, feet, nails, coat, and skin so as not to adversely affect the health of the animal, restrict movement, impair vision, restrict eating, or allow matting of the coat or fur. 
Cat shall mean any cat (Felis catus). 
Circus or carnival shall mean a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment. 
Collar or harness shall mean a proper fitting nylon, leather, or plastic coated collar designed for the animal it is being worn by to prevent it from becoming embedded. 
Commercial feedlot/concentrated animal feeding operation shall mean a concentrated, confined agricultural animal facility operated for meat, milk, or egg production, growing, stabling, or housing in pens or houses wherein agricultural animals are fed at the place of confinement, and crop or forage growth or production of feed is not sustained in the area of confinement. 
Currently vaccinated shall mean an animal that has been vaccinated against rabies by or under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian and otherwise satisfying the criteria for the term currently vaccinated as defined by Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part I, chapter 169, as it is now enacted or hereafter amended. 
Custodian shall mean a person who feeds, shelters, harbors, has possession or control of, or has responsibility to care for and control an animal. 
Dangerous dog shall mean a dog that: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; or 
(3)  Makes an attack on an animal that causes serious injury or death and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own. 
Dog shall mean any dog (Canis familiaris). 
Fowl shall mean species of feathered animals which are normally suited for, or are kept or used on, a farm, ranch, or similar setting for agricultural purposes such as food or food production, animal husbandry, and production of fiber or clothing material, commerce, or other similar purpose. For purposes of this chapter, the following and similar species of animals shall be considered to be fowl, regardless of age, breed, or sex, unless otherwise stated herein or determined by the animal control officer: 
(1)  Chickens; 
(2)  Ducks; 
(3)  Game hens; 
(4)  Geese; 
(5)  Guineas; 
(6)  Peafowl; 
(7)  Pheasant; 
(8)  Quail; 
(9)  Turkeys. 
Harbor shall mean the act of knowingly or intentionally keeping and caring for an animal, or providing a premises to which an animal returns for food, shelter, care or protection from impoundment. 
Health and code enforcement officer shall mean a person employed by the city and assigned to the health and code enforcement division as a sanitarian or code enforcement officer. 
High risk animal shall mean any species of animal which is designated by the state department of health as having a high probability of transmitting rabies, including skunks, bats, foxes, raccoons and coyotes. 
Household pet shall mean species of animals which are commonly found or kept in residential households for an individual's personal enjoyment or companionship, rather than for commerce, utility, or agricultural purposes, unless otherwise stated herein or determined by the animal control officer. 
Hybrid shall mean the offspring of two animals of different species. 
Licensed veterinarian shall mean a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in one or more of the 50 states. 
Livestock shall mean species of animals which are normally suited for, or are kept or used on, a farm, ranch or similar setting for agricultural purposes such as animal husbandry, food or food production, production of fiber or clothing material, riding, driving, pulling, hauling, commerce, or similar purpose. For purposes of this chapter, the following or similar species of animals shall be considered to be livestock, regardless of age, breed, or sex, unless otherwise stated herein or determined by the animal control officer: 
(1)  Bovine; 
(2)  Equine; 
(3)  Goats; 
(4)  Sheep; 
(5)  Swine. 
Local rabies control authority shall mean and refers to the person designated by the governing body of a municipality to enforce the requirements prescribed in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826, "Rabies," (as it is now enacted, or as hereinafter amended). For purposes of this chapter, the animal control officer shall be the local health authority for the city. 
Low risk animal shall mean any species of animal which is designated by the state department of health as having a low probability of transmitting rabies, including all animals of the order Marsupialia, Insectivora, Rodentia, Lagamorpha, and Xenarthra. 
Microchip implant shall mean a passive electronic device that is injected into an animal by means of a hypodermic-type syringe device. Each microchip shall contain a unique and original number that is read by an electronic scanning device for purposes of animal identification and recovery by the animal's owners. The microchip implant shall be supplied with an exterior collar-type tag for purposes of an external means of notifying others that the animal has been implanted with a microchip. 
Microchip reader shall mean an electronic scanner with an operating frequency that is able to detect a microchip that has been implanted in an animal, and displays the number of the microchip to its operator. The microchip reader shall be of a type that activated and displays the number of a microchip manufactured by multiple vendors. 
New owner shall mean a person who is legally competent to enter into a binding contract and whose name appears as the adopter on an adoption receipt and sterilization agreement executed at the time they adopt an animal from city animal services. 
Notice shall mean by personal service, certified mail (return receipt requested), or a written notice left at the entrance to the premises where the animal is harbored. 
Nuisance shall mean any thing or animal which is injurious to the health or morals, or is indecent, or is offensive to the senses, or obstructs the free use of property, or unreasonably interferes with the enjoyment of life or property. 
Owner shall mean a person who has legal or equitable title to an animal, or who is a custodian of an animal, or who has control or responsibility to control an animal. 
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation, trust, estate, company, joint-stock company, foundation or association. 
Pet animals shall mean any domesticated animal other than a dog, cat, ferret or livestock that is kept as a household pet such as a hamster, gerbil, guinea pig, rabbit; exotic birds such as parrots, cockatiels, parakeets, finches; and reptiles such as turtles, lizards, and non-poisonous snakes sold only in pet stores. 
Possession shall mean actual care, custody, control or management of an animal. 
Potbellied pig shall mean an animal which is a purebred miniature breed of swine (sus scrofa vittatus), commonly referred to as Vietnamese, Oriental, or Chinese potbellied pig, which is registered with the potbellied pig registry service or similarly nationally recognized registry or meets all the characteristics of the breed standard which will be verified by the animal control authority. 
Premises shall mean a parcel of land (one or more contiguous lots) which is owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a person. 
Prohibited animal shall mean species of animals whose sale, display, or possession within the city limits is unlawful. The following or similar species of animals, including their hybrids, shall be considered to be prohibited animals, regardless of age, breed, or sex, unless otherwise stated herein or determined by animal services: Order Crocodilia; Order Primata; Order Chiroptera; Family Ursidae; Family Canidae (except species Canis familiaris); Family Felidae (except species Felis Catus); Family Mustelidae (except domestic species of ferrets); Family Procyonidae; venomous animals, including reptiles such as pit vipers, cobras, gila monsters; animals which secrete or discharge deadly toxins; electric eels, piranha, or other dangerous fish; insects or arachnids whose bite or sting is usually fatal to humans or usually results in serious injury to a person which requires hospitalization, including Africanized honey bees; crocodile monitors; komodo dragons; hippopotami; rhinoceros; elephants; kangaroos; giraffes; javelina; anteaters; sloths; state department of health designated high risk animals; animals whose possession is prohibited by state or federal law. 
Protective custody impoundment shall mean the impoundment of an animal for the purpose of protecting the health, safety or welfare of an animal in the absence of an owner or custodian, or where an owner or custodian is unable to care for or control the animal, or where such impoundment is pursuant to a judicial order. Circumstances include, but are not limited to, police arrests, automobile accidents, fires, medical emergencies, lawful evictions, court orders and probable abandonments. 
Quarantine shall mean the strict confinement, by closed cage or pen, of a biting animal or animal suspected of being rabid. Such animal must be separated from all other animals in a manner that there is no possibility of physical contact between animals. Confinement must be at a state department of health approved quarantine facility, or may be at the private residence of the owner or custodian when so authorized by the local health authority. 
Redeem shall mean and refers to the act of the owner of an animal which has been impounded by the animal control officer, whereby the owner regains possession of the animal after properly completing applicable redemption documents and payment of applicable fees and charges to the city. 
Regulated animal shall mean species of animals whose sale, display, or possession within the city limits is unlawful, unless the owner or keeper of such animal possesses a valid permit issued by city animal services. The following or similar species of animals, including their hybrids, shall be considered to be regulated animals, regardless of age, breed, or sex, unless otherwise stated herein or determined by the animal control officer: Hawks, eagles, falcons; boas, pythons, anacondas; any species of animal whose possession is restricted to federal or state permit or license holders authorizing such possession. 
Remove and dispose of all feces shall mean picking up or causing to be picked up, all feces deposited by the animal on public property or the private property of another person, placing the feces into a container, and disposing of such container into a waste receptacle. 
Riding stable shall mean an establishment open to the public that keeps one or more equine animals for hire, recreational purposes, riding or driving, and shall include permanent or transient events or activities such as pony rides, carriage rides, or similar activity operating in the city. 
Serious injury shall mean an injury characterized by severe bite wounds or severe ripping and tearing of muscle, or that required prompt medical attention after the attack to preserve the animal's life. 
Shelter means a structure that is capable of providing cover and protection from the weather. At minimum, a shelter must have three sides, a top, a bottom and be adequately ventilated. It must have bedding material. It must be large enough so that the animal can enter, stand, turn around, and lie down, but small enough to prevent the loss of body heat during cold weather. 
Sterilization shall mean the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of an animal to render it unable to reproduce. 
Strict isolation shall mean to confine an animal in a closed cage or pen in a manner which prevents physical contact with other animals or people for a period of time specified by the animal control officer. 
Thirty-six-month period shall mean 1,095 consecutive days. 
Twelve-month period shall mean 365 consecutive days. 
Vaccinated shall mean an animal properly injected by a licensed veterinarian with a rabies vaccine licensed for use in that species of animal by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). 
Vermin shall mean flies, ticks, fleas, lice, rats, mosquitoes or other small animal or insect which may be annoying, destructive or injurious to health. 
Wild animal or wild life shall mean a species of animal which normally exists in a natural, unconfined wild state. 
Zoo shall mean any premises, whether mobile or stationary, where living animals that normally live in a wild state are kept primarily for display to the general public. 
Zoonosis shall mean a disease which is transmissible from animals to humans. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2338-5-98, § I, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § IA, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2673-4-2001, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3139-11-2004, § I, 11-1-04; Ord. No. 3163-01-2005, § I, 1-24-05; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, §§ 1—4, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 3456-06-2007, §§ 1, 2, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 3644-01-2009 , § 1, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 2, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16; Ord. No. 4291-06-2016 , § 1, 6-20-16)  
Sec. 3-2. - Nuisance. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly or intentionally keep or allow any animal to be kept upon their premises, or to fail to supervise or control the actions of an animal in their custody, in a manner which causes or creates a nuisance by: 
(1)  Causing an unreasonable disturbance to occupants of adjacent or nearby premises by frequent or prolonged periods of barking, howling, crowing, bawling, squealing, or other animal noise. A person shall be deemed to have knowingly violated the terms of this section if such person is notified by the animal control officer or police officer of a complaint regarding an animal noise disturbance, and the person fails or refuses to cause the disturbance to cease and thereafter prevent its recurrence; 
(2)  Keeping any animal in a manner or under conditions which subjects occupants of adjacent or nearby premises to foul odors, unsanitary conditions, an unreasonable presence of vermin or their offspring, or other harmful or offensive conditions which can be attributed to the presence of the animal, or to its physical or environmental conditions. A person shall be deemed to have knowingly violated the terms of this section if such person is notified by the animal control or health and code enforcement officer of such harmful or offensive conditions, and the person fails or refuses to cause such conditions to cease and thereafter prevent its recurrence; or 
(3)  Failing to supervise a dog or failing to restrain or control the actions of a dog, by allowing or permitting the dog to defecate on public property or the private property of another person and thereby causing a nuisance by failing or refusing to immediately remove and dispose of all feces deposited on the property by the dog; 
(4)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (3) of this section: 
a.  That at the time of the violation, the dog was an assistance dog as defined by Texas Administrative Code, title 25, health services, section 169.22(2) as it is now enacted or hereafter amended. 
b.  That at the time of the violation, the dog was a police dog as defined by Texas Administrative Code, title 25, health services, section 169.22(20) as it is now enacted or hereafter amended. 
c.  That at the time of the violation, the dog was a therapy dog as defined by Texas Administrative Code, title 25, health services, section 169.22(26) as it is now enacted or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2673-4-2001, § 1, 4-2-01; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, ch. 9.  
Sec. 3-3. - Offensive exhibition. 
No person shall knowingly or intentionally cause or allow the breeding of any animal unless the same be done in a place entirely out of view of the general public, nor shall a person knowingly or intentionally cause or allow any animal to be exhibited in an indecent manner. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-4. - Disposal of deceased animals or remains. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of a person upon whose premises any deceased animal or animal remains are found to properly dispose of such animal or remains within 24 hours of its discovery. Thereafter, the animal control officer may enter the premises and remove and dispose of the deceased animal or animal remains if a hazard to human health exists. 
(1)  A person may contact the animal control officer during scheduled operating hours and request that the officer remove a deceased dog, cat, or other similar animal from their premises. Such animal shall be placed in a sealed plastic bag or similar container, and placed in a conspicuous location at the curb of the street in front of the person's residence on the day the animal control officer is scheduled to pick it up. 
(2)  The owner of deceased livestock or any large animal which cannot be safely removed and disposed of by the animal control officer shall be responsible for properly disposing of or arranging for removal and disposal of any such deceased animal belonging to them or found upon their premises. 
(b)  The animal control officer may promptly remove and dispose of any deceased animal found upon public property; however, the animal control officer shall make a reasonable attempt to contact the owner of a deceased animal which is found wearing a legible city registration tag, rabies vaccination tag, or other identifying tag. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 12.  
Sec. 3-5. - Treatment. 
A person commits an offense if: 
(1)  Docks the tail or removes the dew claws of an animal over five days of age, or crops the ears of an animal of any age, unless he is licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Texas; 
(2)  Transfers ownership or otherwise physically removes from its mother any dog, cat, ferret, or rabbit less than six weeks old, or any other animal that is not yet weaned, except as advised by a licensed veterinarian; 
(3)  Dyes or otherwise artificially colors any animal; 
(4)  Displays, transfers ownership, or offers to transfer ownership of any dyed or otherwise artificially colored animal; 
(5)  Abandons any animal that they have possession of at the animal shelter, any business, on public property, or with any other person that has not agreed to be responsible for the care of the animals; 
(6)  Fails to notify the animal control authority when any motor vehicle that he is in control of strikes an animal; 
(7)  Euthanizes his own animal in a manner other than one defined in this chapter; 
(8)  Places or confines an animal, or allows that animal to be placed or confined, in a motor vehicle or trailer under conditions which may endanger the health of the animal due to temperature, lack of food or water, or under other circumstances which may cause bodily injury, serious bodily injury or death of the animal; 
(9)  Causes, allows or permits any animal to remain in its own filth; 
(10)  Owns any animal having an infestation of ticks, fleas, or other parasites which has not been treated by a licensed veterinarian or with appropriate commercially available treatments; 
(11)  Owns any animal having any obvious illness, or injury, or any communicable illness transmittable to animals or humans without having followed a proper treatment regimen for the infestation or illness; 
(12)  Fails to provide basic grooming for any animal; 
(13)  Fails to provide at all times, any animal under care with adequate wholesome food, potable water and shelter; 
(14)  Transfers ownership or offers to transfer ownership of any chickens, ducklings, or rabbits younger than 16 weeks of age in quantities of less than 12 to a single purchaser; 
(15)  Mutilates any dead animal for reasons other than food preparation or taxidermy. Dissection in compliance with medical or veterinary research, medical or veterinary necropsy, and bona fide educational use of dead animals shall not be considered mutilation; 
(16)  Attaches a collar or harness to an animal that his of an inadequate size so that it restricts the animal's growth or causes damage to the animal's skin; 
(17)  Attaches a chain as a collar when the animal is being tethered; 
(18)  Teases or taunts any animal that provokes an aggressive reaction from an animal; 
(19)  Displays, transfers ownership or offers to transfer ownership of any turtle with a carapace of less than four inches in length. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-6. - Disposition of cruelly treated animals. 
(a)  Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 821, subch. B, (as it is now enacted, or as hereinafter amended) as it pertains to the definition and disposition of cruelly treated animals is hereby incorporated into this section. The animal control officer shall be authorized to apply to the municipal or justice court for a warrant to seize an animal which the officer has reason to believe is or has been cruelly treated, as provided therein. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent a person from being prosecuted for cruelty to animals as provided by applicable sections of the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-7. - Prohibited sales. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, or in any way transfer, barter, or give away chicks, ducklings, or other infant fowl less than eight weeks of age as pets or novelties; however, this subsection does not prohibit the display or sale of natural chicks, ducklings, or other infant fowl in proper brooder facilities for hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling the same to be raised for agricultural purposes. The sale of such animals shall consist of not less than 12 individual animals per transaction. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, exchange, barter, or give away, or offer to sell, exchange, barter, or give away any live animal from: 
(1)  Any public property; or 
(2)  Any property to which the public has access that does not have a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the city allowing the sale of animals on the property. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that the person is: 
(1)  Employed by the city animal services department; or 
(2)  An animal welfare, rescue, and/or adoption agency this is a registered nonprofit entity in compliance with section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 3644-01-2009 , § 3, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3644-01-2009 , § 3, adopted Jan. 26, 2009, repealed the former § 3-7, and enacted a new § 3-7 as set out herein. The former § 3-7 pertained to sale of baby fowl unlawful and derived from Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95.  
Sec. 3-8. - Animals as prizes, promotions and novelties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, raffle, auction, or give away or offer to sell, exchange, raffle, auction, or give away any live animal as: 
(1)  A prize; 
(2)  An inducement to enter a place of amusement or a business establishment; or 
(3)  An inducement to participate in a charitable fundraising event. 
(Ord. No. 3644-01-2009 , § 3, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-9. - Transportation of an animal in an open bed of a vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to carry or transport an animal within the open bed of any moving pickup, flatbed, or similar vehicle operated on any public roadway in the city. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the animal was in a carrier or other device sufficient to keep the animal from leaving or falling from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 3644-01-2009 , § 4, 1-26-09; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Secs. 3-10—3-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 3-21. - Impoundment. 
(a)  The animal control authority shall immediately be considered the designated caretaker of an impounded animal including any injured animal found at large or abandoned. As the designated caretaker, the animal control authority shall have the authority to administer preventative immunizations and any required medical treatment after the required holding period unless such medical treatment is immediately necessary. 
(b)  The animal control officer may take into custody any animal found roaming at large in the city. Such animal shall be impounded at the city animal shelter, or other place which the animal control officer may designate or deem suitable for purposes of impounding the animal. 
(c)  The animal control officer shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner of an impounded animal wearing a current city license tag or rabies vaccination tag and advise them of the impoundment location of the animal; however, final responsibility for location of any impounded animal shall be that of the owner or custodian. 
(d)  An impounded animal shall be held in the custody of the animal control officer for a period of at least five consecutive days, including the date the animal was taken into custody. During this holding period, the animal may only be redeemed by its owner. If the impounded animal is not redeemed prior to the expiration of the holding period, it shall be presumed that the owner has chosen to waive any further ownership rights or interest in the animal, and it may be offered for adoption to the general public, offered for placement with a humane organization, euthanized, or otherwise humanely disposed of as determined by the animal control officer. 
(e)  If an animal is surrendered to the animal control officer, the owner waives any further ownership rights or interest in the animal, and the animal may be administered preventative immunizations or required medical treatment, offered for adoption to the general public, offered for placement with a humane organization, euthanized, or otherwise humanely disposed of at any time after the owner has released the animal to the animal control officer. 
(f)  If an owner surrenders an animal to the animal control officer and thereafter chooses to regain possession of such animal, he will be required to comply with all established adoption procedures and requirements, including completion of adoption forms, payment of applicable fees and charges, vaccination requirements and sterilization requirements. 
(g)  The animal control officer shall be authorized to euthanize, or cause to be euthanized, any impounded animal prior to the expiration of any holding periods stated herein under the following conditions: 
(1)  To prevent further suffering of an animal which appears to be seriously injured, ill or diseased; 
(2)  To prevent further suffering of any nursing or similarly dependent infant animal which is impounded without its mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses to nurse or care for the infant animal; 
(3)  To prevent suffering of an animal which is unable to feed or otherwise sustain itself; or 
(4)  As may otherwise be authorized by law. 
If the animal control officer determines that it is necessary to euthanize an animal under this section, it shall be presumed that the owner, if any, of the animal has chosen to waive any further ownership rights or interest in the animal at the time of the animal control officer's determination. 
(h)  An animal impounded into the protective custody of the animal control officer shall be held in custody, and may be disposed of in the same manner as an impounded at large animal unless otherwise prescribed by law or judicial order. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16; Ord. No. 4291-06-2016 , §§ 2, 3, 6-20-16)  
Sec. 3-22. - Detaining of at large animals by individuals. 
(a)  A person who finds an at large animal upon premises under their control or upon any public place within the city may detain such animal only for so long as reasonably necessary to notify the animal control officer and have the animal impounded. 
(b)  A person may release an at large animal found within the city into the custody of the animal control officer by delivering it to the city animal shelter and completing the applicable release forms. The animal control officer may only accept custody of at large animals which have been found within the city limits. 
(c)  In attempting to detain an at large animal, a person shall not knowingly or intentionally use any force or method of detainment which causes or is intended to cause the serious injury or death of the animal. 
(d)  A person who chooses to maintain possession of an at large animal, rather than release it into the custody of the animal control officer, shall be presumed to have accepted custodial responsibility for the animal, and shall be responsible for its care and control; however, this section shall not be construed as conveying legal title or other ownership rights to an at large animal which has been found by another person, except as otherwise may be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-23. - Requirements to redeem an impounded animal. 
(a)  An animal which has been impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be redeemed by its owner or his lawful representative, provided that the redeeming person: 
(1)  Is at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Identifies himself as the owner of the impounded animal or provides proof that he is a lawful representative of such owner; 
(3)  Presents identification which verifies his identity and date of birth; 
(4)  Properly completes all applicable redemption forms as required by the animal control officer; and 
(5)  Pays the applicable redemption fees and charges as prescribed by section 2-201 of the city Code. 
(b)  The owner of an impounded animal, which is subject to the rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter, shall be required to provide positive proof that the animal is currently vaccinated against rabies at the time it is redeemed. If the owner cannot or refuses to provide proof that the animal is currently vaccinated against rabies at the time of redemption, the owner shall also be required to: 
(1)  Sign an agreement, as prescribed by the animal control officer, and cause the animal to be vaccinated against rabies as specified therein; and 
(2)  Purchase a rabies vaccination coupon from animal services, which shall be used to obtain a rabies vaccination for the animal as specified therein. 
(c)  The owner of an impounded animal, which is not currently registered with animal services as required by this chapter, shall be required to register such animal at the time it is redeemed. If such animal cannot be registered at the time of redemption, the owner shall also be required to: 
(1)  Sign an agreement, as prescribed by the animal control officer, and cause such animal to be registered with animal services as specified therein; and 
(2)  Purchase a city registration coupon from animal services which shall be used to obtain a current registration certificate and tag for the animal as specified therein. 
(d)  The animal control officer may refer the impoundment of at large livestock to county authorities as provided by law. Redemption or other disposition shall be as prescribed by the impounding authority. 
(e)  In addition to the payment of impoundment fees and charges, nothing in this section shall prevent a person from also being subject to criminal penalties for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, §§ 5, 6, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-24. - Elective euthanasia. 
(a)  The owner of a dog, cat, or similar small animal may release such animal to the animal control officer for euthanasia, provided that the owner: 
(1)  Is at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Presents identification which verifies their identity and date of birth; 
(3)  Completes the applicable euthanasia forms as prescribed by the animal control officer; 
(4)  Pays the applicable euthanasia fees and charges prescribed by section 2-201 of the city Code; and 
(5)  Can produce proof of ownership of animal by veterinary record, witness, or documentation of ownership. 
(b)  The animal control officer may advise the owner of an animal to seek the services of a veterinarian if sufficiently trained staff, equipment, or other resources are not available to safely and humanely perform euthanasia of an animal. 
(c)  The animal control officer reserves the right to refuse elective euthanasia at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-25. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal control authority shall be the sole judge as to whether or not an animal is suitable to offer for adoption; however, a decision to offer a particular animal for adoption shall not constitute any warranty, expressed or implied, of the health, temperament, or age of the animal. 
(b)  City animal services may not release a dog, cat, ferret, for adoption unless the animal has previously been sterilized, or the release is made to a new owner who signs an adoption receipt and sterilization agreement. The new owner shall be solely and legally responsible for compliance with all requirements specified in the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal is adopted. 
(c)  City animal services may require the new owner to purchase a coupon from animal services entitling the new owner to spaying or neutering services at participating veterinarians. 
(d)  A person may adopt an animal from city animal services, provided that: 
(1)  The person is at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  The person presents identification which verifies his name and date of birth; 
(3)  If the animal will be kept in the city, and such animal is subject to the rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter, the person shall be required to purchase a rabies vaccination coupon from animal services and cause the animal to be vaccinated against rabies as specified in the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement; 
(4)  If the animal is subject to the registration requirements of this chapter, the person shall register the animal at the time it is adopted. If the animal cannot be registered at the time it is adopted, the person shall purchase a city registration coupon from animal services and cause the animal to be registered as specified in the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement; 
(5)  The person complies with or meets all other adoption standards or requirements established by animal services; 
(6)  The person pays all applicable adoption fees and charges; and 
(7)  The adoption does not cause a violation of this chapter or other law. 
(8)  Rabies vaccination does not apply to potbellied pigs. 
(e)  City animal services may establish an adoption receipt and sterilization agreement for use in the adoption process and violation of any term of such agreement shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(f)  City animal services may offer for adoption pet animals. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 7, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-26. - Sterilization of adopted animal required. 
(a)  The new owner of an animal adopted from city animal services shall cause that animal to be sterilized by a veterinarian not later than the sterilization completion date specified within the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal is adopted. The sterilization completion date shall be: 
(1)  The 30th day after the date of adoption of a dog or cat which the animal control officer estimates to be six or more months old, or the 30th day after a specified date estimated to be the date an adopted dog or cat becomes six months old; 
(2)  The 30th day after the date of adoption of a ferret which the animal control officer estimates to be four or more months old, or the 30th day after a specified date estimated to be the date an adopted ferret rabbit becomes four months old; or 
(3)  The 30th day after the date of adoption of a potbellied pig which the animal control officer estimates to be three or more months old, or the 30th day after a specified date estimated to be the date an adopted potbellied pig becomes three months old. 
(b)  If the sterilization completion date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or city recognized holiday, the deadline is extended to the first day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or city recognized holiday. 
(c)  City animal services may extend the sterilization completion date for 30 days or waived sterilization requirement upon receiving a written report from a licensed veterinarian which clearly describes the adopted animal and states that the life or health of the adopted animal may be jeopardized by surgery. A separate written report must be delivered to city animal services each time an extension is requested. 
This section does not apply to pet animals offered for adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 8, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-27. - Confirmation of sterilization required. 
The new owner of an animal adopted from city animal services shall deliver a letter to city animal services stating that the animal was sterilized on or before the sterilization completion date specified in the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal was adopted. This letter must be signed by the veterinarian who performed the sterilization. The letter must be delivered to city animal services not later than the seventh day after the date on which the animal was sterilized, and must contain the following information: 
(1)  A brief description of the animal, including breed, sex, age and color; 
(2)  A statement that the animal has been sterilized; and 
(3)  The date the animal was sterilized. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 9, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-28. - Letter required if adopted animal dies. 
(a)  If an animal which was adopted from city animal services dies on or before the sterilization completion date specified within the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal was adopted, the new owner shall deliver a signed letter to city animal services stating that the animal is deceased. This letter must be delivered to city animal services not later than the seventh day after the date on which the animal dies, and must contain the following information: 
(1)  A brief description of the animal, including breed, sex, age and color; 
(2)  The cause of death, if known; and 
(3)  Date the animal died. 
(b)  The letter required by this section is in lieu of the letter required by section 3-27 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 10, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-29. - Letter required if adopted animal is lost or stolen. 
(a)  If an animal which was adopted from city animal services is lost or stolen on or before the sterilization completion date specified within the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal was adopted, the new owner shall deliver a signed letter to city animal services stating that the animal is lost or stolen. This letter must be delivered to city animal services not later than the seventh day after the date on which the animal disappears, and must contain the following information: 
(1)  A brief description of the animal, including breed, sex, age and color; 
(2)  Circumstances surrounding the animal's disappearance; and 
(3)  Date the animal disappeared. 
(b)  If the new owner should regain possession of the animal at any time after delivering a letter to animal services stating the animal is lost or stolen, the new owner shall cause the animal to be immediately sterilized and deliver confirmation of sterilization as required by section 3-27 of this chapter. 
(c)  The letter required by this section is in lieu of the letter required by section 3-27 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 10, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-30. - Failure to deliver confirmation of sterilization or other disposition. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter if any new owner of an animal adopted from city animal services fails or refuses to deliver confirmation of sterilization or other written disposition for such animal as required by sections 3-27, 3-28 or 3-29 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 11, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-31. - Reclamation of adopted animal. 
(a)  If city animal services does not receive written confirmation of sterilization or other written disposition regarding an adopted animal, as required by sections 3-27, 3-28 or 3-29 of this chapter, after the expiration of the seventh day after the sterilization completion date specified in the adoption receipt and sterilization agreement executed at the time the animal was adopted, city animal services may promptly reclaim the animal from the new owner, or require the new owner to return the animal to city animal services, or impose any other penalty as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  A person shall not be entitled to any refund, reimbursement, or other compensation regarding an animal reclaimed or returned under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 12, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-32. - Compliance with animal reclamation or notice to return required. 
(a)  A person may not prevent, obstruct or interfere with a reclamation under section 3-31 of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter if a person fails or refuses to comply with a notice which requires the return of an animal under section 3-31 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Secs. 3-33—3-44. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER 
 
Sec. 3-45. - Enforcement and authority. 
(a)  The animal control officer, a health and code enforcement officer, or a police officer employed by the city shall be authorized to issue citations for any violation of this chapter which they observe. 
(b)  If a person being cited for a violation of this chapter is not present or cannot be contacted in person, the citation may be sent to the alleged offender by certified mail or registered mail, return receipt requested, whereupon service shall be deemed completed. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter if a person intentionally or knowingly fails or refuses to appear before the municipal court in accordance with the terms of a citation issued under this chapter. 
(d)  The animal control officer may carry chemical immobilization supplies and equipment on their person or in their city vehicle when acting within the course and scope of their duties. Such supplies and equipment may not be intentionally or knowingly used in a manner which conflicts with any department policies or applicable state laws. 
(e)  The animal control officer may inspect premises where animals are kept or maintained at any reasonable hour of the day, provided that such inspection does not conflict with any department policies or applicable laws. 
(f)  The animal control officer may destroy a dangerous or attacking animal by whatever means necessary to protect himself or another person from sustaining bodily injury, or to prevent the escape of an animal believed to be rabid or believed to have been exposed to rabies. 
(g)  The animal control officer may place live traps in any public area, or upon private property with the consent of the owner or occupant of such property, for purposes of enforcing the requirements of this chapter or to conduct zoonosis control activities. 
(h)  The animal control officer shall be designated as the local rabies control authority for purposes of implementing the requirements of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826, (as it is now enacted, or as hereafter amended). 
(i)  The animal control officer shall be designated as the animal control authority for purposes of implementing the requirements of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 822, subch. D, "Dangerous Dogs", (as it is now enacted, or as hereinafter amended). 
(j)  The animal control officer shall be authorized to apply for and obtain a warrant or other legal writ from the municipal or justice court, to search for and seize an animal when reasonably necessary to protect the public from harm, or as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § IB, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-46. - Providing false identity or address. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person who is being cited by the animal control officer for a violation of this chapter to knowingly or intentionally give the animal control officer any name or address other than their true name and residence address. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-47. - Interference. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with, obstruct, distract, or otherwise hinder the animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-48. - Tampering with traps. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to remove, destroy, vandalize, render inoperable, render ineffective, or otherwise tamper with or damage an animal trap placed by the animal control officer for purposes of enforcing this chapter or conducting zoonosis control activities. Furthermore, it shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to remove or release any animal from such trap, without the expressed consent of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Secs. 3-49, 3-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ANIMAL SERVICES ADVISORY COMMITTEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section II of Ord. No. 2338-5-98, adopted May 18, 1998, amended the Code by adding § 3-155. For purposes of classification, §§ A—E, were codified herein as §§ 3-51—3-55 at the discretion of the editor. Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 13, adopted Dec. 19, 2005, changed the title of div. 3 from "Animal Control Advisory Committee" to "Animal Services Advisory Committee." 
 
Sec. 3-51. - Membership; terms; appointments. 
(a)  The animal services advisory committee shall consist of at least seven but not more than nine members appointed by the city council and must be composed of at least one licensed veterinarian, one elected city official, one person whose duties include the daily operation of the shelter, and one representative from an animal welfare organization. 
(b)  Members shall be appointed to numbered places on the committee. 
(c)  Odd-numbered places shall be appointed in odd-numbered years, and even-numbered places shall be appointed in even-numbered years so membership will be staggered. 
(d)  Terms of office will be for a period of two years with terms expiring on June 30. 
(e)  Initially, even-numbered places were appointed for the full two-year term; and odd-numbered places were appointed for a one-year term to maintain staggered positions. 
(Ord. No. 2338-5-98, § II(A), 5-18-98; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 14, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16; 0109-19-ORD , § 4, 3-4-19)  
Sec. 3-52. - Qualifications, compensation, vacancy of members. 
(a)  Members shall be citizens or business owners in the city or citizens of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  Members shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  In the event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to serve for the unexpired term. Any member may be removed by the city council. 
(d)  If a replacement has not been designated by the end of the member's term, that member shall continue serving until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2338-5-98, § II(B), 5-18-98; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16; 0109-19-ORD , § 5, 3-4-19)  
Sec. 3-53. - Meetings. 
(a)  The committee shall meet at least three times per year in compliance with state law or as necessary as determined by the chairman or by written notice sent to the chairman or vice-chairman by a majority of the committee's membership. 
(b)  A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. 
(c)  The member(s) absent from any meeting shall be so stated in the minutes of such meeting. In the absence of a quorum for a meeting, the chairman will submit, or cause to have submitted, a report to the city council stating those members absent. 
(Ord. No. 2338-5-98, § II(C), 5-18-98; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-54. - Officers. 
The committee shall elect yearly the following officers: 
(1)  Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings, and shall perform such other duties as usually pertain to his/her office or as may be instructed by the committee or the city council. 
(2)  Vice-chairman. The vice-chairman shall perform the duties of the chairman in his/her absence. 
(Ord. No. 2338-5-98, § II(D), 5-18-98; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-55. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The committee will serve in an advisory capacity to the city council in matters pertaining to the animal shelter or animal services issues. 
(b)  The committee shall assist the animal shelter in complying with the requirements of the state Animal Shelter Act. 
(c)  The committee shall perform such other duties as the city council may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2338-5-98, § II(E), 5-18-98; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 15, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Secs. 3-56—3-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Apr. 18, 2016, amended div. 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 1, §§ 3-61—3-69, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, adopted Feb. 6, 1995; Ord. No. 2071-11-95, § I, adopted Nov. 20, 1995; Ord. No. 2119-7-96, § I, adopted July 1, 1996; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 16, adopted Dec. 19, 2005; and Ord. No. 3644-01-2009 , § 2, adopted Jan. 26, 2009. 
 
Sec. 3-61. - Animals at large. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any owner, custodian or harborer of the following listed animals to fail or refuse to maintain physical restraint or to physically confine such animal in a manner which prevents it from being at large at any time: 
(1)  Dogs, except police or public service assisting dogs which are owned or controlled by any law enforcement or public service agency. 
(2)  Potbellied pigs. 
(3)  Prohibited animals. 
(4)  Agricultural animals, excluding honey bees. 
(Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-62. - Maximum number of animals. 
A person may keep, or allow to be kept, upon residentially zoned premises, not more than a total of six individual animals conforming to the species requirements provided herein. The six individual animals may be a composite of one or more species of animals listed in this section, so long as the total number of individual animals kept on the premises does not exceed six (unless otherwise permitted in this Code) for each individual dwelling unit located thereon: 
(1)  Dogs which are three or more months old; 
(2)  Cats which are three or more months old; 
(3)  Rabbits which are three or more months old; 
(4)  Ferrets which are three or more months old; or 
(5)  One potbellied pig which is three or more months old, and which otherwise conforms to the definition and requirements prescribed within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-63. - Unlawful restraint of dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to leave a dog outdoors and unattended by use of a restraint that unreasonably limits the dog's movement during any time of the day or in the case of extreme weather conditions, including, but not limited to, conditions described in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.077, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(b)  A dog that is restrained outdoors and left unattended must be restrained in a yard that is entirely enclosed by a fence or in an enclosed structure that prevents unauthorized access by any person into the area in which the dog is restrained and that protects the dog from attack by at large dogs or other animals. 
(c)  A restraint unreasonably limits a dog's movement if it meets the conditions set forth in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.077, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, unless otherwise excepted in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.078, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. The restraint being used shall have swivels affixed to each end. 
(d)  The definitions set forth in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.076, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, are hereby incorporated as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16; Ord. No. 4291-06-2016 , § 4, 6-20-16)  
Sec. 3-64. - Prohibited animals—Possession. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to keep, sell, display, exhibit, or otherwise possess any prohibited animal within the city, except as specifically provided within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-65. - Same—Notice to remove. 
The animal control officer may issue a notice to any person who possesses a prohibited animal in the city, which directs that person to immediately and permanently remove such animal from the city limits. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail or refuse to comply with the terms of a notice issued by the animal control officer, which directs the removal of a prohibited animal from the city. 
(Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-66. - Same—Notification of relocation required. 
A person who receives a notice under section 3-65 of this chapter shall notify the animal control officer of the relocation disposition of the prohibited animal. Such notification shall be in the form of a sworn statement and must be delivered to the animal control officer not later than the seventh day after the animal has been removed from the city. The statement shall briefly describe the animal, state the date the animal was removed from the city, and identify the new location to where the animal was delivered. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail or refuse to deliver notification of the relocation of a prohibited animal, as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-67. - Same—Appeal of notice to remove. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice under section 3-65 of this chapter may file a written appeal with the city secretary within ten days of receiving such notice, and request a hearing before the city council for consideration of a variance to this chapter. The city secretary shall notify the person who filed the appeal of the date, time and location of the hearing. 
(b)  Compliance with a notice issued under section 3-65 shall be required, pending the final decision of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-68. - Same—Seizure. 
(a)  The animal control officer may apply for and obtain a warrant or other legal writ from the municipal court or justice court to seize any prohibited animal located in the city. 
(b)  An animal seized under this section shall be impounded at the city animal shelter or as may otherwise be deemed suitable or necessary, by animal services, to insure secure confinement and proper care of the animal. Such impoundment shall be at the expense of its owner, keeper or custodian. All accrued fees and charges shall be due and payable at the time the animal is redeemed. 
(Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Secs. 3-69—3-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES, PERMITS AND REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 3-81. - Proof of current registration required—Animals. 
Each dog, cat and ferret kept in the city that is four or more months of age, shall be registered with city animal services every 12 or 36 months, whichever registration period the registrant chooses to purchase. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person who keeps or allows any such animal to be kept or harbored upon their premises in the city, to fail or refuse to provide proof that such animal is currently registered with city animal services as required by this chapter, upon request by the animal control officer. City animal services shall issue a city registration certificate and tag for each dog, cat or ferret that a person registers. Each such registration certificate and tag shall be valid for a period of 12 months or 36 months from the date issued, whichever registration period the registrant chooses to purchase. A new registration certificate and tag must be purchased, on or before the expiration date indicated on the issued city registration certificate. City registration certificates and tags are not transferable to any other animal. City animal services may issue a registration certificate and tag, provided that: 
(1)  The animal being registered is not a dangerous dog as defined by this chapter, or the subject of any ongoing or pending dangerous dog investigation or hearing, or the subject of any appeal in response to a dangerous dog determination or judgment action. Dangerous dogs shall be registered in accordance with the dangerous dog requirements prescribed within this chapter; and 
(2)  The registrant has presented proof that the animal to be registered is in compliance with the rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter; and 
(3)  The applicable registration fee prescribed by section 2-201 of the city Code has been paid. 
The city registration shall be prominently displayed on the animal at all times by securely affixing it to a properly fitted collar, harness, or similar device that is being worn by the animal. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3139-11-2004, § I, 11-1-04; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 16, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-82. - Same—Guard dogs. 
Each dog which has received protection or guard dog training and is kept in the city must be registered as a guard dog with city animal services annually. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person who keeps or allows any such dog to be kept upon their premises to fail or refuse to present proof to the animal control officer, upon request, that such dog has been registered as a guard dog with city animal services within the preceding 12-month period. Animal services shall issue a guard dog registration certificate and tag for each qualifying dog a person registers. Such certificate and tag shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance, and are not transferable to any other animal. The registration tag shall be prominently displayed on the dog at all times by securely affixing it to a properly fitted collar, harness, or similar device which is being worn by the dog. A guard dog registration certificate and tag may be issued under this section, provided that the registrant first: 
(1)  Presents proof that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies as required by this chapter; and 
(2)  Pays the registration fee prescribed in section 2-201 of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 17, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-83. - Replacing lost tags. 
If a registration tag for a dog, cat or ferret is lost, the registrant may obtain a replacement tag for that animal from city animal services. The replacement tag shall be valid for the remaining balance of the original registration period of the tag being replaced. City animal services may issue a replacement registration tag, provided that: 
(1)  The registrant provides proof that the animal for which the replacement tag is being obtained is in compliance with the rabies vaccination requirements of this chapter at the time the replacement tag is requested; and 
(2)  The replacement tag fee prescribed by section 2-201 of the city Code has been paid. 
The replacement registration tag is to be immediately and prominently displayed on the animal at all times by securely affixing it to a properly fitted collar, harness, or similar device that is being worn by the dog. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3139-11-2004, § I, 11-1-04; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 18, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-84. - Current permit required—Potbellied pigs. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to keep or allow any potbellied pig which is three or more months of age to be kept upon their premises without a valid permit to keep such animal in the city, issued by city animal services. Such permit shall be required for each potbellied pig kept in the city; the permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance, and is not transferable to any other animal. A permit to keep a potbellied pig in the city may be issued under this section, provided that the pig for which the permit is requested conforms to the following requirements: 
(1)  Potbellied pigs are permitted in only residentially or agriculturally zoned districts; 
(2)  No more than one potbellied pig may be kept on any one parcel or tract of land in a residentially zoned district and in accordance with applicable land use regulations; 
(3)  The premises where any such pigs are kept shall be kept clean and free of all offensive odors, flies, rodents or other pests. Droppings shall be placed in a suitable container and disposed of on a regular basis; 
(4)  No such pigs may be bred within a residentially zoned district; 
(5)  All potbellied pigs must be registered with the potbellied pig registry service or similarly nationally recognized registry or meets all the characteristics of the breed standard which will be verified with the animal control authority at the time of licensing; 
(6)  Potbellied pigs must be vaccinated as required and immunization records must be presented at time of licensing; 
(7)  Male pigs must be neutered; females must be spayed. Verification must be presented in the form of a letter signed by a veterinarian who has examined the pig within the preceding 30-day period, or by the veterinarian who performed the surgery; 
(8)  Tusks must be removed or trimmed back as to be blunted all the time. Verification must be presented in the form of a letter signed by a veterinarian who has examined the pig within the preceding 30-day period, or by the veterinarian who removed or trimmed back the tusks; and 
(9)  The person to whom the permit is issued has paid the permit fee prescribed by section 2-201 of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 19, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-85. - Same—Agricultural animals. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to keep or allow any agricultural animal to be kept upon their premises without a valid permit to keep such animal in the city, issued by city animal services. Such permit shall be valid upon the location for which it was issued for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance; the permit is not transferable to any other location. A permit to keep agricultural animals in the city may be issued under this section, provided the following requirements are first met: 
(1)  A completed application requesting the permit must be submitted to animal services; 
(2)  The premises on which the animals will be kept conforms to all applicable zoning, fencing, building, and animal services regulations; and 
(3)  The permit fees prescribed in section 2-201 of the city Code have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 20, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16) 
Cross reference— Fences, § 4-441 et seq.  
Sec. 3-86. - Same—Regulated animals. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to keep or allow any regulated animal to be kept upon their premises without a valid permit to keep such animal in the city, issued by city animal services. A permit shall be required for each such animal kept in the city; such permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance and is not transferable to any other animal. A permit to keep a regulated animal in the city may be issued under this section, provided that the following requirements are first met: 
(1)  A completed application requesting the permit must be submitted to animal services; 
(2)  The applicant must submit copies of valid federal and state licenses and permits, where applicable; and 
(3)  The permit fees prescribed in section 2-201 of the city Code have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 21, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-87. - Transfer of registration or permit. 
(a)  If ownership of a dog, cat or ferret that is currently registered with city animal services is transferred to a new owner who keeps such animal in the city, then the transferring owner shall notify city animal services of the transaction and cause the city registration certificate and tag to be transferred into the new owner's name, address and phone number. Such notification shall be made not later than the tenth day after the transfer of ownership has occurred. The transferred registration shall be valid for the remaining balance of the original registration period, and shall expire on the expiration date indicated on the original registration certificate. 
(b)  If ownership of a potbellied pig or regulated animal which is identified on a permit issued by city animal services is transferred to a new owner who keeps the animal in the city, the owner to whom the permit was issued shall notify animal services of the transaction and cause the permit to be transferred into the new owner's name. Such notification shall be made not later than the tenth day after the date a transfer of ownership has occurred. The transferred permit shall be valid for the portion of the 12-month period remaining for the original permit. 
(c)  There shall be no fee for transferring a registration, permit or license tag to a new owner under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3139-11-2004, § I, 11-1-04; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 22, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-88. - Prohibited animal exhibitor's permit—Required. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to exhibit, display, show, or otherwise possess a prohibited animal without a valid permit which authorizes possession of such animal in the city, issued by city animal services. A permit issued under this section shall authorize the temporary presence of a prohibited animal in the city as an integral and necessary part of a performance or educational exhibition open to the public. Such permit shall be valid for a period of not more than ten consecutive days from the date of issuance. Such permit does not authorize the selling, propagation, breeding, or boarding of any prohibited animal in the city, nor does it authorize any combative or similar activity between animals, or an animal and a person. Prohibited animals allowed in the city under this section shall not be exhibited, displayed, shown, or otherwise be allowed upon any residentially zoned premises. A permit issued under this section shall not supersede any other requirements prescribed within the city Code. A permit to exhibit prohibited animals in the city may only be issued to the following: 
(1)  A bona fide zoo open to the general public; or 
(2)  A visiting performing or educational animal exhibition, rodeo, or circus open to the general public, of which the animal is an integral and necessary part. 
(b)  City animal services may issue a permit under this section to a qualifying person, provided that the person first: 
(1)  Submits a completed application requesting the permit; 
(2)  Presents proof of current liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 against bodily injury or property damage which may be caused by a prohibited animal; 
(3)  Presents copies of valid federal and state licenses and permits; and 
(4)  Pays the permit fees prescribed in section 2-201 of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 23, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-89. - Same—Revocation. 
City animal services may revoke a permit issued under section 3-88 of this chapter, and issue a notice to the permitted person which directs them to immediately and permanently remove any prohibited animal from the city, for the following reasons: 
(1)  For any violation of this chapter; 
(2)  Failing or refusing to comply with written rules or regulations prescribed by the animal control officer; 
(3)  For any violation of federal or state regulations; or 
(4)  Providing false information to obtain a permit under section 3-88 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 24, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-90. - State license required for circuses, carnivals or zoos. 
Any person who operates a circus, carnival or zoo in the city must possess a valid state license as prescribed by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 824 (as it is now enacted, or as hereinafter amended), and as otherwise may be required by law. It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person who operates a circus, carnival or zoo in the city to fail or refuse to present a valid state license, as required by this section, to the animal control officer upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-91. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3163-01-2005, § I, adopted Jan. 24, 2005, repealed § 3-91 in its entirety. Former § 3-91 pertained to requirement of state registration for riding stables, and derived from Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, adopted Feb. 6, 1995.  
Sec. 3-92. - Educational exemption permit required. 
(a)  A person may keep or allow to be kept upon his premises up to a total of 24 rabbits or chickens in the amount allowed under the agriculture code, for educational or exhibition purposes, provided that such person possesses a valid educational exemption permit issued by city animal services. There shall be a $5.00 per year, or any portion thereof, fee for this permit. 
(b)  A permit issued under this section shall be valid only upon the premises identified on the permit, and is nontransferable to any other location. 
(c)  A permit issued under this section shall expire no later than 12 months from the date of issuance, or no later than 30 days after the qualifying person ceases to be an active member in good standing with the qualifying organization, whichever should occur first. 
(d)  City animal services may issue or renew a permit under this section, provided that the following qualifying criteria have been met: 
(1)  A properly completed application, including required verifications, has been submitted to city animal services; 
(2)  The person to whom the permit is issued must be at least 17 years of age. If not, the permit may be issued to the person's parent or guardian; 
(3)  The rabbits or chickens must be an integral part of a bona fide educational or exhibition project/program sanctioned by the 4-H Club, Future Farmers of America, or Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts of America. Written verification from the local program director/coordinator must be submitted with the permit application; 
(4)  The person engaged in the project/program must be an active member in good standing with the sanctioned organization. Written verification from the local program director/coordinator must be submitted with the permit application; 
(5)  The rabbits or chickens must be kept in a pen, cage, hutch, coop or similar enclosure. This must be verified by the animal control officer during an inspection of the premises; and 
(6)  The permit fee has been paid. 
(e)  City animal services may revoke or deny renewal of a permit under this section, under the following situations: 
(1)  False information is provided on the application for the permit; or 
(2)  Upon two or more convictions for violations of this section involving the permitted animals. 
(Ord. No. 2071-11-95, § I, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 25, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Secs. 3-93—3-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DANGEROUS DOGS 
 
Sec. 3-101. - Owner defined. 
(a)  A person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog when: 
(1)  The owner knows of an attack as described in subsection (1) of the definition for "dangerous dog" set forth in section 3-1 of this chapter; or 
(2)  The owner is informed by an animal control authority that the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(b)  The term "owner," as it relates to dangerous dogs, shall mean a person who owns or has custody or control of a dog. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-102. - Secure enclosure. 
(a)  Secure enclosure for a dangerous dog shall mean a fenced area or structure that: 
(1)  Is locked. All entrances to the secure enclosure in which the dog is being kept, such as gates, doors, or windows must be securely closed and locked at all times when the dangerous dog is present; 
(2)  Prevents the escape or release of the dog by any means, including digging, climbing, jumping, or chewing out of the enclosure; 
(3)  Prevents the entry of the general public, including children; 
(4)  Is clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog, with signs obtained from city animal services unless otherwise specifically approved. Such signs shall be posted as specified by city animal services; and 
(5)  Is in conformance with any other requirements for enclosures prescribed by city animal services policy, city zoning regulations, or city construction regulations. 
(b)  At no time may a dangerous dog be kept in any part of a house or other structure where it might have direct access to an opened window, an opened door, a screen window, a screen door, or other opening of similar material or construction which is the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the house or structure. 
(c)  No part of an outdoor secure enclosure for a dangerous dog may be located within five feet of any other property line adjoining the premises on which the enclosure is located. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2473-8-1999, § IC, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 26, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-103. - Confinement and restraint. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for an owner of any dangerous dog found in the city to fail or refuse to physically confine or physically restrain such dog at all times in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Confined in a secure enclosure as defined in section 3-102 of this chapter; or 
(2)  Physically restrained on a leash not longer than six feet in length, and of sufficient tensile strength so it will not break under any conditions or circumstances. One end of the leash must be securely attached to a properly fitted collar or harness which is being worn by the dog; the other end of the leash must be securely held in the grasp of a person. In addition, if the dog is taken onto any public property, it shall be securely muzzled in a manner which will prevent it from biting any person or other animal, yet not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration. A dangerous dog may not be left tied out anywhere outside of a secure enclosure. 
(b)  A person found guilty of an offense under this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 for each separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-104. - Current liability insurance required. 
(a)  Not later than the 30th day after the date the municipal court determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, the dog's owner shall: 
(1)  Obtain, and maintain in force at all times, liability insurance coverage in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from any attack by the dog causing bodily injury to a person; and 
(2)  Present proof of such liability insurance coverage to the animal control officer. Proof of liability insurance coverage shall consist of a copy of the insurance policy. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this section for the owner of any registered dangerous dog or any dog required to be registered as a dangerous dog under this chapter or state law, to fail or refuse to present proof of current liability insurance coverage as required herein, upon request by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § IC, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-105. - Current dangerous dog registration required. 
(a)  Not later than the 30th day after the date the municipal court determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, the dog's owner shall register the dog as a dangerous dog with the animal control officer. The owner shall renew such registration on or before the expiration of every 12-month period thereafter. 
(b)  If the owner of any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under this chapter sells, gives away, or relocates the dog, that owner shall notify the animal control officer of such sale, gift, or relocation not later than 72 hours after the occurrence. Such notification shall include reporting the following information to the animal control officer: 
(1)  The name of the dog's owner at the new location. 
(2)  The address and phone number of the dog's owner at the new location. 
(3)  The address of the new location where the dog is to be kept, if different than subsection (b)(2) above. 
(c)  No dog, which has been determined to be a dangerous dog, may be moved into the city from another animal services jurisdiction until after the owner has complied with all dangerous dog registration requirements prescribed in this chapter. 
(d)  The animal control officer may issue a dangerous dog registration certificate and tag as proof that a dangerous dog has been registered as required. Such registration shall be valid for a period of not more than 12 months from its date of issue, and shall not be transferable to any other animal. The animal control officer shall issue or renew a dangerous dog registration certificate and tag after the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner registering the dog is at least 18 years old; 
(2)  The owner has presented proof that the dog has been vaccinated against rabies as required by this chapter; 
(3)  The owner has presented proof of current liability insurance coverage as required by this chapter; 
(4)  The owner has presented proof that the dog has been implanted with a microchip identification, which can be detected and read by the animal control officer's microchip reader. Proof shall consist of a signed letter from the veterinarian who implanted the microchip. The letter must describe the dog, state the microchip identification number assigned to the dog, and state the microchip manufacturer name; 
(5)  The secure enclosure in which the dog will be kept is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, as verified by inspection conducted by the animal control officer within the preceding 30-day period; and 
(6)  The owner pays the dangerous dog registration fee specified in section 2-201 of this Code. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this section for the owner of any dangerous dog found in the city, to fail or refuse to present proof that their dog is currently registered as a dangerous dog as prescribed herein, to the animal control officer upon request. 
(f)  If any dangerous dog owner fails to maintain compliance with the liability insurance or secure enclosure requirements of this chapter, the owner shall, upon demand, deliver the dog to the city animal shelter for confinement, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the animal control officer. The municipal court may issue a warrant authorizing the seizure of a dangerous dog by the animal control officer, upon receiving notification from the animal control officer that the owner has failed to maintain compliance with the liability insurance or secure enclosure requirements of this chapter. The animal control officer shall provide for the dog's impoundment in secure and humane conditions until the owner has complied with applicable liability insurance or secure enclosure requirements, or until otherwise ordered by the court. If the owner fails to comply with the applicable liability insurance or secure enclosure requirements before the tenth consecutive day after the date the dog was delivered or seized, the court may order the humane destruction of the dog. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all costs to seize, confine, and destroy the dog. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § IC, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 27, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-106. - Tag to be displayed. 
The current dangerous dog registration tag issued by an animal control authority shall be conspicuously displayed on the dangerous dog at all times by securely attaching it to a properly fitted collar, harness, or similar device which is being worn by the dog. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-107. - Report of attack required. 
An owner of any registered dangerous dog shall be required to notify city animal services of any attacks the dog makes on people, regardless of where the attack occurs. Such notification of an attack shall be made not later than 24 hours after the attack occurs. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 28, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-108. - Unprovoked attacks. 
An owner of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the person. An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in which event the offense is a Class A misdemeanor. If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog destroyed at the owner's expense, as provided by law. A person found guilty of an offense under this section, in the municipal court, shall also be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 for each separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-109. - Reporting a dangerous dog incident. 
(a)  A person may report an alleged dangerous dog incident to the animal control officer by submitting a sworn statement describing the event, not later than the 30th day after the date such incident occurs. A parent or guardian may submit the sworn statement on behalf of a minor or a person who is unable to prepare the statement. The statement shall contain as much of the following information as known: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person filing the sworn statement. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the alleged dangerous dog owner or keeper. 
(3)  A description of the alleged dangerous dog including breed, colors, size, sex, name, or any other distinguishing characteristics. 
(4)  Date, time and location where the incident occurred. 
(5)  A detailed account of what happened before, during, and after the incident. 
(6)  A description of any injuries caused by the dog during the incident. Attach a copy of available medical reports, photos, etc. 
(7)  Name, address and telephone number of any available witnesses to the incident. 
(b)  After receiving a sworn statement describing an alleged dangerous dog incident, the animal control officer shall investigate the incident and determine whether or not to file a report with the municipal court and request a hearing to determine if the dog involved is a dangerous dog as defined within this chapter. Upon notification that such dangerous dog determination hearing is to be conducted, the owner shall deliver the dog to the city animal shelter where it shall be confined until the court orders disposition of the dog, unless confinement at another location has been specifically authorized by the animal control officer. 
(c)  If the owner fails to deliver the dog as specified in subsection (b), above, the court may order the animal control officer to seize the dog and issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control officer shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. 
(d)  The owner shall be responsible for payment of all costs incurred to seize and confine the dog. 
(e)  The court may order the humane destruction of an alleged dangerous dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before the 15th day after the dog is seized or impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § IC, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-110. - Dangerous dog determination hearing. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report from the animal control officer describing an alleged dangerous dog incident, the court shall set a time for a hearing to determine if the dog is a dangerous dog as defined within this chapter. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered for confinement. 
(b)  Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be delivered to: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; and 
(2)  The person who reported the incident to animal services. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  If the court determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, such dog shall be confined at the city animal shelter or other confinement location authorized by the animal control officer until the owner presents proof of required liability insurance coverage and the animal control officer has inspected and approved the secure enclosure where the dog will be kept. If the owner does not comply with such requirements on or before the 30th day after the date the dog is determined to be a dangerous dog, the court may order the humane destruction of the dog. 
(e)  The owner of a dog that has been confined under section 3-109 shall be required to present proof to the animal control officer that such dog has been vaccinated against rabies as required by this chapter, before the dog may be released from confinement. If the owner cannot provide such proof, the owner shall make arrangements to have the dog vaccinated against rabies, at a veterinary clinic located within the city limits, during city animal services' regular business hours. The owner shall coordinate such arrangements with city animal services prior to the date the dog is to be vaccinated. An animal control officer shall: 
(1)  Transport the dog to the veterinary clinic and confirm that the dog is vaccinated against rabies; or 
(2)  Accompany the owner to or meet the owner at the veterinary clinic and confirm that the dog is vaccinated against rabies. 
If the owner does not comply with this requirement on or before the 30th day after the court has determined that the dog is a dangerous dog, the court may order the humane destruction of the dog. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all costs incurred to vaccinate or destroy the dog. 
(f)  The owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as for appeals of other municipal court cases. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § IC, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, §§ 29, 30, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-111. - Defenses to prosecution. 
Defenses to prosecution prescribed by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 822, subch. D, "Dangerous Dogs" (as it is now enacted, or as hereinafter amended), are hereby incorporated under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
DIVISION 4. - DOGS THAT CAUSE THE DEATH OF OR SERIOUS BODILY INJURY TO A PERSON[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2473-8-1999, § ID, adopted Aug. 9, 1999, added a new div. 3.5, §§ 3-112—3-115. To maintain a consistent numbering style of divisions in this article, the provisions of Ord. No. 2473-8-1999, § I.D have been redesignated as div. 4 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 3-112. - Seizure of a dog causing death of or serious bodily injury to a person. 
(a)  The municipal court shall order the animal control officer to seize a dog and issue a warrant authorizing the seizure: 
(1)  On the sworn complaint of any person, including the city attorney, or a peace officer, that the dog has caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person; and 
(2)  On a showing of probable cause to believe that the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury to the person as stated in the complaint. 
(b)  Upon order of the municipal court, the animal control officer shall seize the dog and provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. 
(c)  The definition of the term "serious bodily injury" as stated in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 822 (as it is now enacted, or as hereinafter amended), is hereby incorporated into this section. 
(Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § ID, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-113. - Hearing. 
(a)  The court shall set a time for a hearing to determine whether the dog caused the death of or serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the warrant is issued. 
(b)  Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given to: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or the person from whom the dog was seized; and 
(2)  The person who made the complaint. 
(c)  Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(d)  The court shall order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the death of a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court shall order the dog released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom the dog was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of the dog. 
(e)  The court may order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person. If that finding is not made, the court shall order the dog released to: 
(1)  Its owner; 
(2)  The person from whom the dog was seized; or 
(3)  Any other person authorized to take possession of the dog. 
(4)  City impoundment and daily handling fees shall not be charged. 
(f)  The court may not order the dog destroyed if the court finds that the dog caused the serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person; and: 
(1)  The dog was being used for the protection of a person or person's property, and the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept; and 
a.  The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and provided written notice of presence of a dog; and 
b.  The injured person was at least eight years of age, and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; or 
(2)  The dog was not being used for the protection of a person or person's property and, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and the injured person was at least eight years of age, and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred; 
(3)  The attack, bite, or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action of a peace officer while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes; 
(4)  The dog was defending a person from an assault or person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or 
(5)  The injured person was younger than eight years of age, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the dog was being kept, and the enclosure was reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight years of age from entering. 
(g)  The court may determine that the dog is a dangerous dog, as defined in this chapter, even if it determines that the dog did not cause the death of or serious bodily injury to a person. If the court determines that the dog is a dangerous dog, the owner shall comply with all dangerous dog requirements as prescribed within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § ID, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-114. - Destruction of dog. 
The destruction of a dog, ordered under section 3-113, must be performed by: 
(1)  A licensed veterinarian located within the city limits, unless otherwise specifically authorized by the animal control officer; 
(2)  Personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society, located within the city limits, who are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or 
(3)  Personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal services within the city limits, who are trained in the humane destruction of animals. 
(Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § ID, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 29, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-115. - Provocation or location of attack irrelevant. 
Except as provided by subsection 3-113(f), this division applies to any dog that causes a person's death or serious bodily injury by attacking, biting, or mauling the person, regardless of whether the dog was provoked and regardless of where the incident resulting in the person's death or serious bodily injury occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § ID, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
DIVISION 5. - DOGS THAT ATTACK OTHER ANIMALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2473-8-1999, § I.E, adopted Aug. 9, 1999, added a new div. 3.6, §§ 3-116—3-118. To maintain a consistent numbering style of divisions in this article, the provisions of Ord. No. 2473-8-1999, § I.D have been redesignated as div. 4 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 3-116. - Reporting attacks on animals. 
(a)  If an animal is attacked by an at large dog, and that attack resulted in serious injury to or the death of that animal, the attacked animal's owner may report the incident to the animal control officer by submitting a sworn statement describing the attack. The statement must be received by the animal control officer not later than the 30th day after such attack occurs, and it shall contain as much of the following information as known, including: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person filing the sworn statement; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the at large dog owner; 
(3)  A description of the at large dog; 
(4)  Date, time and location of the attack; 
(5)  Detailed account of the attack, including a description of events occurring immediately before, during, and after the attack; 
(6)  Name, address and telephone numbers of any witnesses to the attack. 
(b)  If the attacked animal sustained serious injuries which did not result in death, then a letter signed by the treating veterinarian must be submitted with the sworn statement. The letter must describe the injuries sustained by the attacked animal, and state that the injuries were serious, characterized by severe bite wounds, or severe ripping and tearing of muscle, or that the injuries required prompt medical attention after the attack to preserve the animal's life. 
(c)  Sections 3-116 through 3-118 of this chapter shall not be applicable to: 
(1)  Attacks on prohibited animals; 
(2)  Attacks on animals which are unlawful to keep upon the owner's premises; 
(3)  Attacks on an animal that was at large at the time of the attack, or immediately prior to the attack; or 
(4)  Attacks on wildlife. 
(Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § ID, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 3456-06-2007, § 3, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16; Ord. No. 4291-06-2016 , § 5, 6-20-16)  
Sec. 3-117. - Hearing. 
(a)  After receiving the sworn statement from an owner of an animal that has been seriously injured or killed by an at large dog, along with a letter from the treating veterinarian where required, the animal control officer shall investigate the incident and determine whether to file a report and request a hearing in the municipal court to determine if the dog involved is a dangerous dog as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Upon receiving a report from the animal control officer describing an alleged dangerous dog incident, the court shall set a time for a hearing to determine if the dog is a dangerous dog as defined in this chapter. The hearing must be held not later than the tenth day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered for confinement. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be delivered to: 
(1)  The owner of the at large dog; and 
(2)  The owner of the attacked animal. 
(c)  Upon notification that a dangerous dog determination hearing is to be conducted, the owner shall immediately deliver the dog to the city animal shelter where it shall be confined pending the outcome of the hearing and any subsequent appeals, unless confinement at another location has been specifically authorized by the animal control officer. 
(d)  If the owner fails or refuses to surrender or deliver the dog for confinement as specified in subsection (c), above, the court may order the animal control officer to seize the dog and issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control officer shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions pending the outcome of the hearing and any subsequent appeals. 
(e)  The owner shall be responsible for payment of all costs incurred to seize and confine the dog. 
(f)  Any interested party, including the city attorney, is entitled to present evidence at the hearing. 
(g)  A dog may be designated as a dangerous dog if the court finds that: 
(1)  The dog attacked another person's animal; 
(2)  The attack resulted in serious injury to or the death of the attacked animal; 
(3)  The dog was at large at the time it committed the attack; and 
(4)  The attacked animal was not at large at the time of the attack, or immediately prior to the attack. 
(h)  If the court determines that a dog is a dangerous dog, such dog shall be confined at the city animal shelter or other confinement location authorized by the animal control officer until the owner presents proof of required liability insurance coverage and the animal control officer has inspected and approved the secure enclosure where the dog will be kept. If the owner does not comply with such requirements on or before the 30th day after the date the dog is determined to be a dangerous dog, the court may order the humane destruction of the dog. 
(i)  The at large dog owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as provided for appeals of other municipal court cases. Any order to destroy the dog shall be suspended pending the outcome of the appeal. 
(j)  The court may order the humane destruction of a dog that has killed an animal belonging to another person upon determining that the dog is a dangerous dog and that sufficient evidence has been presented to find that destruction of the dog is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. Destruction of the dog may be performed by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian within the city limits unless otherwise authorized by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § ID, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 3456-06-2007, § 4, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16; Ord. No. 4291-06-2016 , § 6, 6-20-16)  
Sec. 3-118. - Requirements for owners of dogs that are a danger to other animals. 
(a)  The owner of a dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog shall be subject to and must comply with all the conditions and requirements pertaining to owners of dangerous dogs as set forth in this chapter, including: 
(1)  Registering the dog as a dangerous dog as prescribed in this chapter; 
(2)  Obtaining liability insurance as prescribed in this chapter; 
(3)  Providing a secure enclosure for the dangerous dog as prescribed in this chapter, or as otherwise ordered by the court; and 
(4)  Confining the dangerous dog in a secure enclosure and restraining it at all times as required by this chapter. 
If the dog owner fails or refuses to comply with the requirements for owners of dangerous dogs on or before the 30th day after the dog is determined to be a dangerous dog, the court may order that the dog be humanely destroyed by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian within the city limits unless a veterinarian located outside of the city limits is authorized by the animal control officer. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this division for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2473-8-99, § ID, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 30, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 3456-06-2007, § 5, 6-4-07; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-18-16)  
Secs. 3-119—3-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RABIES CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 3-126. - Proof of current vaccination required. 
The owner of each dog or cat found in the city shall cause each such animal to be vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part I, chapter 169 as it is now enacted or hereafter amended. Furthermore, the owner of each ferret found in the city shall cause each such animal to be vaccinated against rabies in the same manner and interval as required for dogs and cats in the city. It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any dog, cat, or ferret to fail or refuse to present proof to the animal control officer, upon request, that such animal has been vaccinated against rabies as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 3-127. - Official vaccination certificate to be issued and retained. 
Any veterinarian who vaccinates an animal against rabies shall issue and retain official rabies vaccination certificates as required by Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part I, chapter 169 as it is now enacted or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 3-128. - Use and sale of vaccine restricted. 
Rabies vaccine for animals may be administered only by or under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian. A person may not sell or distribute rabies vaccine for animals to any person except a licensed veterinarian or to a person working in a veterinary clinic who accepts the vaccine on behalf of the veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95)  
Sec. 3-129. - Report of suspected animals. 
(a)  Any person who knows of an animal which is rabid, or suspects to be rabid, shall report such animal to the animal control officer as soon as possible, but not later than 24 hours from the time of discovery. For purposes of this section, the word "animal," as it relates to rabies suspects, shall specifically mean mammals. A person who reports a rabies suspect to the animal control officer shall provide the following information, if known: 
(1)  Location where the animal is being kept or was last seen. 
(2)  A description of the animal and why it is a rabies suspect. 
(3)  Name, address, phone number of the animal owner or keeper. 
(4)  Name, address, phone number of any persons who may have been in contact with the rabies suspect. 
(5)  Any other relevant information. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95)  
Sec. 3-130. - Report of animal bite required. 
Any person having knowledge of an animal bite to a human shall report the incident to the animal control officer as soon as possible, but not later than 24 hours after the incident occurs. Upon receiving a report of an animal bite to a person, the animal control officer shall investigate the incident utilizing standardized reporting forms. For purposes of this section, the term "animal bite" shall specifically mean a bite inflicted by a mammal. A person who reports an animal bite to the animal control officer shall provide the following information, if known: 
(1)  Name, address, phone number of the person who was bitten. 
(2)  Name, address, phone number of the animal owner or keeper. 
(3)  Description of the biting animal. 
(4)  Location where the animal is being kept or was last seen. 
(5)  Any other relevant information. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95)  
Sec. 3-131. - Quarantine or testing. 
When an animal that has bitten or otherwise may have exposed a human to rabies has been identified, it shall be placed into quarantine or submitted for rabies testing as prescribed by Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part I, chapter 169 as it is now enacted or hereafter amended. City animal services may authorize a home quarantine as provided by Texas Administrative Code, title 25, part I, chapter 169. The owner of an animal for which a home quarantine is authorized shall be required to sign a completed home quarantine agreement issued by city animal services before such authorization is granted. Failure or refusal to comply with all terms and conditions of the home quarantine agreement shall be a violation of this section and shall immediately void the home quarantine authorization. The owner of an animal for which a home quarantine authorization has been refused or voided, shall place the animal into quarantine at the city animal shelter or a veterinary clinic as specified by city animal services, for the remainder of the required observation period. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 2942-06-2003, § I, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 31, 12-19-05)  
Sec. 3-132. - Failure to comply with quarantine or testing requirements. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any requirements for quarantine or rabies testing prescribed by section 3-131 of this chapter, including those contained in any notice or agreement executed pursuant to that section. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95)  
Sec. 3-133. - Exposed animals. 
(a)  The owner of a domestic animal that is not currently vaccinated against rabies which has been bitten by a rabid animal, or directly exposed to rabies by physical contact with a rabid animal or its fresh tissues, shall cause the exposed animal to be: 
(1)  Humanely euthanized; or 
(2)  Immediately vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict isolation for 90 days and given booster vaccinations during the third and eighth weeks of isolation. If the animal is under three months of age at the time of the second vaccination, an additional booster shall be given when the animal reaches three months of age. Isolation shall be accomplished by written agreement prescribed by city animal services, and the owner or custodian shall be required to comply with the terms and conditions of such agreement. 
(b)  The owner of a domestic animal that is currently vaccinated against rabies which has been bitten by a rabid animal, or directly exposed to rabies by physical contact with a rabid animal or its fresh tissues, shall cause the exposed animal to be: 
(1)  Humanely euthanized; or 
(2)  Immediately given a booster rabies vaccination and placed in strict isolation for 45 days. Isolation shall be accomplished by written agreement prescribed by city animal services, and the owner or custodian shall be required to comply with the terms and conditions of such agreement. 
(c)  The owner of a domestic animal, other than that described in subsections (a) or (b), shall comply with the recommendations contained in the latest edition of the Compendium of Animal Rabies Control, published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, or as may otherwise be prescribed by state department of health regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3293-12-2005, § 32, 12-19-05)  
Sec. 3-134. - Failure to comply with requirements for exposed animals. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any requirements for animals exposed to rabies prescribed by section 3-133 of this chapter, including those contained in any notice or agreement executed pursuant to that section. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95)  
Sec. 3-135. - Vaccinations required for certain livestock. 
The owner or custodian of any species of livestock found in the city, for which a United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) approved rabies vaccine is available, shall be required to provide proof that such animal is currently vaccinated against rabies if: 
(1)  The animal is part of a riding stable or is otherwise used or let for hire to be driven or ridden by the public such as for pony rides or carriage rides; or 
(2)  The animal has frequent direct contact with humans at an activity or event open to the public such as a petting zoo, fair, or other public exhibition. 
For purposes of this section, the term "currently vaccinated" shall mean an animal that has been vaccinated against rabies, with a vaccine approved by the USDA for that species, in accordance with the vaccine's label instructions. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail or refuse to provide proof that an animal is in compliance with the rabies vaccination requirements of this section upon request by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 3163-01-2005, § I, 1-24-05)  
Sec. 3-136. - Area quarantine. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any rules or regulations prescribed by the state department of health during a declared area rabies quarantine. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95)  
Secs. 3-137—3-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 3-151. - Restricted premises. 
The keeping of agricultural animals shall be restricted to premises which conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The premises must be at least one acre (43,560 square feet) in size; 
(2)  Fences on the premises must conform to city Code requirements. Agricultural animals may not be permitted to graze, forage, or otherwise roam nearer than 25 feet from any other adjoining property lines, including municipal property. This requirement may be waived for purposes of obtaining a permit from animal control to keep agricultural animals, provided that the adjoining property is currently zoned or used for keeping agricultural animals, and a notarized, undisputed written agreement between the property owners is submitted with the application for such permit; 
(3)  Barns, stables, corrals, sheds, hives, coops, pens, or other similar structure where agricultural animals may be housed, fed, confined, or where food is stored, must conform to city Code requirements and may not be located nearer than 150 feet from any residential dwelling, office building, school building, church, business, or other structure under separate ownership, which is intended for human habitation or use; 
(4)  There must be at least one-third acre of pasture area provided on the premises for each head of livestock, ostrich, buffalo, llama, emu, rhea, alpaca, Family Cervidae, or similar animal; and 
(5)  Up to five individual fowl per each one-fourth acre of land may be kept upon the premises. Fowl must be kept in a pen or other enclosure located at least 150 feet from any residential dwelling, office building, school building, church, business, or other structure under separate ownership which is intended for human habitation or use. Such pen or enclosure must provide at least 100 square feet of exercise area for each bird kept therein. In order to minimize the potential for noise nuisances to adjacent or nearby premises, roosters capable of crowing shall not be allowed to be kept within 1,500 feet of any residential dwelling, office building, school building, church, business, or other structure under separate ownership which is intended for human habitation or use. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95) 
Cross reference— Fences, § 4-441 et seq.  
Sec. 3-152. - Keeping swine in city prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to keep or allow any swine to be kept upon any premises in the city, except as may be specifically stated within this chapter. This section shall not be applicable to swine kept in the city under the following conditions: 
(1)  Animals kept for educational or show purposes at the LISD Vocational Agriculture facility; 
(2)  Animals temporarily brought into the city and kept at an exhibition or holding area of a trial or show in which the animal is a participant, but not to exceed 72 hours; 
(3)  Animals temporarily brought into the city and kept at the site of a "petting zoo" or similar event of which the animal is an integral part, but not to exceed 72 hours; or 
(4)  Potbellied pigs which conform to the definition and requirements for such animals as stated within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95; Ord. No. 4261-04-2016 , § 2, 4-18-16)  
Sec. 3-153. - Commercial feedlot or concentrated feeding operation. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to operate or allow the operation of a commercial feedlot or concentrated animal feeding operation upon any premises in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95)  
Sec. 3-154. - Areas prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly or intentionally ride, drive, or otherwise permit agricultural animals to enter upon any public school grounds, public park grounds, public sidewalk, public street, or other public property, except on bridle paths, riding areas, or exhibiting areas specifically designated by the city for such animals. 
(Ord. No. 1999-2-95, § I, 2-6-95)  
ARTICLE VI. - DOMESTICATED CHICKENS 
 
Sec. 3-155. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. A person commits an offense if he keeps domesticated chickens within the city limits without a valid permit issued by the city. 
(b)  Application. An application for a permit under this article must be made on a form provided by the city. 
(c)  Fee. The annual fee for a chicken permit is set out in section 2-201 of this Code. 
(d)  Approval. The city shall issue a permit if the applicant has demonstrated compliance with the criteria and standards in this article and all other applicable sections of this Code. 
(e)  Denial, suspension or revocation. The city may deny, suspend or revoke a permit if: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to comply with or violated any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable ordinance or law; 
(2)  The applicant has omitted or materially misrepresented any information required for the issuance of a permit; or 
(3)  There is a risk to public health, safety or welfare. 
(f)  Appeal. If the city denies, revokes or suspends the permit, the decision to do so shall be final unless the applicant or permittee files a written appeal to the city council within 20 days from the date of the notice of denial, revocation or suspension. If an appeal is timely perfected, the decision of the city council is final and nonappealable. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-156. - Location, number and type of chickens allowed. 
(a)  Detached single-family lots on less than one acre. Chickens shall be allowed as follows: 
(1)  The maximum number of chickens allowed per lot is six; provided that, there are no other regulated animals, as specified in section 3-86 of this Code, being kept on the same lot. If there are other regulated animals on the same lot, there shall be no more than an aggregate total of six animals in any combination, including chickens, dogs, cats, etc. 
(2)  Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or coop at all times. 
(3)  Only female chickens are allowed. 
(4)  No roosters are allowed. 
(5)  There is no restriction on chicken species. 
(6)  Chickens shall not be allowed to be kept inside the primary residence (including a garage). 
(b)  Detached single-family lots on one acre tracts or larger. Chickens shall be allowed as follows: 
(1)  The maximum number of chickens allowed per one-fourth acre of land is five. 
(2)  Chickens must be kept in an enclosure or coop at all times. 
(3)  There is no restriction on chicken species. 
(4)  Chickens shall not be allowed to be kept inside the primary residence (including a garage). 
(c)  Multi-family, townhouse, duplex, or mobile home uses. Chickens are not allowed. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 4285-06-2016 , § 1, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 3-157. - Coop. 
(a)  The coop shall be designed to provide safe and healthy living conditions for the chickens while minimizing adverse impacts to other residents in the neighborhood. 
(b)  The coop shall be enclosed on all sides and shall have a roof and doors. Openings must be covered with predator and bird proof wire of less than one inch openings. 
(c)  The coop shall be well-maintained. 
(d)  Coops are deemed residential accessory buildings and as such shall comply with the residential accessory requirements as specified in section 17-32.5 of this Code. 
(e)  Chickens shall be secured within the coop during non-daylight hours. 
(f)  The coop must provide adequate ventilation, sun and shade and must both be impermeable to rodents, wild birds, and predators, including dogs and cats. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-158. - Enclosures. 
(a)  Chickens must be kept in an enclosure and/or coop at all times. 
(b)  Enclosures must be clean, dry, and odor-free, kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times, in a manner that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of neighboring lots due to noise, odor or other adverse impact. 
(c)  Enclosures must be made and constructed of listed materials in compliance with this Code. 
(d)  Where the enclosure is not an integral part of the coop, the enclosure must be a minimum of 100 square feet in size. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-159. - Setbacks. 
(a)  Detached single-family lots on less than one acre. 
(1)  Coops and/or enclosures, whichever is nearer, shall be no less than 25 feet from any adjacent residential or commercial building. 
(2)  Measurement shall be made from the nearest point of the coop/enclosure to the closest point of the primary residential structure and/or adjacent residential or commercial building. 
(b)  Detached single-family lots on one acre tracts or larger. 
(1)  Coops and/or enclosures, whichever is nearer, shall be no less than 150 feet from any residential dwelling, office building, school building, church, business, or other structure under separate ownership which is intended for human habitation or use. 
(2)  Coops or enclosures must provide at least 100 square feet of exercise area for each bird kept therein. 
(3)  In order to minimize the potential for noise nuisances to adjacent or nearby premises, roosters capable of crowing shall not be allowed to be kept within 1,500 feet of any residential dwelling, office building, school building, church, business, or other structure under separate ownership which is intended for human habitation or use. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 4285-06-2016 , § 2, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 3-160. - Odor and noise impacts. 
(a)  Odors from chickens, chicken manure, or other chicken-related substance shall not be perceptible at the property boundaries. 
(b)  Perceptible noise from chickens shall not be loud enough at the property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity. 
(c)  Enclosures must be kept in a neat and sanitary condition at all times, and must be cleaned on a regular basis so as to prevent offensive odors. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-161. - Waste storage and removal. 
Provision must be made for the storage and removal of chicken manure. All stored manure shall be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or lid over the entire structure. All other manure not used for composting or fertilizing shall be removed. In addition, the coop/enclosure and surrounding area must be kept free from trash and accumulated droppings. Uneaten feed shall be removed in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-162. - Lighting. 
Only motion activated lighting may be used to light the exterior of the coop/enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-163. - Predators, rodents, insects, parasites. 
The property owner shall take necessary action to reduce the attraction of predators and rodents and the potential infestation of insects and parasites. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-164. - Feed and water. 
Chickens must be provided with access to feed and clean water at all times. Such feed and water shall be unavailable to rodents and predators. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-165. - Inspections. 
On-site inspections shall be conducted on a complaint basis. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-166. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Chickens currently existing illegally in the city shall not be grandfathered or allowed to remain after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(b)  There shall be no slaughtering of chickens on-site. 
(c)  There shall be no sale of chickens, including chicks, on-site. 
(d)  There shall be no sale or other distribution of eggs to persons other than the inhabitants of the primary residence. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Sec. 3-167. - Violation; penalty. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provision of this article or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to any other penalty imposed by this article or by state law, the city may remove or order the removal of the chickens and chicken-related structures. 
(c)  The remedies provided herein shall be deemed to be cumulative to all other remedies. 
(Ord. No. 4025-10-2013 , § 3, 10-7-13)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to adopt building codes, etc., § 3.07(8). 
Cross reference— Fire prevention standards, § 5-91 et seq.; permits required for land development, § 6-61 et seq.; erosion control requirements, § 6-331 et seq.; construction and equipment requirements for land development, § 6-481 et seq.; house moving licensing and regulations, § 7-76 et seq.; unsanitary, unsightly conditions prohibited, § 9-31 et seq.; sign regulations, ch. 11; utility requirements, ch. 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Waiver of fees for school district. 
The fees which shall be waived for the Lewisville Independent School District are set out in section 2-202. 
(Code 1990, § 3-1-6)  
Secs. 4-2—4-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , §§ 1—8, adopted December 16, 2013, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article II, §§ 4-26—4-28, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1990, §§ 3-1-1—3-1-5; Ord. No. 1671-2-92, §§ I, II, adopted February 3, 1992; Ord. No. 1824-7-93, § I, adopted July 9, 1993; Ord. No. 2008-3-95, §§ I, II, adopted March 6, 1995; Ord. No. 2431-4-99, § 2, adopted April 5, 1999; Ord. No. 2502-10-99, § 2, adopted September 13, 1999; Ord. No. 2662-3-2001, § 3, adopted March 19, 2001; Ord. No. 2754-12-2001, § I, adopted December 10, 2001; Ord. No. 3216-07-2005, § 1, adopted July 11, 2005; Ord. No. 3263-10-2005, § I, adopted October 17, 2005; Ord. No. 3519-12-2007, § I, adopted December 17, 2007; Ord. No. 3664-03-2009 , § 1, adopted March 16, 2009, and Ord. No. 3867-06-2011 , §§ 1, 2, adopted June 6, 2011. 
 
Sec. 4-26. - Building code—Adopted. 
The 2015 edition of the International Building Code and its Appendices E, F, G, J, and K, published by the International Code Council, Inc., amendments and such other addendum as adopted and published by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted as the building code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is on file in the office of the director of building inspection division of the neighborhood services department. 
(Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , § 1, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4270-05-2016 , § 1, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-27. - Local amendment to Section 903.2(2). 
The following provision was enacted by the Lewisville City Council in 2007, prior to the effective date of V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1301.551(i) and, therefore, shall remain in full effect as a revision to any version of the International Fire Code adopted under this article and shall be read in conjunction with any other local amendments set forth in section 4-28 of this article. 
Section 903.2(2); maintain provision to read as follows: 
2.  Townhomes—An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all townhouse occupancies with more than two dwelling units per building. The automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with DFPA 13-R to include garages, exterior balconies and attached breezeways. Each building shall be provided with not less than a Class A roof covering. 
(Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , § 2, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 4-28. - Same amendments. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Building Code 2012 Edition and its Appendices E, F, G, J, and K. 
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Lewisville, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 101.4; amend to read as follows: 
101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.8 and referenced elsewhere in this code, when specifically adopted, shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 101.4.8; add the following: 
101.4.8 Electrical. The provisions of the Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
Section 103; amend title to read as follows: 
SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES 
Section 103.1; amend to read as follows: 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Neighborhood Services is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
Section 105.2; under sub-title entitled "Building" delete items 1, 2, 10 and 11 and re-number accordingly. 
Section 108.1; amend to read as follows: 
108.1 Definitions. 
TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT. Any transportable container, storage unit, shed-like container or other portable structure that can or is used for the storage of personal property of any kind on a limited basis on residential property and which is located for such purposes outside an enclosed building other than an accessory building or shed complying with all building codes and land use requirements. 
TEMPORARY USE DUMPSTER shall mean portable containers (typically open on top), compactors, roll-offs, or recycling containers used on a temporary basis for the collection and storage of construction waste from ongoing permitted construction projects, house cleans, or temporary uses in residentially-zoned districts, and which is 5 cubic yards or less, but shall not include any portable, nonabsorbent, enclosed container with a close fitting cover, or doorswhich is capable of being serviced by mechanical equipment and which is used on a permanent basis to store large volumes of refuse and which serves as the primary method of garbage collection and disposal for a residence. 
OUTDOOR RECEPTACLE. Any receptacle, container or similar product which is located outdoors and designed or intended to collect and temporarily store items, including a dumpster, temporary use dumpster, recycling storage container, donation container, trash compactor or receptacle for similar uses. 
108.2; amend to read as follow: 
108.2 Temporary Structures and Uses. It shall be the responsibility of the homeowner and or provider of a Temporary Portable Storage Unit to notify the Department of Neighborhood Services of the placement. A Temporary Portable Storage Unit may remain at a site used for residential purposes for up to thirty (30) calendar days, with one portable storage unit allowed at a site at a time. There will be 2 allowances per calendar year. An extension may be granted by Code Enforcement and/or the Department of Neighborhood Services and subject to conditions, for a reasonable additional period in an amount not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
Temporary Portable Storage Units may be located in residential zoning districts and shall only be placed on the property owner's driveway or parking area and only so long as they do not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic and provided the units are not placed in the set-back, encroaching into drainage areas/easements or landscaping buffers, or the right-of-way. Such units shall not be placed in such a manner that a person lawfully using the sidewalk must detour into the street in order to go around the unit. 
Temporary Portable Storage Units shall not be used to store solid waste, construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, business inventory, commercial goods, goods for property other that at the residential property where the Temporary Portable Storage Unit is located (i.e., used for retail sales) or any other illegal or hazardous material. Upon reasonable notice to the resident, the City may inspect the contents of any Temporary Portable Storage Unit at any reasonable time to ensure that it is not being used to store said materials. At no time shall a Temporary Portable Storage Unit be used for any of these purposes. 
Locations where a Temporary Portable Storage Unit is being used in connection with new construction or extensive renovation or repair of property, Temporary Portable Storage Units related to and used for the ongoing construction or storage of personal articles during such construction shall be allowed for the period of continuous construction provided there is an active and valid building permit for the property. Any Temporary Portable Storage Unit at the site that is not specifically related to and used in connection with the construction shall be subject to the limits otherwise imposed in this section of the code. Within 5 calendar days of expiration of a building permit, passage of all final inspections, or issuance of a certificate of occupancy (whichever is later), the Temporary Portable Storage Unit shall be removed. 
108.3; amend to read as follow: 
108.3 Temporary Use Dumpsters—Duration. A temporary use dumpster may remain at a site used for residential purposes for up to thirty (30) calendar days, with one temporary use dumpster allowed at a site at a time. There will be 2 allowances per calendar year allowed. An extension may be granted by Code Enforcement and/or the Department of Neighborhood Services and subject to conditions, for a reasonable additional period in an amount not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
Locations where a temporary use dumpster is being used in connection with new construction or extensive renovation or repair of property shall be allowed for the period of continuous construction provided there is an active and valid building permit for the property. Any temporary use dumpster at the site that is not specifically related to and used in connection with the construction shall be subject to the limits otherwise imposed in this section of the code. Within 5 calendar days of expiration of a building permit, passage of all final inspections, or issuance of a certificate of occupancy (whichever is later), the temporary use dumpster shall be removed. 
108.4; amend to read as follow: 
108.4 Severe Weather Conditions. At all times Temporary Portable Storage Units and Temporary Use Dumpsters shall be secured or removed in such a manner so as to minimize the danger of such units causing damage to persons or property from high winds or severe weather conditions. 
Section 108.5; add to read as follows: 
Section 108.5, Outdoor Receptacle. This section applies to outdoor receptacles on any property designated as non-residential zoning district, multi-family zoning district and mixed use zoning district, as defined by the Lewisville Zoning Ordinance, placed on said property after the passage of this ordinance. 
Section 108.5.1; add to read as follows: 
108.5.1. Approval required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, place, maintain or operate any outdoor receptacle without first obtaining approval from the City's Neighborhood Services Department. 
(b)  Information from the applicant including a drawing showing location, size and the number of such receptacles shall be submitted to the City prior to placement of the receptacles on the property. 
Section 108.5.2; add to read as follows: 
108.5.2. Screening and placement. 
(a)  Outdoor receptacles shall be screened on 3 sides with a minimum six (6) foot masonry screening wall consistent with the building material of the primary building(s). The service opening shall not directly face a public street or ROW unless approved by the Director of Neighborhood Services due to the site configuration that may not allow such a design. The receptacles shall be located on a concrete or asphalt surface. 
(b)  Outdoor receptacles shall be located behind the primary building front façade(s). 
(c)  Outdoor receptacles shall not be located within any utility easements, fire lanes, public ROW or easement, required parking or loading spaces, maneuvering lanes, access easements or landscape areas. 
Section 108.5.3; add to read as follows: 
108.5.3. Maintenance. Outdoor receptacles shall be sized and designed to contain all material between designated pick up schedules. Any overflow above or around the outdoor receptacle is strictly prohibited. All clean up shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
Section 109.7; add to read as follows: 
109.7 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  City approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site; 
7.  Failure to maintain erosion control, trash control or tree protection. 
Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
Section 109.8.1; add to read as follows: 
109.8.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
Section 109.8.2; add to read as follows: 
109.8.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes nor from penalty prescribed by law. 
Section 109.9; add to read as follows: 
109.9 Unauthorized cover up fee. Any work concealed without first obtaining the required inspection in violation of Section 110 shall be assessed a fee as established by the city fee schedule. 
Section 110.3.5; delete exception 
Section 113.1; amend to read as follows: 
113.1 Means of Appeal. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals. 
Section 113.3; delete. 
Section 114.2; add exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Citations for violations of this code may be issued without requiring the issuance of a notice. 
Section 114.3; amend to read as follows: 
114.3 Prosecution of violation. If a notice of violation is issued and is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. 
Section 114.4; amend to read as follows: 
114.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, installs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 202; amend definition of Ambulatory Care Facility as follows: 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include, but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis centers 
- Providers of procedures involving sedation 
- Providers of sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
Section 202; add definition of Assisting Living Facilities to read as follows: 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. 
Section 202; amend definition of "Atrium" as follows: 
ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories&hellip {Balance remains unchanged} 
Section 202; amend definition to read as follows: 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
Section 202; add definition of "Repair Garage" as follows: 
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and watercraft. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
Section 202; amend definition of SPECIAL INSPECTOR to read as follows: 
SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency who shall prove to the satisfaction of the registered design professional in responsible charge and the Building Official as having the competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring special inspection. 
Section 303.1.3; add a sentence to read as follows: 
303.1.3 Associated with Group E occupancies. A room or space used for assembly purposes that is associated with a Group E occupancy is not considered a separate occupancy. Except when applying the assembly requirements of Chapters 10 and 11. 
Section 304.1; add the following to the list of occupancies: 
Fire stations 
Police stations with detention facilities for 5 or less 
Section 307.1.1, Exception 4; add language to read as follows: 
4.  Cleaning establishments....{text unchanged}....with Section 707 or 1-hour horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 or both. See also IFC Chapter 21, Dry Cleaning Plant provisions. 
Section 403.1, Exception 3; amend to read as follows: 
3.  The open air portion of a building {remainder unchanged} 
Section 403.3, Exception; delete item 2. 
Section 403.3.2; amend to read as follows: 
[F] 403.3.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (36.5 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Exception: {No change to exception.} 
Section 404.5; delete Exception. 
Section 406.3.5.1 Carport separation; add sentence to read as follows: 
A fire separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3,048 mm). 
Section 506.2.2; add sentence to read as follows: 
506.2.2 Open Space Limits. Such open space shall be either on the same lot or dedicated for public use and shall be accessed from a street or approved fire lane. In order to be considered as accessible, if not in direct contact with a street or fire lane, a minimum 10-foot wide pathway meeting fire department access from the street or approved fire lane shall be provided. 
Section 712.1.9, amend item 4 to read as follows: 
4.  Is not open to a corridor in Group I and H occupancies. 
Section 901.6.1.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be backflushed when foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
Section 901.6.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
901.6.3 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner. 
Section 901.7; amend to read as follows: 
901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service. 
Where utilized, fire watches shall be provided with at least one approved means for notification of the fire department and their only duty shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires. 
Section 901.8.2: amend to read as follows: 
901.8.2 Removal of Occupant-use Hose Lines. The fire code official is authorized to permit the removal of occupant-use hose lines and hose valves where all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire department. 
2.  If the occupant-use hose lines are to be removed, but the hose valves are required to remain as per the fire code official, such shall be compatible with the local fire department fittings. 
Section 903.1.1; amend to read as follows: 
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.2; delete the exception and amend to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12, and as follows: 
1.  Commercial buildings—Automatic sprinkler systems will be required in all newly constructed buildings exceeding 3,600 square feet of fire area, any remodel or addition that changes the square footage beyond 3,600 square feet or any single tenant expansion requiring a new certificate of occupancy that exceeds 12,000 square feet of fire area. Whichever requirement listed in this chapter, including exceptions, or defined in this amendment that is more restrictive will apply. Credit will not be given for fire barrier walls with a fire resistive rating in lieu of automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
2.  Whenever Section 903.2 requires the installation of an approved automatic sprinkler system, the automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building. 
Exceptions: 
1.  In strip mall buildings, the installation of fire barrier walls with not less than a two-hour fire resistive rating may be allowed to separate the occupancy from the rest of the building in lieu of providing fire sprinkler protection throughout the entire building as approved by the fire code official. 
2.  As allowed in Section 903.3.8, limited area sprinkler systems. 
3.  When a change in Occupancy Classification is required for an existing building or tenant space, the building or tenant space shall comply with the provisions of Section 903.2. 
Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
Section 903.2.1; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.1 Group A. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building housing a Group A occupancy as provided in this section. 
Section 903.2.1.1; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building housing a Group A-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
4.  The fire area contains a multitheater complex. 
Section 903.2.1.2; amend to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building housing a Group A-2 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
Section 903.2.1.3; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building housing a Group A-3 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
Section 903.2.1.4; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building housing a Group A-4 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
Section 903.2.1.6; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs: Where an occupied roof has an assembly occupancy with an occupant load in excess of 100 persons, the entire building shall be equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
Exception: Open parking garages of Type I or Type II construction. 
Section 903.2.1.7; amend to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.1.7 Multiple fire areas. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided where multiple fire areas of Group A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancies share exit or exit access components and the combined occupant load of these fire areas is 100 or more. 
Section 903.2.2: amend to read as follows: 
Ambulatory care facilities. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building housing an ambulatory care facility when any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet. 
2.  Four or more care recipients are incapable of self-preservation, whether rendered incapable by staff or staff has accepted responsibility for care recipients already incapable. 
3.  One or more care recipients that are incapable of self-preservation are located at other than the level of exit discharge serving such facility. 
In buildings where ambulatory care is provided on levels other than the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building. 
Section 903.2.1.8; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.1.8 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group B occupancies where the floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
Section 903.2.3; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies where the floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
Section 903.2.4; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group F-1 occupancies where either: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area; 
2.  A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade; or 
3.  A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
Section 903.2.4.1: 
903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group F-1 occupancy fire areas that contain woodworking operations is excess of 2,500 square feet in area which generate finely divided combustible waste or which use finely divided combustible materials. 
Section 903.2.4.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.4.2 Group F-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group F-2 occupancies where the floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
Section 903.2.5; {No change.} 
Section 903.2.6; amend to read as follows: 
Section 9032.6 Group I. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings with a Group I fire area conforming to Section 903.3.1.1. 
Section 903.2.7; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy when the floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area or for Group M occupancies located more than three stories above grade plane. 
Section 903.2.7.1 {No change.} 
Section 903.2.8; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.8. Group R-1, R-2, R-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Groups R-1, R-2, and R-4 occupancies throughout and shall include the following criteria: 
1.  Throughout Groups R-1, 2, and 4 occupancies in all areas, including but not limited to attics, balconies, breezeways, garages and exterior storerooms, shall have an approved hydraulically designed fire sprinkler system installed. 
2.  Residential or quick response standard sprinklers shall be used in dwelling units and guestroom portions of the building. 
3.  Attics are to be in accordance with NFPA 13. 
Section 903.2.9; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area; 
2.  A Group S-1 occupancy is located more than three stories above the grade plane; or 
3.  A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
Section 903.2.9.1; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with Section 406.8 of the International Building Code, if: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area; or 
2.  Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements. 
Section 903.2.9.2; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires. Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of fires exceeds 20,000 cubic feet or 3,600 square feet shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
Section 903.2.9.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
Section 903.2.10; delete exception and amend section to read as follows: 
903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all S-2 occupancies where either of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area, or 
2.  Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups. 
Section 903.2.10.1; amend section to read as follows: 
903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings used for storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 3,600 square feet. 
Section 903.2.11.3; amend to read as follows: 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings with a floor level, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 35 feet or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no occupancies above the subject garage. 
Section 903.2.11.7; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4,572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
Section 903.2.11.8; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
Section 903.2.11.9; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.11.9 Buildings Over 3,600 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area 3,600 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 3,600 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
Section 903.3.1.1.1; amend to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment. In such locations, an alternative fire suppression or detection system may be required by the fire code official. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the fire code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
Section 903.3.1.2.1; amend to read as follows: 
903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for exterior balconies, decks, and ground floor patios of dwelling units and sleeping units, provided there is a roof or deck above. Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall be permitted to be located such that their deflectors are within 1 inch to 6 inches below the structural members and a maximum distance of 14 inches below the deck of the exterior balconies and decks that are constructed of open wood joist construction. 
Section 903.3.1.2.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics, Exterior Storerooms, and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such buildings exterior storerooms, and attached garages. Attic automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed per NFPA 13. 
Section 903.3.1.3; amend to read as follows: 
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3, Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
Section 903.3.1.4; add section to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
Section 903.3.1.4.1: add section to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or head envelope such that insulation is provided and the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
Section 903.3.1.4.2; add section to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe. 
Section 903.3.5; amend to read as follows: 
903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the International Plumbing Code. For connections to public waterworks systems, the water supply test used for design of fire protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as approved by the fire code official. 
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
Section 903.3.8; amend to read as follows: 
903.3.8 Limited area sprinkler systems. When approved by the fire code official and not in conflict with Section 903.2(2), limited area sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the standards listed in Section 903.3.1 except as provided in Sections 903.3.8.1 through 903.3.8.5. 
Section 903.4; amend to read as follows: 
903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. All valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures and water-flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit. 
Exceptions: [All exceptions to remain unchanged.] 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
Section 903.4.2.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.4.2.1 Multiple tenant buildings. A minimum of one horn/strobe notification appliance shall be installed in each tenant space of a multiple tenant building to notify occupants of an automatic fire sprinkler system water-flow condition. 
Section 903.6; amend to read as follows: 
903.6 Where required in existing buildings and structures. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in existing buildings and structures where required in Chapter 11 and, when a change in Occupancy Classification is required for an existing building or tenant space, the building or tenant space shall comply with the provisions of the new Occupancy Classification as stated in Section 903.2. 
Section 903.7; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.7 Fire Control Rooms. A fire control room is required for all new automatic sprinkler system installations. The fire control room shall comply with the following: 
1.  Located on an exterior wall adjacent to a fire apparatus access lane. 
2.  Be a minimum size of 5-foot by 7-foot. 
3.  Shall house the system riser, fire alarm control panel, and spare sprinkler heads. 
4.  Have an exterior entry door that measures at a minimum 36-inch by 80-inch, and shall be identified as FIRE CONTROL ROOM, with a minimum of 4-inch characters, on the exterior of the door. 
5.  Be equipped with an exterior horn/strobe device indicating a water-flow alarm. Device shall be located above the FDC, 120-inches above finished floor. 
6.  The riser shall be located a minimum of 12-inches from any wall. 
7.  A "Knox" key box shall be located on the exterior of the fire control room, adjacent to the exterior door, installed 5-feet above finished floor, and shall house a key to open the exterior door. 
8.  Room shall be kept free of any storage. 
Section 905.2; amend to read as follows: 
905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
Section 905.3.9; add this new section to read as follows: 
905.3.9 Buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and any portion of the building's interior is more than 200 feet of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided. 
Exception: 
1.  Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
2.  Manual dry standpipes systems are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
Section 905.4, amend to read as follows: 
905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections. Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of the following locations: 
1.  In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provide for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
2.  {No change.} 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit stairway hose connection by a 30-foot hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of the building. 
4.  {No change.} 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of a stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
6.  {No change.} 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
Section 905.9; amend to read as follows: 
905.9 Valve supervision. Valves controlling water supply shall be supervised in the open position so that the change in the normal position of the valve will generate a supervisory signal at the supervising station required by Section 903.4. Where a fire alarm system is provided, a signal shall also be transmitted to the control unit. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Valve to underground key or hub valves in roadway boxes provided by the municipality or public utility do not require supervision. 
2.  Valves locked in the normal position and inspected as provided in this code in buildings not equipped with a fire alarm system. 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
907.1.4; add new section to read as follows: 
907.1.4 Design standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Section 907.2.1; amend to read as follows: 
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow. 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
Section 907.2.3; amend to read as follows: 
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Section 907.2.3, Exception No. 1; amend to read as follows and add a new 1.1 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of less than 50. 
1.1.  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2-1/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) 
Section 907.2.13, Exception 3; amend to read as follows: 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas. 
Section 907.4.2.7; add this new section to read as follows: 
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
Section 907.6.1.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
Section 907.6.3; delete all exceptions. 
Section 907.6.6; amend to read as follows: 
Section 907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the International Code shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72. See Section 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
Section 909.22; add new section to read as follows: 
909.22 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smokeproof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the fire department as per Section 105.7. 
[F] 909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3. 
909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following: 
1.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to the smokeproof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
2.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smokeproof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
3.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system. 
2.  Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete. 
3.  Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
909.21.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code. 
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these requirements. 
Section 910.2.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
Sections 910.3.4; add this new section to read as follows: 
910.3.4 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
Sections 910.3.4.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 310.2. 
Sections 910.3.4.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F and 220°F above ambient. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
Section 910.4.3.1; amend to read as follows: 
910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1,829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
Section 910.4.4; amend to read as follows: 
910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall also be provided. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
Section 912.2; add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
Section 912.3.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
912.3.1 Multiple inlet fire department connections. When more than two, 2-1/2-inch Siamese connections are required for a fire department connection, in addition to the required 2-1/2-inch Siamese connections, a 5-inch Storz fitting shall be installed at a 45-degree downward angle at the end of the fire department connection manifold. 
Section 913.2.1; amend to read as follows: 
913.2.1 Protection of fire pump rooms. Rooms where fire pumps are located shall be separated from all other areas of the building in accordance with Section 913.2.1 of the International Building Code. 
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by Section 506.1. 
Section 914.3.1.2; amend to read as follows: 
914.3.1.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that the water supply will continue without interruption through no fewer than one of the connections. 
Chapter 10: Sections 1001 through 1031; replace all references to "fire code official" with "building official". 
Section 1004.1.2; amend to delete exception and to read as follows: 
1004.1.2 Areas without fixed seating. The number of occupants shall be computed at the rate of one occupant per unit of area as prescribed in Table 1004.1.2. For areas without fixed seating, the occupant load shall not be less than that number determined by dividing the floor area under consideration by the occupant load factor assigned to the function of the space as set forth in Table 1004.1.2. Where an intended function is not listed in Table 1004.1.2, the building official shall establish a function based on a listed function that most nearly resembles the intended function. 
Section 1006.2.2.6; add a new Section 1006.2.2.6 as follows: 
1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 1009.1; add new exception 4 to read as follows: 
4.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009. 
Section 1010.1.9.4, Exceptions 3 and 4; amend to read as follows: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars, or similar operating hardware. 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf provided such inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress width requirements and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
Section 1015.8; amend number 1 to read as follows: 
1.  Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 feet above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006. 
Section 1020.1; add Exception 6 to read as follows: 
6.  In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided. 
Section 1029.1.1.1; Delete. 
Section 1101.2; add exception to Section 1101.2 as follows: 
Exception: Components of projects regulated by and registered with Architectural Barriers Division of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 1203.1; amend to read as follows: 
1203.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with Section 1203.4, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with the International Mechanical Code. 
Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is less than 5 air changes or less per hour when tested with a blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section 402.4.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical means in accordance with Section 403 of the International Mechanical Code. 
Table 1505.1; delete footnote c and replace footnote b with the following: 
b.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of U occupancies having not more than 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area. When exceeding 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area, buildings of U occupancies may use non-rated non-combustible roof coverings. 
Section 1505.7; delete. 
Section 1510.1; amend to read as follows: 
1510.1 General. Materials and methods of applications used for recovering or replacing an existing roof covering shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15. All individual replacement shingles or shakes shall be in compliance with the rating required by Table 1505.1. {text of exception unchanged} 
Section 1704.2; amend to read as follows: 
1704.2 Special inspections and tests. Where application is made to the Building Official for construction as specified in Section 105, the owner or the owner's authorized agent, or the registered design professional in responsible charge, other than the contractor, shall employ one or more approved agencies to provide special inspections and tests during construction on the types of work listed under Section 1705 and identify the approved agencies to the Building Official. The special inspector shall not be employed by the contractor. These special inspections and tests are in addition to the inspections identified by the Building Official that are identified in Section 110. 
Section 1704.2.1; amend to read as follows: 
1704.2.1 Special inspector qualifications. Prior to the start of construction and or upon request, the approved agencies shall provide written documentation to the registered design professional in responsible charge and the building official demonstrating the competence and relevant experience or training of the special inspectors who will perform the special inspections and tests during construction. {Remainder unchanged} 
Section 1704.2.4; amend to read as follows: 
1704.2.4 Report requirement. Approved agencies shall keep records of special inspections and tests. The approved agency shall submit reports of special inspections and tests to the Building Official upon request, and to the registered design professional in responsible charge. Individual inspection reports shall indicate that work inspected or tested was or was not completed in conformance to approved construction documents. {Remainder unchanged} 
Section 1704.2.5.2; amend to read as follows: 
1704.2.5.1 Fabricator approval. Special inspections during fabrications required by Section 1704 are not required where the work is done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved to perform such work without special inspection. Approval shall be based upon review of the fabricator's written procedural and quality control manuals and periodic auditing of fabrication practices by an approved agency, or a fabricator that is enrolled in a nationally accepted inspections program. At completion of fabrication, the acceptable or approved fabricator shall submit a certificate of compliance to the owner or the owner's authorized agent or the registered design professional in responsible charge, stating that the work was performed in accordance with the approved construction documents. The certificate of compliance shall also be made available to the Building Official upon request. 
Section 2901.1; amend to read as follows: 
[P] 2901.1 Scope. {existing text to remain} The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of Chapter 4 of the International Plumbing Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Building Official shall determine which provision applies. 
Section 2902.1; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
In other than E Occupancies, the minimum number of fixtures in Table 2902.1 may be lowered, if requested in writing, by the applicant stating reasons for a reduced number and approved by the Building Official. 
Table 2902.1; add footnote f to read as follows: 
f.  Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments. 
Section 2902.1.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
2902.1.3 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in this Chapter, all food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section. 
Section 2902.1.3.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
2902.1.3.1 Hand washing lavatory. At least one hand washing lavatory shall be provided for use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing areas. Additional hand washing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by employees. 
Section 2902.1.3.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
2902.1.3.2 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service sink or one floor sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tool and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the City of Lewisville's Health Department. 
Section 3002.1; add exceptions to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Elevators wholly located within atriums complying with Section 404 shall not require hoistway enclosure protection. 
2.  Elevators in open or enclosed parking garages that serve only the parking garage, and complying with Sections 406.5 and 406.6, respectively, shall not require hoistway enclosure protection. 
Section 3005.4; amend to read as follows: 
Section 3005.4 Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. Elevator machine rooms, control rooms, control spaces and machinery spaces shall be enclosed with fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711, or both. {Remainder unchanged} 
Section 3005.7; add this new section to read as follows: 
3005.7 Fire Protection in Machine rooms, control rooms, machinery spaces and control spaces. 
Section 3005.7.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
3005.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. The building shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1, except as otherwise permitted by Section 903.3.1.1.1 and as prohibited by Section 3005.7.2.1. 
Section 3005.7.2.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
3005.7.2.1 Prohibited locations. Automatic sprinklers shall not be installed in machine rooms, elevator machinery spaces, control rooms, control spaces and elevator hoist-ways. 
Section 3005.7.2.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
3005.7.2.2 Sprinkler system monitoring. The sprinkler system shall have a sprinkler control valve supervisory switch and water-flow initiating device provided for each floor that is monitored by the building's fire alarm system. 
Section 3005.7.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
3005.7.3 Water protection. An approved method to prevent water from infiltrating into the hoistway enclosure from the operation of the automatic sprinkler system outside the elevator lobby shall be provided. 
Section 3005.7.4; add this new section to read as follows: 
3005.7.4 Shunt trip. Means for elevator shutdown in accordance with Section 3005.5 shall not be installed. 
Section 3005.8; add this new section to read as follows: 
3005.8 Storage. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room, control room, machinery spaces and or control spaces. Provide approved signage at each entry to the above listed locations stating: "No Storage Allowed." 
Section 3006.2; amend Section 5 to read as follows: 
5.  The building is a high rise and the elevator hoistway is more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) in height. The height of the hoistway shall be measured from the lowest floor at or above grade to the highest floors served by the hoistway. 
Section 3109.1; amend to read as follows: 
3109.1 General. Swimming pools shall comply with the requirements of sections 3109.2 through 3109.5 and other applicable sections of this code and complying with applicable state laws. 
Section E3601.6.2; amend to read as follows: 
Section E3601.6.2 - Service Disconnect Location. 
The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location outside the building nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors. {Remainder of section unchanged} 
Chapter 44 - Referenced Standards; add 
ASTM - F 537 -01 - Standard Specification for Design, Fabrication, and Installation of Fences Constructed of Wood and Related Materials. 
(Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , § 3, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4098-08-2014 , § 1, 8-4-14; Ord. No. 4223-11-2015 , §§ 1, 2, 11-2-15; Ord. No. 4270-05-2016 , § 2, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-29. - Energy conservation code—Adopted. 
The 2015 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code and portions of the International Residential Code published by the International Code Council, Inc., amendments and such other addendum as adopted and published by the International Code Council are hereby adopted as the energy conservation code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is on file in the office of the director of building inspection division of the neighborhood services department. 
(Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , § 4, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4270-05-2016 , § 4, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-30. - Energy conservation code—Amendments. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Energy Conservation Code 2015 Edition and the International Residential Code 2015 Edition. It is recognized that the city is located in Climate Zone 3 of the IECC. 
Section C101.1 and R101.1; amend to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. This code shall be known as the Energy Conservation Code of the City of Lewisville, and shall be cited as such. It is referred to herein as "this code." 
Section C102.1.2; add new section to read as follows: 
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. 
Section R102.1.2; add new section to read as follows: 
R102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in Sections R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively. 
Section C109.1 and R109.1; amend to read as follows: 
109.1 Means of Appeal. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals. 
Sections C202 and R202; add the following definition: 
PROJECTION FACTOR. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device. 
Section R202; add the following definition: 
DYNAMIC GLAZING. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change it performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT). 
Section R402.3.2; amend to add, following the exception, language and a table to read as follows: 
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave, or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduced by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2, SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections. 
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections a 
Projection 
Factor 	SHGC Multiplier 
(all Other Orientation) 	SHGC Multiplier 
(North Oriented) 
0 - 0.10 	1.00 	1.00 
>0.10 - 0.20 	0.91 	0.95 
>0.20 - 0.30 	0.82 	0.91 
>0.30 - 0.40 	0.74 	0.87 
>0.40 - 0.50 	0.67 	0.84 
>0.50 - 0.60 	0.61 	0.81 
>0.60 - 0.70 	0.56 	0.78 
>0.70 - 0.80 	0.51 	0.76 
>0.80 - 0.90 	0.47 	0.75 
>0.90 - 1.00 	0.44 	0.73 
 
a  North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north. 
Section R402.4.1.2; amend to add a last paragraph to read as follows: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
Section R403.3.3; amend to add a last paragraph to read as follows: 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform duct testing leakage testing certified by national or state organizations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
Section C402.2.7/R402.2; amend to add Sections C402.2.9 and R402.2.14 to read as follows: 
C402.2.7/R402.2.14 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent material approved by the building official. 
Section R405.6.2; amend to add the following sentence to the end of paragraph: 
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate TM , Energy Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official. 
Table R406.4 MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX; amend to read as follows: 
TABLE R406.41 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	65 
 
1   This table is effective until August 31, 2019. 
TABLE R406.42 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	63 
 
2  The table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022. 
TABLE R406.43 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	59 
 
3  This table is effective on or after September 1, 2022. 
(Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , § 5, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4270-05-2016 , § 5, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-31. - Residential code—Adopted. 
The 2015 edition of the International Residential Code of the International Code Council and its appendices A, B, C, D, E, G, J, K, M, O, P, T, and U published by the International Code Council, Inc., amendments and such other addendum as adopted and published by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted as the residential code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is on file in the office of the director of building inspection division of the neighborhood services department. 
(Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , § 6, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4270-05-2016 , § 6, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-32. - Residential code—Amendments. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Residential Code 2015 Edition and its appendices A, B, C, D, E, G, J, K, M, O, P, T, and U. 
Section R101.1; amend to read as follows: 
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Lewisville, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
Section R102.4; amend to read as follows: 
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards listed in this section and its subsections and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each reference and as further regulated in Sections R102.4.1, R102.4.2, and R102.4.3. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer's instructions shall apply. 
  R102.4.1 Conflicts. Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply, unless otherwise specified. 
  R102.4.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard, unless otherwise specified. 
  R102.4.3 Green Built Texas. All new one- and two-family dwellings, including townhouses, must follow the requirements of version 3.0 of the Green Built Texas protocol, a copy of which is on file in the office of the director of building inspection division of the neighborhood services department. When conflicts occur between the provisions of the Green Built Texas protocol and the provisions of this code or any other provisions of the City of Lewisville's Residential Code or Energy Conservation Code, the more stringent requirements shall apply. 
Section R103.1; amend to read as follows: 
R103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Neighborhood Services is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
Section R104.10.1; delete. 
Section R105.3.1.1; delete. 
Section R106.1.4; delete. 
Section R110 (R110.1 through R110.5); delete. 
Section R112.1; amend to read as follows: 
R112.1 Means of Appeal. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals. 
Section R112.3; delete. 
Section R113.2; add exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Citations for violations of this code may be issued without requiring the issuance of a notice. 
Section R113.3; amend to read as follows: 
R113.3 Prosecution of violation. If a notice of violation is issued and is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. 
Section R113.4; amend to read as follows: 
R113.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, installs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section R202; amend definition of "Townhouse" to read as follows: 
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. 
Table R301.2 (1); fill in as follows: 
GROUND SNOW LOAD 	WIND DESIGN 	SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORYf 	SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM 	WINTER DESIGN
TEMPe 	ICE BARRIER
UNDERLAYMENT h 	FLOOD HAZARDSg 	AIR FREEZING INDEXi 	MEAN ANNUAL TEMPj 
	SPEED d (MPH) 	Topographic 
Effects k 	Special Wind 
Region L 	Windborne 
Debris Zone m 		Weathering a 	Frost Line Depth b 	Termite c 					
5 lb/ft 	115 (3 sec- gust)/76 fastest mile 	No 	No 	No 	A 	Moderate 	6" 	Very Heavy 	22° F 	No 	Local Code 	150 	64.9° F 
 
{no change to footnotes} 
Section R302.1; add this new exception #6 to read as follows: 
6.  Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within adopted ordinances. 
Section R302.3; add this new exception #3 to read as follows: 
3.  Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated as required for townhouses. 
Section R302.5.1; amend to read as follows: 
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. 
Section R303.3, Exception; amend to read as follows: 
Exception: {existing text unchanged} Exhaust air from the space shall be exhaust out to the outdoors unless the space contains only a water closet, a lavatory, or water closet and a lavatory may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
Section R313; delete. 
Section R315.2.2; amend to read as follows: 
Exception: 
2.  Installation, alteration or repairs of electrical powered plumbing or mechanical systems are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
Section R322; delete. 
Section R326.1; amend to read as follows: 
R326.1 General. The design and construction of pools and spas shall comply with the 2015 IRC Appendix Q (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs). 
Section R401.2; add a new paragraph following the existing paragraph to read as follows: 
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer. 
Section R602.6.1; amend to read as follows: 
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight 10d (0.148 inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1 ½ inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1. {exception remains unchanged} 
Figure R602.6.1; delete the figure and insert the following figure: 
 
Section R703.8.4.1; add a second paragraph after the exception to read as follows: 
In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to studs as follows: 
1.  When studs are 16 in (407 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 in (737 mm) vertically starting approximately 12 in (381 mm) from the foundation; or 
2.  When studs are 24 in (610 mm) o.c., stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 in (483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 in (254 mm) from the foundation. 
Section R902.1; Amend and add exception #5 to read as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. Class A, B, or C roofing shall be installed. Class A, B and C roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E108. 
Exceptions: 
1.  {text unchanged} 
2.  {text unchanged} 
3.  {text unchanged} 
4.  {text unchanged} 
5.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed (area defined by jurisdiction). 
Chapter 11 [RE] - Energy Efficiency is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
CHAPTER 11 [RE]
ENERGY EFFICIENCY RESIDENTIAL PROVISIONS 
N1101.1 Scope. This chapter regulates the energy efficiency for the design and construction of buildings regulated by this code. 
N1101.2 Compliance. Compliance shall be demonstrated by meeting the requirements of the residential provisions of 2015 International Energy Conservation Code. 
Section M1305.1.3; amend to read as follows: 
M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided . . . {bulk of paragraph unchanged} . . . sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance can be serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is unobstructed&hellip{remaining text unchanged} 
Section M1411.3; amend to read as follows: 
M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means of a direct or indirect drain. {remaining text unchanged} 
Section M1411.3.1, Item 3; amend to read as follows: 
3.  An auxiliary drain pan&hellip {bulk of text unchanged}&hellip with Item 1 of this section. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
Section M1411.3.1, Item 4; amend to read as follows: 
4.  A water level detection device&hellip {bulk of text unchanged}&hellip overflow rim of such pan. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
Section M1411.3.1.1; amend to read as follows: 
M1411.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices. On down-flow units &hellip{bulk of text unchanged}&hellip installed in the drain line. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
M1503.4; add exception and amend to read as follows: 
M1503.4 Makeup air required. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 400 cubic feet per minute (0.19 m3/s) shall be provided with makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 400 cubic feet per minute. Such makeup air systems shall be equipped with a means of closure and shall be automatically controlled to start and operate simultaneously with the exhaust system. 
Exception: Where all appliances in the house are of sealed combustion, power-vent, unvented, or electric, the exhaust hood system shall be permitted to exhaust up to 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) without providing makeup air. Exhaust hood systems capable of exhausting in excess of 600 cubic feet per minute (0.28 m3/s) shall be provided with a makeup air at a rate approximately equal to the difference between the exhaust air rate and 600 cubic feet per minute. 
Section M2005.2; amend to read as follows: 
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bedroom or bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required. 
Section G2408.3 (305.5); delete. 
Section G2415.2.1 (404.2.1); add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING: 1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure - Do Not Remove" 
Section G2415.2.2 (404.2.2); add an exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EDH). 
Section G2415.12 (404.12); amend to read as follows: 
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade. 
Section G2417.1 (406.1); amend to read as follows: 
G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the building official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
Section G2417.4; amend to read as follows: 
G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
Section G2417.4.1; amend to read as follows: 
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing 
Section G2417.4.2; amend to read as follows: 
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
Section G2420.1.4; add this new section to read as follows: 
G2420.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1); add text to read as follows: 
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve &hellip{bulk of paragraph unchanged}&hellip in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox. 
Section G2421.1 (410.1); add exception and amend to read as follows: 
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be &hellip {bulk of paragraph unchanged}&hellip approved for outdoor installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section M1305. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3); delete Exception 1 and Exception 4. 
Section G2445.2 (621.2); add Exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Building Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas Code Section 108.7 of the Fuel Gas Code. 
Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1); amend to read as follows: 
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code. 
Section P2801.6.1; amend to read as follows: 
Section P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 11/2 inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than 3/4 inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table 605.4. Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
Section P2801.7; add Exception to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  Electric Water Heater. 
Section P2804.6.1; amend to read as follows: 
Section P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacturers installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. 
{remainder unchanged} 
Section P2902.5.3; amend to read as follows: 
P2902.5.3 Lawn irrigation systems. The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure-type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
Section P3003.9.2; delete exception. 
Section P3111; delete. 
Section P3112.2; delete and replace with the following: 
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drainboard height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level and a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drain-board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 
Section E3601.6.2; change to read as follows: 
Section E3601.6.2 Service Disconnect Location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location outside the building nearest the point of entrance of the service conductors. {Remainder of section unchanged} 
Chapter 44 Referenced Standards; add 
ASTM - F 537-01 - Standard Specification for Design, Fabrication, and Installation of Fences Constructed of Wood and Related Materials" 
Appendix Q, currently reserved; replace with text to read as follows: 
Appendix Q. Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs. 
SECTION AQ101 GENERAL 
AQ101.1 General. 
The provisions of this appendix shall control the design and construction of swimming pools, spas and hot tubs installed in or on the lot of a one- or two-family dwelling. 
AQ101.2 Pools in flood hazard areas. 
Pools that are located in flood hazard areas established by Table R301.2(1), including above-ground pools, on-ground pools and in-ground pools that involve placement of fill, shall comply with Sections AQ101.2.1 or AQ101.2.2. 
Exception: Pools located in riverine flood hazard areas which are outside of designated floodways. 
AQ101.2.1 Pools located in designated floodways 
Where pools are located in designated floodways, documentation shall be submitted to the building official which demonstrates that the construction of the pool will not increase the design flood elevation at any point within the jurisdiction. 
AQ101.2.2 Pools located where floodways have not been designated. 
Where pools are located where design flood elevations are specified but floodways have not been designated, the applicant shall provide a floodway analysis that demonstrates that the proposed pool will not increase the design flood elevation more than 1 foot (305 mm) at any point within the jurisdiction. 
SECTION AQ102 DEFINITIONS 
AQ102.1 General. 
For the purposes of these requirements, the terms used shall be defined as follows and as set forth in Chapter 2. 
ABOVE-GROUND/ON-GROUND POOL. See "Swimming pool." 
BARRIER. A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool. 
HOT TUB. See "Swimming pool." 
IN-GROUND POOL. See "Swimming pool." 
RESIDENTIAL. That which is situated on the premises of a detached one- or two-family dwelling, or a one-family townhouse not more than three stories in height. 
SPA, NONPORTABLE. See "Swimming pool." 
SPA, PORTABLE. A nonpermanent structure intended for recreational bathing, in which all controls, water-heating and water-circulating equipment are an integral part of the product. 
SWIMMING POOL. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water more than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. 
SWIMMING POOL, INDOOR. A swimming pool which is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all four sides by the walls of the enclosing structure. 
SWIMMING POOL, OUTDOOR. Any swimming pool which is not an indoor pool. 
SECTION AQ103 SWIMMING POOLS 
AQ103.1 In-ground pools. 
In-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-5. 
AQ103.2 Above-ground and on-ground pools. 
Above-ground and on-ground pools shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-4. 
AQ103.3 Pools in flood hazard areas. 
In flood hazard areas established by Table R301.2(1), pools in coastal high-hazard areas shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ASCE 24. 
SECTION AQ104 SPAS AND HOT TUBS 
AQ104.1 Permanently installed spas and hot tubs. 
Permanently installed spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-3. 
AQ104.2 Portable spas and hot tubs. 
Portable spas and hot tubs shall be designed and constructed in compliance with ANSI/NSPI-6. 
SECTION AQ105 BARRIER REQUIREMENTS 
AQ105.1 Application. 
The provisions of this appendix shall control the design of barriers for residential swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. These design controls are intended to provide protection against potential drownings and near-drownings by restricting access to swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
AQ105.2 Outdoor swimming pool. An outdoor swimming pool, including an in-ground, above-ground or on-ground pool, hot tub or spa shall be surrounded by a barrier which shall comply with the following: 
1.  The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches (1,219mm) above grade measured on the side of the barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51mm) measured on the side of the barrier, which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches (102mm). 
2.  Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102mm) sphere. 
3.  Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
4.  Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches (1,143mm), the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44mm) in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44mm) in width. 
5.  Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches (1,143mm) or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches (102mm). Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches (44mm) in width. 
6.  Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2.25-inch (57mm) square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 1.75 inches (44mm). 
7.  Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be more than 1.75 inches (44mm). 
8.  Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Section AQ105.2, Items 1 through 7, and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following: 
8.1.  The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches (76mm) below the top of the gate, and 
8.2.  The gate and barrier shall have not opening greater than 0.5 inch (13mm) within 18 inches (457mm) of the release mechanism. 
9.  Where a wall of a dwelling serves a part of the barrier one of the following conditions shall be met: 
9.1.  The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM F1346; or 
9.2.  Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and/or its screen, if present, are opened. The alarm shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. The deactivation switch(es) shall be located at least 54 inches (1,372mm) above the threshold of the door; or 
9.3.  Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with self-latching devices, which are approved by the governing body, shall be acceptable as long as the degree of protection afforded is not less than the protection afforded by Items 9.1 or 9.2 described above. 
10.  Where an above-ground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then: 
10.1.  The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or 
10.2.  The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of Section AQ105.2, Items 1 through 9. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch diameter (102mm) sphere. 
AQ105.3 Indoor swimming pool. Walls surrounding an indoor swimming pool shall comply with Section AQ105.2, Item 9. 
AQ105.4 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb them. 
AQ105.5 Barrier exceptions. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F 1346, as listed in Section AQ107, shall be exempt from the provisions of this appendix. 
SECTION AQ106 ENTRAPMENT PROTECTION FOR SWIMMING POOL AND SPA SUCTION OUTLETS 
AQ106.1 General. 
Suction outlets shall be designed and installed in accordance with ANSI/APSP-7. 
SECTION AQ107 ABBREVIATIONS 
AQ107.1 General. 
ANSI—American National Standards Institute 
11 West 42nd Street 
New York, NY 10036 
APSP—Association of Pool and Spa Professionals 
NSPI—National Spa and Pool Institute 
2111 Eisenhower Avenue 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
ASCE—American Society of Civil Engineers 
1801 Alexander Bell Drive 
Reston, VA 98411-0700 
ASTM—ASTM International 
100 Barr Harbor Drive 
West Conshohocken, PA 19428 
UL—Underwriters Laboratories, Inc. 
333 Pfingsten Road 
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096 
SECTION AQ108 REFERENCED STANDARDS 
AQ108.1 General. 
ANSI/NSP 
ANSI/NSPI- 
3—99 	Standard for Permanently Installed 
Residential Spas 	AQ104.1 
ANSI/NSPI- 
4—99 	Standard for Above-ground/On-ground 
Residential Swimming Pools 	AQ103.2 
 
(Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , § 7, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4270-05-2016 , § 7, 5-2-16; 0113-19-ORD , §§ 1, 2, 3-18-19)  
Sec. 4-33. - Fees. 
Building permit fees, inspection fees, and plan checking fees are set out in section 2-201. 
(Ord. No. 4037-12-2013 , § 8, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 4-34. - Existing building code—Adopted. 
The 2015 edition of the International Existing Building Code and its Appendices A, B, and C, published by the International Code Council, Inc., amendments and such other addendum as adopted and published by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted as the existing building code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is on file in the office of the director of building inspection division of the neighborhood services department. 
(Ord. No. 4268-05-2016 , § 1, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-35. - Same—Amendments. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Existing Building Code 2015 Edition and its Appendices A, B, and C. 
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These Regulations shall be known as the Existing Building Code of the City of Lewisville, hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
Section 103; amend title to read as follows: 
SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES 
Section 103.1; amend to read as follows: 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Neighborhood Services is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official. 
Section 104.3; amend to read as follows: 
104.3 Notices and orders. The code official is authorized to issue necessary notices and orders to ensure compliance with this code. 
Section 108.2; amend to read as follows: 
108.2 Schedule of permit fees. On buildings, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required in accordance with Section 2-201 of the City of Lewisville Code of Ordinances. 
Section 112.1; amend to read as follows: 
112.1. Means of Appeal. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals. 
Sections 112.2 - 112.3; delete. 
Section 113.2; add exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Citations for violations of this code may be issued without requiring the issuance of a notice. 
Section 113.3; amend to read as follows: 
Prosecution of violation. If a notice of violation is issued and is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the code official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. 
Section 113.4; amend to read as follows: 
113.4 Violation penalties. Persons who violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who repairs or alters or changes the occupancy of a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4268-05-2016 , § 2, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-36. - Certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  In addition to the circumstances listed in the adopted building code which require certificates of occupancy, certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
(2)  Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification. 
(3)  Change in tenant name or ownership regardless of a change in use or occupancy. 
No such occupancy, use, change of use or change of tenant name or ownership shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefore shall have been issued by the building official. 
(b)  Procedure for new or altered buildings. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Said certificate shall be issued within three days after a written request for the same has been made to said building official or his agent after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Contents. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of law. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building official or his agent and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. 
(d)  Temporary certificate. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official for a period not exceeding six months, during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary certificate shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owners or of the city relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this chapter. 
(e)  Certificate for nonconforming use. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses or buildings created by adoption of this chapter. Application for such certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the building official by the owner or lessee of the building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one year of the effective date of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the building official to issue a certificate of occupancy for a lawful nonconforming use, but failure to apply for such certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be evidence that said nonconforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of this chapter. 
( 0059-18-ORD , § II, 9-10-18)  
Secs. 4-37—4-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention standards, § 5-91 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-46. - Electrical code—Adopted. 
The 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association and all of its annexes are hereby adopted as the electrical code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is filed in the office of the building inspections division of the community development department. 
(Code 1990, § 3-2-1; Ord. No. 1675-2-92, § I, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2011-3-95, § I, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 2755-12-2001, § I, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3267-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 4041-12-2013 , § 1, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4272-05-2016 , § 1, 5-2-16; Ord. No. 4286-06-2016 , § 1, 6-6-16) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5.  
Sec. 4-47. - Same—Amendments. 
The following revisions to the National Electrical Code adopted in section 4-46 are and shall become a part of the electrical code for the city: 
Section 90.4.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
90.4.1 General. The City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals when the need to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of installation exist. They shall also provide reasonable interpretations of this code in cases of variance requests or conflicts. 
Section 90.4.2; add these new sections to read as follows: 
90.4.2 Fees. 
(A)  Permit Fees. Fees shall be assessed as set forth in the City Code, Chapter 2, Section 2-201. 
(B)  Plan Review Fees. Fees shall be assessed as set forth in the City Code, Chapter 2, Section 2-201. 
(C)  Investigation Fee. Fees shall be assessed as set forth in the City Code, Chapter 2, Section 2-201. 
(D)  Re-inspections. Fees shall be assessed as set forth in the City Code, Chapter 2, Section 2-201. 
Section 230.2(A); add a seventh special condition as follows: 
(7)  In supplying electrical service to multifamily dwellings, two or more laterals or service drops shall be permitted to a building when both of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The building has six or more individual gang meters and all meters are grouped at the same location. 
b.  Each lateral or service drop originates from the same point of service. 
Section 230.71(A) amend to read and add an exception as follows: 
(A)  General. The service disconnecting means for each service permitted by section 230.2, or for each set of service-entrance conductors permitted by section 230.40, exception nos. 1 or 3, shall consist of not more than six switches or six circuit breakers mounted in a single enclosure, in a group of separate enclosures, or in or on a switchboard. There shall be no more than six disconnects per service grouped in any one location. {Remainder of section unchanged.} 
Exception: Multi-occupant buildings. Individual service disconnecting means is limited to six for each occupant. The number of individual disconnects at one location may exceed six. 
Section 300.1(A); add new language to read as follows: 
300.1 (A) General requirements. All electrical wiring regulated by this code shall be copper except that conductors for service entrances and major feeders (250 mcm through and including 500 mcm) may be aluminum. 
(Code 1990, § 3-2-2; Ord. No. 1675-2-92, § II, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2755-12-2001, § II, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3267-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 4041-12-2013 , § 2, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4272-05-2016 , § 2, 5-2-16; Ord. No. 4286-06-2016 , § 2, 6-6-16)  
Sec. 4-48. - Same—Additions. 
The following additions to the National Electrical Code adopted in section 4-46 are and shall become a part of the Electrical Code for the City. 
(a)  Licenses: 
(1)  General. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use or maintain an electrical system or equipment who is not the holder of an unexpired, unrevoked license. 
(2)  License grades: 
a.  State Master Electrician License. Shall entitle the holder to contract for, and engage in, the business of electrical wiring of any nature. 
b.  State Journeyman Electrician License. Shall entitle the holder thereof to perform any type of electrical work, except that all work must be supervised by a State Master Electrician. 
Exception: Homeowners performing electrical work on their private residences (rental property excluded) shall not be required to hold an electrical license. An apprentice electrician may perform work with a state license when such work is prescribed and supervised by the holder of a state master electrician's license. All work shall comply with the provisions of this division and the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 1675-2-92, § III, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2755-12-2001, § III, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3267-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 4041-12-2013 , § 3, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4272-05-2016 , § 3, 5-2-16; Ord. No. 4286-06-2016 , § 3, 6-6-16)  
Secs. 4-49—4-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING STANDARDS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Swimming pools, § 4-471 et seq.; water service requirements in land development regulations, § 6-626 et seq.; utilities, ch. 16; water and sewer extensions, § 16-201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-111. - Plumbing code—Adopted. 
The 2012 Edition of the International Plumbing Code of the International Code Council and its Appendices C, D, E, and F are hereby adopted as the plumbing code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is filed in the office of the building inspection division of the community development department. 
(Code 1990, § 3-3-1; Ord. No. 1672-2-92, § I, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2009-3-95, § I, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 2758-12-2001, § I, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3264-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3521-12-2007, § I, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 4038-12-2013 , § 1, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 4-112. - Same—Amendments. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Plumbing Code 2012 Edition. 
Table of Contents, Chapter 7, Section 714; change to read as follows: 
714  Engineered Drainage Design ..... 67 
Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 13 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 106.6.2; change to read as follows: 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by resolution or ordinance of the governing body of the jurisdiction. 
Section 106.6.3; change to read as follows: 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refund of fees. {Delete balance of section} 
Section 109; Delete entire section and insert the following: 
SECTION 109
MEANS OF APPEAL 
109.1 Application for appeal. An applicant may appeal the code official's denial, disapproval, revocation, or other refusal to grant the applicant's submitted permit application. Such an appeal must be filed in writing with the City Manager within thirty (30) days after the date of the denial, disapproval, refusal, and/or revocation. The appeal must also state how the code official allegedly misconstrued or wrongly interpreted the city's plumbing code. After receiving an appeal in accordance with this section, the City Manager shall submit the appeal to the City Council for their consideration. For all purposes, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals, and the City Council's decision on the appeal shall be final decision. [Delete the balance of Section]. 
Section 305.4.1; change to read as follows: 
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
Section 305.7; change to read as follows: 
305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which they would be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner. 
Section 314.2.1; change to read as follows: 
314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. ... {text unchanged} ... Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance. 
Section 314.2.2; change to read as follows: 
314.2.2 Drain pipe materials and sizes. Components of the condensate disposal system shall be cast iron, galvanized steel, copper, cross-linked polyethylene, polyethylene, ABS, CPVC, or schedule 80 PVC pipe or tubing when exposed to ultra violet light. All components shall be selected for the pressure, temperature and exposure rating of the installation. Joints and connections shall be made in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 7 relative to the material type. Condensate waste and drain line size shall not be less than ¾-inch (19 mm) internal diameter and shall not decrease in size from the drain pan connection to the place of condensate disposal. Where the drain pipes from more than one unit are manifolded together for condensate drainage, the pipe or tubing shall be sized in accordance with Table 314.2.2. All horizontal sections of drain piping shall be installed in uniform alignment at a uniform slope. 
Section 401.1; change to read as follows: 
401.1 Scope. This chapter shall govern the materials, design and installation of plumbing fixtures, faucets and fixture fittings in accordance with the type of occupancy, and shall provide for the minimum number of fixtures for various types of occupancies. The provisions of this Chapter coordinate with the provisions of the Building Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Code Official shall determine which provision applies. 
Section 403.1; change to read as follows: 
403.1 Minimum number of fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided for the type of occupancy and in the minimum number as follows: 
1.  Assembly Occupancies: At least one drinking fountain shall be provided at each floor level in an approved location. 
2.  Groups A, B, F, H, I, M and S Occupancies: Buildings or portions thereof where persons are employed shall be provided with at least one water closet for each sex except as provided for in Section 403.2. 
3.  Group E Occupancies: Shall be provided with fixtures as shown in Table 403.1. 
4.  Group R Occupancies: Shall be provided with fixtures as shown in Table 403.1. 
It is recommended, but not required, that the minimum number of fixtures provided also comply with the number shown in Table 403.1. Types of occupancies not shown in Table 403.1 shall be considered individually by the code official. The number of occupants shall be determined by the International Building Code. Occupancy classification shall be determined in accordance with the International Building Code. 
Section 405.6; delete. 
Section 409.2; change to read as follows: 
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against backflow by an air gap or backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. 
Section 412.4; change title and section to read as follows: 
412.4 Required location. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas. 
1.  In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter. 
2.  Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may accept floor sinks. 
3.  Public restrooms. 
Section 419.3; change to read as follows: 
419.3 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal lip and 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be waterproofed with a smooth, readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material. 
Section 502.6; add this new section to read as follows: 
502.6 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
Section 502.6.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
502.6.1 Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with Section 502.1. 
Section 504.6; change to read as follows: 
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T & P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufactures installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. Where discharging to the outdoors in areas subject to freezing, discharge piping shall be first piped to an indirect waste receptor through an air gap located in a conditioned area. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
10.  Not terminate less than 6 inches or more than 24 inches (152 mm) above grade nor more than 6 inches above the waste receptor. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1. 
Section 604.4; add this new section to read as follows: 
604.4.1 State maximum flow rate. Where the State mandated maximum flow rate is more restrictive than those of this section, the State flow rate shall take precedence. 
Section 604.8.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
604.8.3 Thermal expansion control. An expansion tank or approved device shall be installed for the water heater with the addition of a pressure reducing valve or regulator creating a closed system. 
Section 606.1; delete items #4 and #5. 
Section 606.2; delete item #2 
Section 608.16.1; change to read as follows: 
608.16.1 Beverage dispensers. The water supply connection to beverage dispensers shall be protected against backflow by a backflow preventer conforming to ASSE 1022 (of 100% stainless steel) or by an air gap. The portion of the backflow preventer device downstream from the second check valve and the piping downstream therefrom shall not be affected by carbon dioxide gas. 
Section 608.16.5 Connections to Lawn Irrigation Systems; change to read as follows: 
608.16.5 Connections to Lawn Irrigation Systems 
Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this section, have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(1)  Air gap—A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. 
(2)  Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker—An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker Back-Siphonage Prevention Assembly. 
(3)  Backflow prevention—The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of nonpotable water from an irrigation system into the potable water source. 
(4)  Backflow prevention assembly—Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition. 
(5)  Completion of irrigation system installation—When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly. 
(6)  Consulting—The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems. 
(7)  Cross-connection—An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process. 
(8)  Design—The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan. 
(9)  Design pressure—The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source. 
(10)  Double Check Valve—An assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly. 
(11)  Emission device—Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters. 
(12)  Employed—Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, §3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks. 
(13)  Head-to-head spacing—The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head. 
(14)  Health hazard—A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
(15)  Hydraulics—The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system. 
(16)  Inspector—A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor. 
(17)  Installer—A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who is licensed according to Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
(18)  Irrigation inspector—A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
(19)  Irrigation plan—A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system. 
(20)  Irrigation services—Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply. 
(21)  Irrigation system—An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Texas Agricultural Code, § 251.002. 
(22)  Irrigation technician—A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
(23)  Irrigation zone—A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control. 
(24)  Irrigator—A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30. 
(25)  Irrigator-in-Charge—The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system. 
(26)  Landscape irrigation—The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf. 
(27)  License—An occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30. 
(28)  Mainline—A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves. 
(29)  Maintenance checklist—A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed. 
(30)  Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service—Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere. 
(31)  Master valve—A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline. 
(32)  Matched precipitation rate—The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate. 
(33)  New installation—An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist. 
(34)  Pass-through contract—A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system. 
(35)  Potable water—Water that is suitable for human consumption. 
(36)  Pressure Vacuum Breaker—An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a Pressure Vacuum Breaker Back- siphonage Prevention Assembly. 
(37)  Reclaimed water—Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation. 
(38)  Records of landscape irrigation activities—The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system. 
(39)  Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly—An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve. 
(40)  Static water pressure—The pressure of water when it is not moving. 
(41)  Supervision—The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system. 
(42)  Water conservation—The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion. 
(43)  Zone flow—A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure. 
(44)  Zone valve—An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system. 
Valid License Required. Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) must hold a valid license, as defined by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 and required by Chapter 1903 of the Texas Occupations Code, or as defined by Chapter 365, Title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code and required by Chapter 1301 of the Texas Occupations Code. 
Exemptions. A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with Texas Occupations Code, Title 12, §1903.002(c)(1) if he is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the requirements of this ordinance and the standards contained in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain, moisture or freeze shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention and isolation valves. See Texas Occupations Code §1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing requirement. 
Permit Required. Any person installing an irrigation system within the city or its ETJ is required to obtain a permit from the city or it's ETJ. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Permits for the installation on an irrigation system within the city shall be obtained from the building official of the Building Inspections Division of the Community Development Department. Permits for the installation of an irrigation system within the City's ETJ shall be obtained from the Denton County Fresh Water District #1-A. 
Exemptions. 
(1)  An irrigation system that is that an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by Section 355.002, Health and Safety Code; or 
(2)  An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Section 251.002, Agriculture Code; or 
(3)  An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use. 
Backflow Prevention Methods and Devices. 
(a)  Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The city only permits the installation of double check valves for backflow prevention device and must be approved by University of Southern California for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory approval standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current published recommendations. 
(b)  If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation and test cocks are used for testing only. 
(c)  If a double check valve is installed below ground: 
(1)  Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested; 
(2)  Test cock plugs must be threaded, water-tight, and made of non-ferrous material; 
(3)  A y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve; 
(4)  There must be a clearance between any fill material and the bottom of the double check valve to allow space for testing and repair; and 
(5)  There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double check valve. 
(d)  If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved, properly installed backflow prevention method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is performed. 
(e)  If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly. 
(f)  The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester prior to being placed in service and the test results provided to the local water purveyor and the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the backflow prevention device 
Specific Conditions and Cross-Connection Control. 
(a)  Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap. 
(b)  Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap. 
(c)  Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
(d)  If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 285, then: 
(1)  all irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the On- Site Sewage Facilities system as required for a private water line in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 285.91(10); 
(2)  any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 344.50; and 
(2)  any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the On-Site Sewage Facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent the On-Site Sewage Facilities system from operating effectively. 
Water Conservation. All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation as defined in the Definitions section of this ordinance [section 608.16.5]. 
Irrigation Plan Design: Minimum Standards. 
(a)  An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not: 
(1)  Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system; 
(2)  Violate any requirements of this ordinance [section 608.16.5]; and 
(3)  Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan. 
(b)  The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan. 
(c)  All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing; 
(2)  All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered; 
(3)  A North arrow; 
(4)  A legend; 
(5)  The zone flow measurement for each zone; 
(6)  Location and type of each: 
(A)  Controller; and 
(B)  Sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze); 
(7)  Location, type, and size of each: 
(A)  Water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection; 
(B)  Backflow prevention device; 
(C)  Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays; 
(D)  Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves; 
(E)  Pressure regulation component; and 
(F)  Main line and lateral piping. 
(8)  The scale used; and 
(9)  The design pressure. 
Design and Installation: Minimum Requirements. 
(a)  No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component. 
(b)  Spacing. 
(1)  The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure. 
(2)  New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices in Landscapes that are less than 48 inches not including the impervious surfaces in either length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar. 
(3)  Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped area. 
(c)  Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads. 
(d)  Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
(e)  Irrigation Zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements. 
(f)  Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate. 
(g)  Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc. 
(h)  Master valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new installations. 
(i)  PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (Section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
(j)  Rain, moisture or freeze shut-off devices or other technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture, rainfall or freezing. Rain, moisture or freeze shut-off technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture, rainfall or freezing. As of January 1, 2010 all existing irrigation systems, except those systems for single- family properties, shall be retrofit with rain, moisture and freeze shut-off sensor devices. Existing single-family properties shall be exempt from the retrofit provision, except when repair/replacement provisions outlined above take place. 
(k)  Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention device. 
(l)  Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's published specifications for depth coverage of piping. 
(1)  If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues. 
(2)  If a utility, man-made structure, or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the six- inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. 
(3)  All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade. 
(m)  Wiring irrigation systems. 
(1)  Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground. 
(2)  Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation. 
(3)  Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer. 
(4)  Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six inches of select backfill. 
(n)  Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be non-potable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled "non potable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system. 
(o)  Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not onsite, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on-site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system. 
Completion of Irrigation System Installation. Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete four items: 
(1)  A final "walk through" with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of the system; 
(2)  The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited to: 
(A)  The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic; 
(B)  A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors; 
(C)  A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components; that require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and 
(D)  The statement, "This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time." 
(3)  A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed with waterproof ink. 
(4)  The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner or owner representative. 
Maintenance, Alteration, Repair, or Service of Irrigation Systems. 
(a)  The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system. 
(b)  All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill. 
(c)  Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (Section 316) or the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
(d)  When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present. 
Reclaimed Water. Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if: 
(a)  There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption; 
(b)  The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the irrigation system's owner; 
(c)  The irrigation system is installed using purple components; 
(d)  The domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, in accordance with Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 290.47(i) (relating to Appendices); 
(e)  A minimum of an eight inch by eight inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, "RECLAIMED WATER - DO NOT DRINK" and "AGUA DE RECUPERACIÓN - NO BEBER"; and 
(f)  Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the regulations of the city's water provider. 
Advertisement Requirements. 
(a)  All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI _______" in a contrasting color of block letters at least two inches high, on both sides of the vehicle. 
(b)  All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI _______." Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and estimates which displays an entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number. 
(c)  The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a legible sign and displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation records are kept. 
Contracts. 
(a)  All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone numbers, the date that each party signed the agreement, the total agreed price, and must contain the statement, "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www. tceq.state.tx.us." All contracts must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. 
(b)  All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation system(s) must include the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone number(s), and the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission On Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (MC-178), P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's web site is: www.tceq.state.tx.us." 
(c)  An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 344.30 (relating to License Required) shall hold an irrigator license issued under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations) unless the contract is a pass-through contract as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 344.1(36) (relating to Definitions). If a pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion of the contract can only be performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass-through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a copy of the warranty and all other documents required under this chapter. A pass-through contract must identify by name and license number the irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the irrigator for irrigation system warranty work. 
(d)  The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid. 
Warranties for Systems. 
(a)  On all installations of new irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative with a written warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the new installation of the irrigation system. The irrigator shall be responsible for adhering to terms of the warranty. If the irrigator's warranty is less than the manufacturer's warranty for the system components, then the irrigator shall provide the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative with applicable information regarding the manufacturer's warranty period. The warranty must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the warranty is part of an irrigator's contract, a separate warranty document is not required. 
(b)  An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's name, business address, and business telephone number(s), must contain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative confirming receipt of the warranty and must include the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us." 
(c)  On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a written document that identifies the materials furnished in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. If a warranty is provided, the irrigator shall abide by the terms. The warranty document must include the irrigator's name and business contact information. 
Duties and Responsibilities of City Irrigation Inspectors. A licensed irrigation inspector shall enforce the ordinance of the city, and shall be responsible for: 
(a)  Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed; 
(b)  Inspecting the irrigation system; 
(c)  Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this chapter; 
(d)  Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test results provided to the city; 
(e)  Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and 
(f)  Maintaining records according to this chapter. 
Items not covered by this ordinance [section 608.16.5]. Any item not covered by this ordinance [section 608.16.5] and required by law shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code, the Texas Water Code, Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and any other applicable state statute or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rule. 
Fees. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the city ordinance providing the permit, inspection and license fees which is set out in Section 2-201 of the City Code. The city will collect all applicable permit fees in accordance with the city fee ordinance. Fees for irrigation systems installed within the City's ETJ will be as set forth by the Denton County Fresh Water District #1A. 
Enforcement. 
(a)  The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter as may be required by governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of the ordinance [section 608.16.5] codified in this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding $2000.00. Each day that a provision of this chapter is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense under this chapter is a Class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $2000.00. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the ordinance [section 608.16.5] or to require specific conduct that is necessary for compliance with the ordinance [section 608.16.5]; and 
(2)  Other available relief. 
Section 608.17; change to read as follows: 
608.17 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with Sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8. 
Section 610.1, exception; add this new exception after the existing text of Section 610.1: 
Exception: With prior approval the Code Official may wave this requirement when deemed unnecessary. 
Section 7123.3.1; change to read as follows: 
712.3.3.1 Materials. Pipe and fitting materials shall be constructed of brass, copper, CPVC, ductile iron, stainless steel, galvanized iron, PE, or PVC. 
Section 712.5; add this new section to read as follows: 
712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any "public use" occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see Section 1113. 
Change Title of Section 714 to read as follows: 
SECTION 714
ENGINEERED DRAINAGE DESIGN 
Section 714.1; change to read as follows: 
714.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be permitted to be designed by approved design methods. 
Section 802.4; change to read as follows: 
802.4 Standpipes. Standpipes shall be individually trapped. Standpipes shall extend not less than 18 inches (457 mm) but not greater than 42 inches (1066 mm) above the trap weir. Access shall be provided to all standpipes and drains for rodding. No standpipe shall be installed below the ground. 
Section 903.1; change to read as follows: 
903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least six (6) inches (152 mm) above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof. 
Section 917; delete entire section. 
Section 1002.10; delete. 
Section 1003.3.1; delete last sentence. 
Section 1003.3.4.1; change to read as follows: 
Section 1003.3.4.1. Sizing of grease receptacles. 
(a)  Traps and Interceptors. Sizing of grease traps and interceptors shall be determined by: 
(1)  A grease trap is defined as a device designed to retain grease from one (1) to maximum of four (4) fixtures that does not exceed a grease retention capacity of 100 pounds or exceed a rate of flow per minute of 50 gallons. 
(2)  A grease interceptor is defined as a device designed and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious or undesirable matter such as grease, oil, sand, and grit from normal waste and permit normal sewage or liquid waste to discharge into the sewer system by gravity. 
(3)  Sizing of interceptors for industrial facilities shall be determined by flow and industrial process. 
(4)  All interceptors and traps shall provide required capacity and shall be at least a two chamber, watertight, vented system. The interceptors and traps shall be constructed of impervious material acceptable to the control authority. The interceptors and traps shall be capable of withstanding traffic loads. 
(5)  A four-inch inspection port with screw type lid shall be installed on the receptacle influent and effluent lines. 
(6)  The maximum required grease interceptor for food service establishments and single service kitchens is 5000 gallons. Larger units will be required if deemed necessary by the owner, design engineer, or controlling authority. 
(7)  Food Establishment sizing criteria. 
a.  Parameters. The parameters for sizing a grease interceptor are hydraulic loading and grease storage capacity, for one or more fixtures. 
b.  Sizing Formula. The size of the interceptor shall be determined by the following formula: 

Number of meals 
Per peak hour 1 	× 	Waste flow 
rate 2 	× 	retention 
time 3 	× 	storage 
factor 4 	× 	Interceptor size 
liquid capacity 
 
1.  Meals Served at Peak Hour 
2.  Waste Flow Rate 
a.  With dishwashing machine: 6 gallon (22.17 L) flow 
b.  Without dishwashing machine: 5 gallon (18.9 L) flow 
c.  Single service kitchen: 2 gallon (7.6 L) flow 
d.  Food waste disposer: 1 gallon (3.8 L) flow 
3.  Retention Times 
Commercial kitchen waste dishwasher: 2.5 hours 
Single service kitchen single serving: 1.5 hours 
4.  Storage Factors 
Fully equipped commercial kitchen 
8 hour operation: 1 
16 hour operation: 2 
24 hour operation: 3 
Single Service Kitchen: 1.5 
Food Establishment Grease Traps 
Total Number of 
Fixtures Connected 	Required Rate of Flow Per 
Minute, Gallons 	Grease Retention 
Capacity, Pounds 
1 	20 	40 
2 	25 	50 
3 	35 	70 
4 	50 	100 
 
Grease Traps (Metric) 
Total Number of 
Fixtures Connected 	Required Rate of Flow Per 
Minute, Liters 	Grease Retention 
Capacity, Kg 
1 	76 	18 
2 	95 	22 
3 	132 	31 
4 	189 	45 
 
(8)  Food service establishments that install a dish machine or garbage disposal must have a mechanical engineer seal of approval. 
(9)  Food Service Establishment that have more than four (4) plumbing fixtures requires an interceptor with a mechanical engineer seal. 
Table 1003.3.4.1; delete. 
Section 1003.3.4.2; delete. 
Section 1003.3.5; delete. 
Section 1003.4 changes to read as follows: 
Section 1003.4. Oil interceptors. 
(a)  Garages, lube centers, automotive service areas, etc., shall have an oil interceptor with a minimum total interior dimension of 30 cubic feet or 220 gallons. 
(b)  A four-inch inspection port with screw type lid shall be required on the effluent line of the interceptor. 
Section 1003.5 changes to read as follows: 
Section 1003.5. Sand/grit interceptors. 
Sand/grit interceptors shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Manual or hand-held car washes. 
a.  Each wash bay shall have a standard size car wash catch basin (minimum total interior dimension 30 cubic feet). 
b.  A maximum of three catch basins may drain into a single car wash sand interceptor. The size of sand interceptors required shall be a minimum of 1,100 gallons. 
(2)  Automatic car washes. 
a.  Each wash bay shall have a standard size catch basin (minimum total interior dimension of 30 cubic feet). 
b.  Each catch basin shall discharge into a separate car wash sand interceptor with a minimum capacity of 1,100 gallons. 
(3)  Automobile dealerships, make-ready shops, detail shops, etc., shall require sand interceptors as outlined for car washes. 
(4)  Other establishments with the potential of discharging sand or grit into the public sewer system shall be required to have a sand/grit interceptor, the size to be determined by the control authority. 
(5)  Catch basins must be cleaned as needed to function properly. 
(6)  Car wash run-off and drag-out shall be contained on-site and routed to a designated sanitary sewer. 
Discharge shall not be allowed into streets or other areas adjacent to the property. 
Section 1101.8; delete the exception and change to read as follows: 
1101.8 Cleanouts required. Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed in the storm drainage system and shall comply with the provisions of this code for sanitary drainage pipe cleanouts. 
Section 1106.1; change to read as follows: 
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour rainfall rate 
Section 1108.3; change to read as follows: 
1108.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1106 based on the rainfall rate for which the primary system is sized in Figure 1106.1 or on other rainfall rates determined from approved local weather data. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system. 
Section 1202.1; delete Exception 2. 
(Code 1990, § 3-3-2; Ord. No. 1672-2-92, § II, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2009-3-95, § II, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 2758-12-2001, § II, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3102-08-2004, § I, 8-2-04; Ord. No. 3264-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3521-12-2007, § I, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 3646-02-2009 , § 1, 2-2-09; Ord. No. 4038-12-2013 , § 2, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 4-113. - Fuel gas code—Adopted. 
The 2012 Edition of the International Fuel Gas Code of the International Code Council and its Appendices A, B, C, and D are hereby adopted as the fuel gas code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is filed in the office of the building inspection division of the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 2758-12-2001, § III, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3264-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3521-12-2007, § I, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 4038-12-2013 , § 3, 12-16-13)  
Sec. 4-114. - Same—Amendments. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Fuel and Gas Code 2012 Edition. 
Section 102.2, Exception; add this new exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with Section 621.2. 
Section 102.8; change to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 106.6.3; change to read as follows: 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refund of fees. {Delete balance of section} 
Section 304.10; change to read as follows: 
304.10 Louvers and grilles. The required size of openings for combustion, ventilation and dilution air shall be based on the net free area of each opening. Where the free area through a design of louver, grille or screen is known, it shall be used in calculating the size opening required to provide the free area specified. Where the design and free area of louvers and grilles are not known, it shall be assumed that wood louvers will have 25-percent free area and metal louvers and grilles will have 50-percent free area. Screens shall have a mesh size not smaller than ¼ inch (6.4 mm). Nonmotorized louvers and grilles shall be fixed in the open position. Motorized louvers shall be interlocked with the appliance so that they are proven to be in the full open position prior to main burner ignition and during main burner operation. Means shall be provided to prevent the main burner from igniting if the louvers fail to open during burner start- up and to shut down the main burner if the louvers close during operation. 
Section 304.11, Item 8; change #8 to read as follows: 
8.  Combustion air intake openings located on the exterior of a building shall have the lowest side of such openings located not less than 12 inches (305 mm) vertically from the adjoining ground level or the manufacturer's recommendation, whichever is more restrictive. 
Section 305.5; delete the section. 
Section 306.3; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided . . . {bulk of paragraph unchanged} . . . side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high for its entire length, the passageway shall be not greater than 50 feet (15 250 mm) in length. 
Section 306.5; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall . . . {bulk of section to read the same}. . . on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). ... {remainder of section to read the same}. 
Section 306.5.1; change to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on roofs having slopes greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
Section 306.7; add this new section to read as follows: 
306.7 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger when approved by the code official) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
306.7.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
306.7.1. Illumination and convenience outlet. Whenever the mezzanine or platform is not adequately lighted or access to a receptacle outlet is not obtainable from the main level, lighting and a receptacle outlet shall be provided in accordance with Section 306.3.1. 
Section 401.5; add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
Section 402.3, Exception; add a new exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EHD). 
Section 404.12; change to read as follows: 
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (458 mm) top of pipe below grade. 
Section 404.12.1; change to read as follows: 
404.12.1 Individual outside appliances. Individual lines to outside lights, grills or other appliances shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches (203 mm) top of pipe below finished grade, provided that such installation is approved and is installed in locations not susceptible to physical damage. 
Section 406.1; change to read as follows: 
406.1 General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the code official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
Section 406.4; change to read as follows: 
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a monometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
Section 406.4.1; change to read as follows: 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be no less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2 psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.6 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Section 406.4.2; change to read as follows: 
406.4.2 Test duration. Test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
Section 409.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
Section 410.1; add a second paragraph and exception to read as follows: 
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section 306. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
Section 621.2, Exception; add this new exception to read as follows: 
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Code Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in Section 108.7. 
Section 624.1.1; change to read as follows: 
624.1.1 Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 2758-12-2001, § IV, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3264-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3521-12-2007, § I, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 4038-12-2013 , § 4, 12-16-13)  
Secs. 4-115—4-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 4-131. - Mechanical code—Adopted. 
The 2015 Edition of the International Mechanical Code published by the International Code Council, Inc., amendments and such other addendum as adopted and published by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted as the mechanical code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is on file in the office of the director of building inspection division of the neighborhood services department. 
(Code 1990, § 3-12-1; Ord. No. 1673-2-92, § I, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2010-3-95, § I, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 2756-12-2001, § I, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3265-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3520-12-2007, § I, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 4039-12-2013 , § 1, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4271-05-2016 , § 1, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-132. - Same—Amendments. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Mechanical Code 2015 edition: 
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical Code of the City of Lewisville, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 102.8; amend to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced Codes and Standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the adopted amendments. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 103.1; amend to read as follows: 
103.1 General. The Department of Neighborhood Services is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. 
Section 106.5.2; amend to read as follows: 
106.5.2 Fee Schedule. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the City Code section 2-201 providing for permit, inspection, and license fees. 
Section 106.5.3; amend to read as follows: 
Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refund of fees. {Delete balance of section} 
Section 108.2; amend and add exception to read as follows: 
108.2 Notice of violation. The code official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, removal or demolition of mechanical work in violation of the provisions of this code, or in violation of a detail statement or the approved construction documents thereunder, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
Exception: Citations for violations of this code may be issued without requiring the issuance of a notice. 
Section 108.3; amend to read as follows: 
108.3 Prosecution of violation. If a notice of violation is issued and is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the code official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. 
Section 108.4; amend to read as follows: 
108.4 Violation penalties. Persons who violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by Section 1-15 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 108.5; amend to read as follows: 
108.5 Stop work orders. Whenever the code official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the code official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
Section 109.1; amend to read as follows: 
109.1 Means of Appeal. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals. 
Section 306.3; amend to read as follows: 
306.3 Appliances in Attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided . . . {bulk of paragraph unchanged} . . . side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the code official. As a minimum, for access to the attic space, provide one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
4.  Access Panel may be used in lieu of items 1, 2, and 3 with prior approval of the code official due to building conditions. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  {Exception 2 unchanged.} 
Section 306.5; amend to read as follows: 
306.5 Equipment and Appliances on Roofs or Elevated Structures. Where equipment requiring access or appliances are located on an elevated structure or the roof of a building such that personnel will have to climb higher than 16 feet (4,877 mm) above grade to access, a permanent interior or exterior means of access shall be provided. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2,438 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliances' level service space. Such access shall ... {bulk of section to read the same} ... on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). ... {Remaining language unchanged}. 
Section 306.5.1; amend to read as follows: 
306.5.1 Sloped Roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on a roof having a slope of 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (25-percent slope) or greater and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1,067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
Section 306.6; add this new section to read as follows: 
306.6 Water Heaters above ground or floor. When the mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2,438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A maximum 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and the water heater installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3,048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
Section 307.2.3; amend item 2 to read as follows: 
2.  A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment. Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance. 
Section 403.2.1; add an item 5 to read as follows: 
5.  Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory, or combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
Section 501.3; add a new exception 4 to read as follows: 
4.  Toilet room exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when infiltration of outside air is present. 
Section 607.5.1; amend to read as follows: 
607.5.1 Fire Walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with Section 705.11 of the International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. For hazardous exhaust systems see Sections 510.1—510.9 IMC. 
(Code 1990, § 3-12-2; Ord. No. 1673-2-92, § II, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2010-3-95, § II, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 2756-12-2001, § II, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3265-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3520-12-2007, § I, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 4039-12-2013 , § 2, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4271-05-2016 , § 2, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 4-133. - Permit fees. 
Mechanical permit fees shall be as set out in section 2-201. 
(Code 1990, § 3-12-3)  
Secs. 4-134—4-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSING STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building code shall mean the building code adopted by this city in section 4-26. 
Efficiency dwelling unit shall mean a dwelling unit containing only one habitable room and meeting the requirements of section 4-198. 
Hot water shall mean water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
Mechanical code shall mean the mechanical code as adopted by this city in section 4-131. 
Nuisance shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the director of health and code enforcement division of the department of community development. 
(4)  Overcrowding a room with occupants. 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination. 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities. 
(7)  Uncleanliness, as determined by the director of health and code enforcement division of the department of community development. 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the director of health and code enforcement division of the department of community development. 
Plumbing code shall mean the plumbing code as adopted in section 4-111. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-4) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-152. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all residential buildings and structures within this jurisdiction. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-1(A))  
Sec. 4-153. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be used, or are currently designed or intended to be used, for human habitation. 
(b)  Where any building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used as a combination apartment house-hotel, the provisions of this article shall apply to the separate portions as if they were separate buildings. 
(c)  Every roominghouse or lodginghouse shall comply with all the requirements of this article for dwellings. 
(d)  Buildings or structures moved into or within this jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements in the building code for new buildings and structures. Additions, alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure shall comply with the requirements in the building code. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-1(B))  
Secs. 4-154—4-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 4-171. - Enforcement authority. 
The city manager or the director of building inspection division of the community development department is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this article. For such purposes, he shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-2(A)1)  
Sec. 4-172. - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the director of building inspection division of the community development department has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the director of building inspection division of the community development department may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the director of building inspection division of the community development department by this article; provided, that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the director of building inspection division of the community development department shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-2(A)2.)  
Sec. 4-173. - Responsibilities defined. 
(a)  Every owner remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon him by this article even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his building, and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this article. 
(b)  All buildings and structures and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for such maintenance. To determine compliance with this subsection, the building may be reinspected. 
(c)  Every owner or his agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining his building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which he occupies or controls in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a building containing two or more dwelling units. 
(d)  Every owner shall, where required by this article or the director of health and code enforcement division of the department of community development, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation, and where infestation has taken place, shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling. 
(e)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling unit or premises which he occupies and controls, shall dispose of all his rubbish, garbage and other organic waste in a manner required by this Code and approved by the director of health and code enforcement division of the department of community development. 
(f)  Every occupant shall, where required by this article, this Code or the director of health and code enforcement division of the department of community development, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities necessary to keep his premises safe and sanitary. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-2(A)3.)  
Sec. 4-174. - Substandard buildings. 
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard as defined in this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-2(B))  
Sec. 4-175. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this article. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-2(C))  
Sec. 4-176. - Permits and inspections. 
(a)  General. No building or structure regulated by this article shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been obtained from the director of building inspections. 
(b)  Fees. Whenever a building permit is required by subsection (a) of this section, the appropriate fees shall be paid as specified in section 304 of the building code. 
(c)  Inspection. All buildings or structures within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the director of building inspection division of the community development department. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-3)  
Secs. 4-177—4-195. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPACE AND OCCUPANCY STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 4-196. - Location on property. 
All buildings shall be located with respect to property lines and to other buildings on the same property as required by the building code. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-5(A))  
Sec. 4-197. - Yards and courts. 
(a)  Scope. This section shall apply to yards and courts having required windows opening therein. 
(b)  Yards. Every yard shall be not less than three feet in width for one-story and two-story buildings. For buildings more than two stories in height, the minimum width of the yard shall be increased at the rate of one foot for each additional story. Where yards completely surround the building, the required width may be reduced by one foot. For buildings exceeding 14 stories in height, the required width of yard shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories. 
(c)  Courts. Every court shall be not less than three feet in width. Courts having windows opening on opposite sides shall be not less than six feet in width. Courts bounded on three or more sides by the walls of the building shall be not less than ten feet in length unless bounded on one end by a public way or yard. For buildings more than two stories in height, the court shall be increased one foot in width and two feet in length for each additional story. For buildings exceeding 14 stories in height, the required dimensions shall be computed on the basis of 14 stories. Adequate access shall be provided to the bottom of all courts for cleaning purposes. Every court more than two stories in height shall be provided with a horizontal air intake at the bottom not less than ten square feet in area and leading to the exterior of the building unless abutting a yard or public way. The construction of the air intake shall be as required for the court walls of the building, but in no case shall be less than one-hour fire-resistive. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-5(B))  
Sec. 4-198. - Room dimensions. 
(a)  Ceiling heights. Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches except as otherwise permitted in this subsection. Kitchens, halls, bathrooms and toilet compartments may have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet measured to the lowest projection from the ceiling. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at less than 48 inches on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of these members. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at 48 inches or more on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of the deck supported by these members, provided that the bottom of the members is not less than seven feet above the floor. 
(1)  If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No portion of the room measuring less than five feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof. 
(2)  If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required in two-thirds the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred ceiling be less than seven feet. 
(b)  Floor area. Every dwelling unit shall have at least one room which shall have not less than 120 square feet of floor area. Other habitable rooms, except kitchens, shall have an area of not less than 70 square feet. Where more than two persons occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of 50 square feet for each occupant in excess of two. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit within an apartment house meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220 square feet of superficial floor area. An additional 100 square feet of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two. 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a separate closet. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this article shall be provided. 
(4)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
(c)  Width. No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than seven feet in any dimension. 
(d)  Water closet location. Each water closet stool shall be located in a clear space not less than 30 inches in width and a clear space in front of the water closet stool of not less than 24 inches shall be provided. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-5(C))  
Sec. 4-199. - Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Natural light and ventilation. All guest rooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed openings with an area not less than one-tenth of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of ten square feet. 
(1)  All bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area not less than 1/20 of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of 1½ square feet. 
(2)  All guest rooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior openings with an area of not less than 1/20 of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of five square feet. 
(b)  Origin of light and ventilation. Required exterior openings for natural light and ventilation shall open directly onto a street or public alley or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building. 
(1)  Required windows may open into a roofed porch where the porch: 
a.  Abuts a street, yard, or court; 
b.  Has a ceiling height of not less than seven feet; and 
c.  Has the longer side at least 65 percent open and unobstructed. 
(2)  A required window in a service room may open into a vent shaft which is open and unobstructed to the sky and not less than four feet in least dimension. No vent shaft shall extend through more than two stories. 
(3)  For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one-half of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square feet, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Mechanical ventilation. In lieu of required exterior openings for natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilation system may be provided. Such system shall be capable of providing two air changes per hour in all guest rooms, dormitories, habitable rooms and in public corridors. One-fifth of the air supply shall be taken from the outside. In bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms a mechanical ventilation system connected directly to the outside, capable of providing five air changes per hour, shall be provided. 
(d)  Hallways. All public hallways, stairs and other exitways shall be adequately lighted at all times in accordance with the building code. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-5(D))  
Sec. 4-200. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Dwelling units and lodginghouses. Every dwelling unit and every lodginghouse shall be provided with a bathroom equipped with facilities consisting of a water closet, lavatory, and either a bathtub or shower. 
(b)  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, there shall be provided on each floor for each sex at least one water closet and lavatory and one bath accessible from a public hallway. Additional water closets, lavatories and baths shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one for every additional ten guests, or fractional number thereof in excess of ten. Such facilities shall be clearly marked for "Men" or "Women." 
(c)  Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink. Wooden sinks or sinks of similarly absorbent material shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its normal operation. All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or of a similarly nonabsorbent material. 
(e)  Water closet compartments. Walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings, shall be finished in accordance with the building code. 
(f)  Room separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this article shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. A room in which a water closet is located shall be separated from food preparation or storage rooms by a tight-fitting door. 
(g)  Installation and maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with applicable requirements of the plumbing code. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-5(E))  
Sec. 4-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Building official means the building official for the City of Lewisville, Texas, or designee. 
Calendar year means January 1 through December 31 of a year. 
Owner means the person claiming, or in whom is invested, the ownership, dominion, or title of real property including, but not limited to, holder of fee-simple title; holder of life-estate; holder of leasehold estate for an interim term of five years or more; a buyer under contract for deed; a mortgagee, receiver, executor, administrator or trustee in control of real property; but not including the holder of a leasehold estate or a tenancy for initial term of less than five years. The term owner includes owner's agent. 
Owner's agent means a person whom for compensation has managing control of a rental unit. 
Person means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, two or more persons having a joint interest, or any other legal or community entity. 
Rent means the offering, holding out or actual leasing of a rental unit to an occupant other than the owner and generally involves the payment of a rental amount although other forms of consideration may be involved or no consideration at all may be involved. 
Rental unit means a single-family dwelling unit, duplex dwelling unit, and a townhome dwelling unit, or portion thereof that is rented or offered for rent as a residence. 
Tenant means any person who rents or leases a rental unit for living or dwelling purposes with the consent of the owner. 
Working day(s) means Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday (excluding city holidays) and begins at 8:00 a.m. on the next business day after an application for a rental permit or a request for re-inspection is made with the city. 
(Ord. No. 3544-02-2008, § 1, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 3992-05-2013 , § 1, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 4-202. - Rental registration. 
(a)  An owner of a rental unit shall register, on the form provided by the city for that purpose, each such unit with the city. Separate registrations shall be required for each rental unit. 
(b)  It is an offense for an owner to fail to register the owner's rental units, and each and every day that the owner continues to fail to register the owner's rental units shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3992-05-2013 , § 1, 5-6-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3992-05-2013 , § 1, adopted May 6, 2013, amended §§ 4-202—4-204 in their entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, §§ 4-202—4-204 pertained to certificate of occupancy, inspection, and appeals, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 3544-02-2008, § 1, adopted February 18, 2008.  
Sec. 4-203. - Rental permit. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  No person shall rent a rental unit without first obtaining a rental permit issued under the provisions of this article. A rental permit must be obtained prior to the unit's original occupancy as a rental unit and each time there is a change in tenancy in the unit. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to submit a false or fraudulent application for a rental permit. 
(3)  A person who rents a rental unit knowing that a rental permit has not been issued for that unit or who knows that the rental permit for that unit has been revoked commits an offense each day the unit is occupied by a tenant. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a rental permit shall file with the city a written application, on the form provided for that purpose, signed by the owner of the rental unit to be permitted. An applicant who owns more than one rental unit shall file a separate application for each unit. 
(c)  Form; contents. The application shall include at least the following information: 
(1)  Owner's name, address, work and home telephone number, driver's license number, or identification card number and state of issuance of the owner; 
(2)  If owner is a partnership, the name of all partners, the principal business address, and telephone number of each partner; 
(3)  If owner is a corporation, the person registering must state whether it is organized under the laws of this state or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location, telephone number, name of the main individual in charge of the local office of such corporation, if any, and the names of all officers and directors or trustees of such corporation, and, if a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation; 
(4)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner's agent; 
(5)  Street address of the rental unit; 
(6)  Name, driver's license number or identification number and state of issuance for each primary or principal tenant; 
(7)  Number of persons occupying the rental unit; 
(8)  Signature of the owner. 
(d)  Permit non-transferable; surrender. A permit issued under this section is not transferable. A permit is valid only for the unit for which it is issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, or alter a permit. A permit may be canceled upon written request of the owner and surrender of the permit itself to the city. The surrender of a permit shall be effective immediately upon its submission to the city. 
(e)  Permit term and fee. 
(1)  Each rental permit issued under this section shall be valid until the current tenant vacates the unit from its date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked. 
(2)  Application for a rental permit shall include a refundable fee, as set forth in section 2-201 of the City Code, which shall be applied to the water bill of the unit. 
a.  The fee will be refunded upon issuance of the rental permit. 
b.  If, however, the owner fails to schedule the initial inspection of the rental unit within three working days after application for a rental permit or within two working days after receiving a request for re-inspection, the fee will be surrendered to the city. An inspection will still be required for the issuance of a permit. In the event the initial inspection is not performed within ten working days due to circumstances beyond the control of the tenant (city at fault) the fee will be refunded. 
(f)  Water utilities. While the rental unit is vacant, the owner may connect the water utilities for maintenance purposes only without a rental permit. 
(g)  Temporary tenancies. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the rental unit was rented or leased for a period of less than 60 days to a person who was the immediate past owner of the unit or who shall be the immediate next owner of the unit. 
(Ord. No. 3992-05-2013 , § 1, 5-6-13) 
Note— See editor's note at section 4-202.  
Sec. 4-204. - Inspection. 
(a)  Inspections required. Issuance of a rental permit shall require an inspection of the rental unit by the city to determine compliance with applicable state and local law. 
(1)  If entry is refused thus prohibiting inspection of the rental unit, the city shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including, but not limited to, an inspection warrant. 
(2)  If deficiencies are found, the city may prohibit occupancy of the unit until the unit is brought into compliance. 
(3)  When the rental unit is in compliance with applicable state and local law, a rental permit shall be issued. 
(4)  When a rental unit passes two inspections within two calendar years and no complaints regarding property condition have been received by the city during the same time period, the owner shall file a self inspection, on a form provided by the city, for the succeeding five calendar years. 
(b)  Requests for inspection. An owner of a rental unit shall request an inspection of said unit within three working days after: (1) registering the unit with the city; (2) a change in tenancy; or (3) applying for water service for said unit. 
(c)  Follow-up inspections (re-inspections). Follow-up inspections (re-inspections) shall be conducted within two working days after a request for re-inspection is made by the owner. Additional time for re-inspections may be granted by the city if the owner is unavailable, or it is determined by the city that more time is needed. 
(Ord. No. 3992-05-2013 , § 1, 5-6-13) 
Note— See editor's note at section 4-202.  
Sec. 4-205. - Appeals. 
(a)  The owner of a rental unit may appeal any decision or order of the building official to the city council by filing at the office of the city secretary, within 30 days of such decision or order, a written appeal to the city council on a form to be supplied by the city secretary. 
(b)  Within 30 days after receiving the written appeal, the city secretary shall fix a date, time and place of the hearing of the appeal by city council. Written notice of such time, date and place of the hearing shall be given to each party by the city secretary, either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the party personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the party at the address shown on the written appeal. 
(c)  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing by the city council and the building official's decision shall be final and not appealable. 
(d)  The decision of the city council on the appeal is final and not appealable. 
(Ord. No. 3992-05-2013 , § 1, 5-6-13)  
Secs. 4-206—4-215. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - STRUCTURAL STANDARDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Building standards, § 4-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-216. - Structural requirements. 
Buildings or structures may be of any type of construction permitted by the building code. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all structural components of buildings shall be capable of resisting any and all forces and loads to which they may be subjected. All structural elements shall be proportioned and joined in accordance with the stress limitations and design criteria as specified in the appropriate sections of the building code. Buildings of every permitted type of construction shall comply with the applicable requirements of the building code. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-6(A))  
Sec. 4-217. - Shelter. 
Every building shall be weather protected so as to provide shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-6(B))  
Sec. 4-218. - Protection of wooden materials. 
All wood shall be protected against termite damage and decay as provided in the building code. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-6(C))  
Sec. 4-219. - Heating. 
Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit at a point three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the building code, the mechanical code and all other applicable laws. Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall not be permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-7(A))  
Sec. 4-220. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type. 
(b)  Where there is electrical power available within 300 feet of any building, such building shall be connected to such electrical power. Every habitable room shall contain at least two electrical convenience outlets or one convenience outlet and one electric light fixture. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hallway shall contain at least one electric light fixture. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-7(B))  
Sec. 4-221. - Ventilation. 
Ventilation for rooms and areas and for fuel-burning appliances shall be provided as required in the mechanical code and in this article. Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation required by this article, such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in operation during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-7(C))  
Sec. 4-222. - Exits. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways and appurtenances as required by the building code. 
(b)  Every sleeping room below the fourth story shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without the use of separate tools. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-8)  
Sec. 4-223. - Fire protection. 
All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of fire-resistive construction as required by the building code for the appropriate occupancy, type of construction and location on property; and shall be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by the building code. 
(Code 1990, § 3-11-9)  
Secs. 4-224—4-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A) adopted June 4, 2018, repealed the former art. VII, §§ 4-241—4-343, and enacted a new art. VII as set out herein. The former art. VII was entitled "Substandard Buildings," and derived from: Code 1990; Ord. No. 1496-11-89, adopted Nov. 6, 1989; Ord. No. 2333-4-98, adopted Apr. 20, 1998; and Ord. No. 3209-06-2005, adopted June 6, 2005. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.; buildings considered substandard under the housing standards, § 4-174. 
State Law reference— Dangerous structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-241. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare within the city by requiring the repair, removal and/or demolition of substandard structures in order to protect property values and prevent bodily injury, death and property damage within the city limits. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-242. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appraised value means the value given to the structure by the applicable county's tax assessor's office. 
Building codes means the International Building Code, International Residential Code, National Electrical Code, International Plumbing Code, and International Mechanical Code, as adopted with amendments in article II of this chapter. 
Demolish means to tear down, destroy, dismantle, or otherwise abolish the existence of a structure in a lawful manner and to remove all remaining pieces, parts, rubbish, and traces of the structure. 
Diligent effort means to attempt to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lien holder, or a mortgagee by performing a search of the following records: 
(1)  County real property records of the county in which the structure is located; 
(2)  Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the structure is located; 
(3)  Records of the Secretary of State; 
(4)  Assumed name records of the county in which the structure is located; 
(5)  Tax records of the city, if any; and 
(6)  City utility records. 
Fire code means the International Fire Code, as adopted with amendments in chapter 5, article III of this Code. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm or corporation, named in the real property records of the county where the structure is located as owning the property. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, or any part thereof, including a wall, slab, portion, foundation, or the collapsed remains of a structure or any other portion of a building, wall, or fence that was erected for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-243. - Minimum standards and substandard declaration. 
(a)  All structures within the city shall comply with the building codes and the fire code. 
(b)  If the city council declares that a structure is a substandard structure under this article, such structure shall automatically be deemed to be a danger to the public health and welfare, a public nuisance, and in violation of this article. 
(c)  Compliance is required with any orders issued by the city council relating to the repair, removal, or demolition of a substandard structure. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-244. - Inspections. 
Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any premises any condition or violation of this article which makes such structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a diligent effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, or the owner or person in control is not identified or located, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-245. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the building official has inspected any structure and believes that such structure is substandard due to violations of this article, he shall prepare a written report of such inspection, giving a general description of the structure in question, a description of the land on which it is located and street address, a description of the violations of this article observed therein, and stating his opinion as to whether such structure should be ordered to be vacated, repaired, removed, or demolished, as provided for herein. 
(b)  Upon completion of the written report, the building official shall schedule a public hearing for the city council to determine whether the structure should be declared a substandard structure and whether the structure must be vacated, repaired, removed, or demolished, or any occupants relocated. 
(c)  A notice of the public hearing shall be sent to the occupant, if any, and all owners, lienholders or mortgagees. The notice of hearing shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the affected property, if that information can be determined; 
(2)  The names of all persons to whom notice is being served; 
(3)  The street address and legal description of the affected property; 
(4)  The date of inspection; 
(5)  The nature of the violation(s); 
(6)  The date, time and location of the hearing, which shall be established not less than ten days from the date of the mailing of the notice; 
(7)  A description of the hearing; 
(8)  A statement advising that securing the required permits and physically commencing the work required to rectify the violations set forth in the building official's report shall be considered as an intent to comply with the building codes and fire code, and that the hearing may, at the sole discretion of the building official, be temporarily postponed upon the written request of the owner, lienholder or mortgagee with accompanying evidence of such permits and/or work, but should such compliance efforts halt, or not progress at a rate determined to be reasonable by the building official, the hearing shall be recalled and new notice sent in compliance with the requirements of this section; and 
(9)  A statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing, proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the city's building codes and fire code and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(d)  Notice of the hearing shall be in writing and shall be delivered by personal delivery or by certified mail with return receipt requested, with a second copy sent by regular mail. Notice to the occupant of the property does not require the occupant's name. The city shall make a diligent effort to discover the identity and address of each owner, mortgagee and lienholder before mailing or delivering notice of the hearing. 
(e)  The notice of hearing shall be served to all unknown owners, lien holders or mortgagees by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each affected structure situated on the property or as close to the front door as practicable. 
(f)  The notice of hearing shall also be filed in the official public records of real property in the county in which the property is located. 
(g)  When the notice of hearing is mailed in accordance with this section to a property owner, lienholder, mortgagee or registered agent and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered delivered. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-246. - Substandard structure finding. 
The city council is authorized to find that a structure is a substandard structure if any of the following conditions or defects exist to the extent that the structure is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare: 
(1)  The structure has been damaged by fire, earthquake, tornado, wind, flood, vandals or any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is subject to partially or fully collapsing. 
(2)  The structure was constructed or is being maintained in violation of any provision of the city's building codes, fire code or any other applicable ordinance or law of the city, county, state or federal government. 
(3)  Any wall or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle one-third of its base. 
(4)  The foundation of the structure or the vertical or horizontal supporting members are 25 percent or more damaged or deteriorated. 
(5)  The total area of nonsupporting coverings of walls, ceilings, roofs, and floors throughout the structure is 50 percent or more damaged or deteriorated. 
(6)  The structure has improperly distributed loads upon the structural members, or they have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(7)  The structure or any part thereof has been damaged by fire, water, earthquake, wind, tornado, vandalism, or other cause to such an extent that it has become dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(8)  A portion of a structure remains on a site when construction or demolition work is abandoned. 
(9)  A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, fire escape or other means of egress is not of sufficient width or size, or is damaged, dilapidated, obstructed or otherwise unusable, or so arranged so as not to provide safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or panic. 
(10)  The structure, because of its condition, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the city's citizens including all conditions conducive to the harboring of rats or mice or other disease carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease. 
(11)  The structure has been found to contain molds which are known to be harmful to humans, and the city council finds that the cost of remediation of such mold contamination would exceed 50 percent of the appraised value of the structure. 
(12)  Whenever the structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, tornado, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to: 
a.  Become an attractive nuisance to children; 
b.  Become a harbor for vagrants, criminals or trespassers; or 
c.  As to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts. 
(13)  A portion of the structure or member or appurtenance thereof (e.g., porch, chimney, signs) is likely to fall, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(14)  The structure has any portion, member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof which is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of safely resisting wind pressure, snow, ice, or other loads. 
(15)  The electrical system is totally or partially damaged, destroyed, removed or otherwise made inoperable, unsafe or hazardous. 
(16)  The plumbing system is totally or partially damaged, destroyed, removed or otherwise made inoperable or unsanitary. 
(17)  The mechanical system or any portion of the mechanical system is totally or partially damaged, destroyed, removed or otherwise made inoperable or unsafe. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-247. - Public hearing. 
(a)  To determine if a structure is substandard, there shall be a public hearing before the city council. 
(b)  In the public hearing to determine if a structure is a substandard structure under this article, the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee may testify or present witnesses or written information, and has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work. 
(c)  If, at the public hearing, a structure is found to be a substandard structure, the city shall order the owner of the structure to, within 30 days: 
(1)  Secure the structure from unauthorized entry; or 
(2)  Repair, remove, or demolish the structure, unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed in 30 days. 
The city council may also order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable time, at the owner's expense. 
(d)  The order shall also specify an additional reasonable time, comprising at least 30 days, for the ordered action(s) to be taken by any of the mortgagees or lienholders in the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the owner. The city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action. 
(e)  If the city council allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 30 days to repair, remove, or demolish the structure, the city council shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the city council. 
(f)  The city council shall not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to repair, remove or demolish the structure or fully perform all work required to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee: 
(1)  Submits a detailed plan and time scheduled for the work at the hearing; and 
(2)  Proves at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days. 
If the city council allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required by the order, the city council shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit work progress reports to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the city council to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. 
(g)  The following standards shall be followed by the city council in ordering the repair, vacation or demolition of any substandard structure: 
(1)  The structure shall be repaired in accordance with the current building codes and fire code or other current codes applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair. 
(2)  If city council finds that the structure is in such a condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants, it shall be ordered vacated and secured from unlawful entry, and the occupants relocated. 
(h)  An order may not be reconsidered by the city council unless a written request for reconsideration is submitted to the city secretary within ten days of the order. The request for reconsideration will be entertained only if it includes substantial evidence, clearly documented, of changed circumstances sufficient to warrant a change of decision. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-248. - Notice of repair, removal or demolition. 
(a)  After the hearing, the city shall promptly mail by certified mail with return receipt requested or delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, with a second copy by regular mail, or personally deliver a copy of the order to the owner and any lienholder or mortgagee of the structure. 
The city shall make a diligent effort to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the structure before mailing or delivering a copy of the order. 
(b)  Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and 
(2)  Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing: 
a.  The street address or legal description of the property; 
b.  The date of the hearing; 
c.  A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and 
d.  Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-249. - Demolition, removal, and repair by the city. 
(a)  If the structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated, within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the structure or relocate the occupants at its own expense. The city shall keep an itemized account of the expenses, and may thereafter assess the expenses on the property, and establish a lien for the expenses against the property as set forth in section 4-250, below. 
(b)  Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within the time period allotted by an order issued under this article: 
(1)  The building official shall cause the structure described in such order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading: 
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING 
DO NOT OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this structure, or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official, Department of Community Development for City of Lewisville 
___________________________ 
(2)  No person shall occupy any structure which has been posted as specified in this section. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the city council have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of this Code. 
(c)  If, after the expiration of the time allotted under an order issued under this article, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of a structure which is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units fails to comply with the order, the city may do or cause to be done the repairs necessary to bring the structure into compliance with this article. The repairs may not improve the structure to the extent that the structure exceeds the minimum standards outlined in the building codes and fire code, and expenses may be assessed and a lien established against the property as provided in section 4-250. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the city may elect to obtain a judicial determination by a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction of the existence, in fact, of a public nuisance in cases contemplated by this article. Such judicial determination may include any available remedy for the abatement of such a nuisance. 
(d)  If work under this section is done at the expense of the city, then said expense shall be assessed against any salvage resulting from the demolition of the structure and against the lot, tract, or parcel of land, or the premises upon which such expense was incurred, and the remainder shall be considered a lien against the property as described in section 4-250. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-250. - Assessment of lien. 
(a)  In the event the owner fails or refuses to pay the expenses assessed against the property under section 4-249, above, within 20 days after the abatement work is completed, a lien may be obtained against the property on which the structure was located, unless the property in question is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, and subject to any other restrictions in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214. The lien arises and attaches to the property when the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is located. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner, if that information can be determined with a diligent effort; 
(2)  A legal description of the property on which the structure was located; 
(3)  The amount of expenses incurred by the city; 
(4)  The balance due; and 
(5)  The date on which said work was done or improvements made. 
(b)  A lien placed on a property under this section shall be a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens; except that a lien placed on a property for expenses arising from repair work done under subsection 4-249(d), above, shall be inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to the property to which the city's lien attaches if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the property is located before the date the repair is begun by the city, but shall be superior to all other previously recorded judgment liens. 
(c)  The amount of a lien under this section shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date such statement was filed. 
(d)  For any expenditure and interest assessed under this section and placed as a lien on a property, suit may be instituted and recovered, and foreclosure of said lien may be made in the name of the city, except when prohibited by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 214; and the statement of expenses so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or expense. 
(e)  The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the city for the expenses. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-251. - Interference with repair or demolition work prohibited. 
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any structure which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this article; or with any person to whom such structure has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this Code, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this city, person having an interest or estate in such structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, removing or demolishing such structure pursuant to the provisions of this article, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-252. - Appeal. 
In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.0012, any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by an order issued under this article may file in district court a verified petition setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder or mortgagee within 30 calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the final decision of the municipality is personally delivered to them, mailed to them by first class mail with certified return receipt requested, or delivered to them by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or such decision shall become final as to each of them upon the expiration of each such 30 calendar-day period. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 4-253. - Emergency demolitions. 
(a)  Where it appears to the building official or fire marshal that, due to violations of the building codes or fire code threatening the structural integrity of a structure, there is clear and imminent danger to the life, safety or property of any person unless the structure is immediately vacated and demolished, either of these officials shall, in writing, declare its immediate vacation and demolition. The written concurrence of the director of development services shall be required prior to execution of the demolition order. Such concurrence shall include a determination that under the circumstances no other abatement procedure is reasonably available except demolition. Emergency demolition under this section shall be the remedy of last resort, and shall be utilized only when the notice and hearing procedure outlined in this article will not be adequate to prevent the clear and imminent danger described herein. 
(b)  Notice that the structure has been determined to be a clear and imminent danger to life and safety shall be issued: 
(1)  By a placard affixed to the property or by stake driven into the ground at the property where the structure is located. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the posted notice without written permission of the building official and no unauthorized person shall enter the structure for any purpose; and 
(2)  By personal delivery to the owner of the structure, as defined herein, only if the owner resides within the city. If the owner cannot be located for personal delivery, a copy of the notice may be posted on the front door of the main structure at the owner's address. 
(c)  The emergency demolition shall be executed not later than 96 hours after the last required written concurrence is made. 
(d)  After execution of the emergency demolition, the official who declared the immediate vacation and demolition shall: 
(1)  Provide notice to the owners, lienholders and mortgagees of the structure; and 
(2)  Advise the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(e)  Expenses for the repair, removal, or demolition of the structure shall be at the expense of the city. Such expenses shall be assessed on the property on which the structure was located and a lien placed thereupon as outlined in section 4-250, above. 
( 0034-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-18)  
Secs. 4-254—4-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - NUMBERING BUILDINGS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5; streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways in property, ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 4-361. - Base lines. 
Main Street and its continuation by an imaginary line through the city, from east to west, and Mill Street (Old Highway No. 77) and its continuation by an imaginary line through the city, from north to south, are hereby established as the base lines from which all houses are to be numbered in the city. 
(Code 1990, § 8-2-1)  
Sec. 4-362. - Numbering from base lines. 
All houses shall be numbered from the base line of the street on which they are located, out such street to the corporate limits or to the terminus of such street, in regular order, the even numbers to be on the south and west sides of the streets, and the odd numbers to be on the north and east sides of the streets. 
(Code 1990, § 8-2-3)  
Sec. 4-363. - Owners to place numbers. 
(a)  Owners of single-family, two-family, multifamily dwellings, commercial and industrial structures in the city are required to place or have placed the proper street number, building number, suite and/or unit number, in a designated location so that same can be plainly seen and read from the street and alley, when alleys are provided. Street numbers will be designated by the director of building inspection, division of the community development department. Building numbers, suite and/or unit numbers for multifamily and commercial structures shall be submitted to the city for approval by the owner or developer. 
(b)  Where the owner is a nonresident of the city, the duty prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall devolve on the occupant or manager of such structures. 
(Code 1990, § 8-2-4; Ord. No. 2019-5-95, § I, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 4-364. - Size and location of numbers. 
(a)  [For] one- and two-family dwellings, numbers shall be minimum three inches high, posted front and rear when rear access is available. Numbers shall be posted on the principal structure at a minimum height of five (5) feet above existing grade. Numbers may also be posted on curbside mailboxes when available. Numbers shall be posted on a contrasting background and maintained clearly visible from the street and alley, when rear access is available. 
(b)  [For] multifamily dwellings, building numbers shall be minimum 12 inches high, unit range numbers shall be minimum three inches high, and unit numbers shall be minimum three inches high. Building and unit range numbers shall be posted on two sides of every building. Location of building numbers and unit range numbers shall be designated by the fire marshal. Individual unit numbers shall be posted minimum five feet above existing grade or floor level. Street numbers shall be minimum three inches and posted minimum five feet above existing grade. All numbers shall be posted on a contrasting background and maintained clearly visible as defined by the fire marshal. 
(c)  [For] commercial and industrial structures, all street numbers, suite or lease space numbers shall be minimum four inches high, posted front and rear when rear access is available. All numbers shall be posted minimum five feet above existing grade on a contrasting background and maintained clearly visible front and rear as defined by the fire marshal. 
(Code 1990, § 8-2-5; Ord. No. 2019-5-95, § II, 5-1-95)  
Sec. 4-365. - Assignment of numbers. 
It shall be the duty of the director of building inspection division of the community development department, upon application or at his own election, to assign the proper numbers for all houses. The owner shall state the name of the street and the side thereof upon which house is situated, and the direction and exact distance from the nearest cross street in his application, or upon request by the director of building inspection division of the community development department. A complete record of the numbering of all houses and buildings in the city shall be prepared by the director of building inspection division of the community development department, or under his direction, and filed in the office of the secretary as a public record; such record shall be supplemented and amended from time to time, when necessary. House numbers shall be public property, and subject to change by the city, with or without notice, at the discretion of the director of building inspection division of the community development department. 
(Code 1990, § 8-2-6)  
Sec. 4-366. - Display of numbers. 
(a)  All numbers for new construction shall be fixed and properly displayed as required by this article at the time the building, lease space, suite, or unit is released for occupancy. 
(b)  All numbers for existing buildings, lease space, suites, or units shall be fixed and properly displayed after notification to the owner/occupant. A reasonable time, to be determined by the director of community development, will be granted for purposes of compliance. 
(Code 1990, § 8-2-7; Ord. No. 2019-5-95, § III, 5-1-95)  
Secs. 4-367—4-385. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - ALARM SYSTEMS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 5; emergency medical services, § 5-171 et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of burglar alarm systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 218.001 et seq.; fire alarms, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code § 5.43-2; security alarm systems, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4413(2966). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-386. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm site shall mean a premises or location served by an alarm system. 
Alarm system shall mean a device or system that transmits or relays a signal, indirectly, other than by community antenna television cable, intended to summon emergency police, fire or emergency medical assistance services of the city. 
Burglar alarm notification shall mean a notification triggered manually or by a stimulus, intended to summon police of a municipality in response to a burglary. The term includes an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. 
Commercial unit shall mean any business establishment. 
Director shall mean the chief of police of the city or his authorized representative. 
False alarm notification shall mean a false police alert, false fire alarm notification, or false personal emergency response alarm notification, but shall not include a false robbery alarm notification or false burglar alarm notification. 
False burglar alarm notification shall mean an alarm notification to the police when the responding police officer finds no evidence of unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion. 
False robbery alarm notification shall mean a robbery alarm notification to the police when the responding police officer finds no evidence of a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Fire alarm notification shall mean a notification to the fire department intended to summon firefighting forces, which is initiated or triggered manually by an alarm system designed to react to any of the visual or physical characteristics of fire. 
Governmental unit shall mean any tax supported entity or structure, including public buildings. 
Local alarm shall mean an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a premises. 
Permit holder shall mean the person who has received an alarm permit and is directly responsible for management and control of the alarm site. 
Personal emergency response alarm notification shall mean a notification intended to signal the occurrence of a medical or personal emergency and to summon the appropriate assistance from the city. A personal emergency response alarm system is not part of a combination of alarm systems that includes a burglar alarm or fire alarm. 
Police alert alarm notification shall mean an alarm notification which does not differentiate between burglar/intrusion and robbery but is intended to summon the police whenever a real and immediate threat to life exists. 
Residential unit shall mean a single family residence, condominium, apartment or any other dwelling which is not a governmental unit or commercial unit. 
Robbery alarm notification shall mean a notification triggered manually or by a stimulus, intended to summon police of a municipality in response to a robbery. The term includes an alarm that emits an audible signal on the exterior of a structure. 
Site shall mean the premises upon which any alarm notification is located. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-1; Ord. No. 1661-12-91, § I, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 1, 10-17-05) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-387. - Penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article. Any person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted; and each offense is punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-15)  
Sec. 4-388. - Exclusions. 
For the purposes of this article, the term alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle unless such vehicle is permanently installed at a permanent site; 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises; or 
(3)  An alarm system owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 2, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-389. - Other types of alarms. 
(a)  A person shall not install or maintain an alarm system except for the purpose of eliciting responses to burglaries/intrusions, robberies, real and immediate threat to life, fires, water flow or requests for personal emergency response, unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(b)  If innovations in alarm systems or other types of alarm devices adversely affect emergency police services of the city, the director may promulgate rules and regulations in order to protect the city's emergency police services. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-3; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 3, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-390. - Reporting of alarm signals restricted. 
A permit holder shall not report his alarm signal through a relaying intermediary that does not meet the requirements of this article and any rules and regulations promulgated by the director or is not licensed by the state or the appropriate agency, board or department thereof. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-6)  
Sec. 4-391. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder under this article shall: 
(1)  Cause an adjustment to be made to the sensory mechanism of his alarm system in order to suppress false indications; and 
(2)  Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that enables proper operation of the alarm system. 
(b)  No alarm permit holder shall activate the alarm system to send an alarm notification to the police for test purposes, unless the alarm permit holder first notifies the director or his representative, and the alarm company monitoring control center prior to the testing of the system that the signal is for testing purposes only. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-7; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 4, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-392. - False alarms. 
(a)  Service fee. A service fee shall be imposed for false alarms as follows: 
(1)  If within a 12-month period of the date of issuance of a permit, or within any successive 12-month period, one false robbery alarm notification is emitted from either a residential or commercial unit, the director shall assess the permit holder in control of that alarm site a fee as set forth in section 2-201 for each subsequent false robbery alarm notification emitted from the alarm site within the 12-month period. 
(2)  If within a 12-month period of the date of issuance of a permit, or within any successive 12-month period, three false burglar alarm notifications or three of any other type of false alarm notifications (except a false robbery alarm notification) are emitted from either a residential or commercial unit, the director shall assess the permit holder in control of that alarm site a fee as set forth in section 2-201 for each subsequent false alarm notification (except a false robbery alarm notification) emitted from the alarm site within the 12-month period. 
(3)  For purposes of assessing service fees against the permit holder of a multi-unit housing facility for a facility other than an individual residential unit, the director must inform the permit holder of the date of the signaling of a false burglar alarm, the address of the multi-unit housing facility where the signaling of the false burglar alarm occurred; and the identification of the individual facility, if applicable, located on the multi-unit housing facility premises where the signaling of the false burglar alarm occurred. 
(4)  No service fee shall be assessed against a governmental unit; however, a warning notice shall be issued in writing for each false alarm notification, false burglar alarm notification, or false robbery alarm notification emitted which exceeds three false notifications in any calendar month. 
(b)  Time limit to pay. A permit holder shall pay a fee assessed under this section within 30 calendar days of the date on the notice of the fee assessment. The director may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew a permit for failure to pay the fee assessed. 
(c)  Exemption from charges. The permit holder will be exempt from any fee charged for a false alarm notification, false burglar alarm notification, or false robbery alarm notification which is later shown to have been justified or which was due to a natural or manmade catastrophe or other situation specifically exempted by the director. 
(d)  In addition to any other penalties provided for in this article, a person who has not obtained a permit for an alarm system as required by this article shall be assessed a fee, as set forth in section 2-201, for a false alarm notification, including a false robbery alarm notification or false burglar alarm notification. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-5; Ord. No. 1661-12-91, § II, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 5, 10-17-05; 0173-19-ORD , § I, 11-18-19)  
Sec. 4-393. - Reset required. 
(a)  A user of an alarm system that causes an alarm notification to be sent directly to the city shall adjust or cause the adjustment of the mechanism so that upon activation, the system will transmit only one alarm signal and will not transmit another alarm signal without first being reset in such a manner that it will not automatically resound, unless there is an outside stimulus characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion. 
(b)  All local alarms shall be equipped with a device that silences or resets the local alarm after a 20-minute alarm sounding period. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-8; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 6, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-394. - Indirect alarm reporting. 
A person who is engaged in the business of relaying alarm notifications to the city shall: 
(1)  Send notifications of an alarm to the city by human operator, unless such notification is by a direct computer terminal. 
(2)  Report alarms only over a special telephone number designated by the director. 
(3)  Send alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the director. 
(4)  Keep his business premises in compliance with state law. 
(5)  Allow an inspection of his business premises by the director or representative. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-11)  
Sec. 4-395. - Working specifications. 
(a)  Alarm system activation and deactivation panels may be of a key or keyless configuration. They must be installed on the interior of the structure. The system shall provide for variable entrance and exit grace times which shall be incorporated into the unit. 
(b)  No alarm system shall be so designed as to generate an alarm due to the premises or a particular area of the premises not being secured at the time of attempted arming. The alarm system shall utilize an internal audible alert signal to notify the user that he has programmed grace period in which to deactivate the alarm system upon the user's entrance. In case of power failure, all alarm circuits shall automatically convert to stand-by battery supply, capable of supplying at least 12 hours of emergency power. 
(1)  Installers of alarm systems shall make the user aware that a permit must be obtained from the city and shall comply with all requirements as set forth in state law. 
(2)  The installer shall also instruct the user regarding the operation of the system, including but not limited to, the criteria for use of the police alert button device, stressing it is for the summoning of police only in the event of a real or immediate threat to life. 
(3)  The installer shall not install an alarm system contrary to the provisions of this article. Alarm systems that are installed that are contrary to the provisions of this article are in violation of this article and the installer is subject to the punishment phase of this article for the day the alarm system is installed and each day or portion of a day thereafter are separate offenses until the alarm system adheres to the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Any keyless configuration activating or deactivating device which contains only a single button to activate a police alert alarm shall provide for a design of such equipment that accidental activation will not occur and that activation is a deliberate act. 
(5)  Alarm systems shall include a delay which will be so engineered so as an alarm will not be sent due to momentary breaks in electrical current caused by lightning. 
(6)  All electrical equipment used for the installation of alarm systems shall be Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-13; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 7, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-396. - Protection of financial institutions. 
(a)  A financial institution required to have an alarm system pursuant to the provisions of the Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12 USC 1882) shall install that alarm system to an indirect alarm reporting agency for the purpose of reporting burglaries, robberies and fires. The alarm system may be of a local nature also. 
(b)  The director shall have the right, at reasonable times and upon oral notice, to inspect the alarm system at the alarm site, and require necessary repairs or improvements. If the director finds that the alarm system continually fails to operate or be operated to his satisfaction, he may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew the permit. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-14; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 8, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-397. - Recorded message alarm notification prohibited. 
No permit will be issued for the use of systems using automatic telephone dialing to report an alarm condition by means of a recorded message. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-12)  
Secs. 4-398—4-415. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 4-416. - Required. 
A person commits an offense if he operates, or causes to be operated, an alarm system without first obtaining from the director an alarm permit, a renewal permit, or without reinstating a suspended permit. An alarm permit may be obtained for the user of an alarm system by the installer of such alarm system equipment. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-2(A); Ord. No. 1984-11-94, § I, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 9, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-417. - Application. 
Each application for a permit required by this division must contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of the fees assessed under this article. 
(2)  The street address of the property (including the suite, office or apartment number) on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated. 
(3)  Classification of the alarm site as residential, commercial or governmental unit. 
(4)  Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated. 
(5)  The name of one other person to respond to an alarm in the event the permit holder is unavailable. 
(6)  Any other information required by the director which is necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-2(C); Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 10, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3349-06-2006, § 1, 6-5-06)  
Sec. 4-418. - False statements. 
Any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit or renewal, or while making a change thereto, shall be sufficient cause of refusal to grant, or suspension of, a permit under this division. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-2(E))  
Sec. 4-419. - Issuance. 
Upon receipt of the completed application form for a permit under this division, the director shall issue a permit unless there is cause to believe the equipment responsible for initiating an alarm will not be maintained and operated in accordance with this article or the applicant will not comply with each provision of this article. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-2(B))  
Sec. 4-420. - Fee for permit, duration, renewal. 
(a)  A nonrefundable fee which is set out in section 2-201 is required for each permit or renewal of a permit. 
(b)  All permits shall expire 12 months from the date of issuance and no permit shall be issued for more than a 12-month period. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the permit holder to pay the renewal fee prior to the expiration date. All fees owed must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-4; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 11, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-421. - Transfer. 
An alarm permit for a residential unit may be transferred during the 12-month period for which the permit was issued. Moreover, the individual designated to respond to an alarm or relay an alarm may be changed. A permit holder shall promptly inform the director of any change that alters information listed on the original permit application. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-2(D); Ord. No. 3349-06-2006, § 1, 6-5-06)  
Sec. 4-422. - Suspension, reinstatement after suspension. 
(a)  The director may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew an alarm system permit for any violation of this article, provided that if the revocation or refusal to renew the permit is based on the number of false burglar alarms, said action may only be taken if the alarm system has had eight or more false burglar alarms during the preceding 12-month period. 
(b)  The director may suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew an alarm permit if there is a false statement of a material matter in the application for a permit. 
(c)  A suspension may be lifted or permit reinstated upon a sufficient showing that the conditions which caused the action have been corrected and if the director determines that the alarm system is likely to be maintained and operated in a responsible manner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No fee is required to reinstate a suspended or nonrenewal permit. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-9; Ord. No. 1661-12-91, §§ III, IV, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 12, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-423. - Appeal from denial or suspension. 
(a)  If the director refuses to issue or reinstate a permit, revokes a permit, or suspends a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder, by certified mail, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the director to the city manager by filing with the city manager a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten calendar days after receipt of the notice from the director. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city manager stays any action of the director in suspending or denying a permit until the city manager or his designated representative makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within a ten-day period, the action of the director is final and nonappealable. 
(b)  The city manager or his representative shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider evidence by an interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing; the hearing officer shall make his decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The hearing officer must render a decision within 30 days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The hearing officer shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the director, and his decision is final, unless the applicant or permit holder files a written request for a hearing with the city council within ten calendar days after receipt of notice of action of the hearing officer. A written request to the city council stays the action of the hearing officer in suspending or denying a permit until the city council renders a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within a ten-day period, the action of the hearing officer is final and nonappealable. 
(c)  If a request for an appeal hearing with the city council is filed within the ten-day period, the city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by an interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply to an appeal hearing before the city council. The city council shall decide the appeal on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The city council shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the hearing officer by a majority vote; failure to reach a majority decision on a motion shall leave the hearing officer's decision unchanged. The result of an appeal hearing before the city council is final and nonappealable. 
(Code 1990, § 3-10-10; Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 13, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 4-424. - Alarm systems in multiunit housing facilities. 
(a)  The owner or property manager of a multiunit housing facility shall obtain an alarm permit from the director if any alarm system is operated in a facility other than an individual residential unit. 
(b)  The person occupying an individual residential unit in a multiunit housing facility shall obtain an alarm permit from the director before operating or causing the operation of an alarm system in the residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 3270-10-2005, § 14, 10-17-05)  
Secs. 4-425—4-440. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - FENCES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Fences or barriers required for livestock, § 3-152; screening devices required in the land development regulations, § 6-381 et seq.; fence requirements in the land development regulations, § 6-547; posting advertising on fences, etc., prohibited, § 9-83; streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways and property, ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 4-441. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Barrier shall mean a fence, wall or other structure built to bar passage. 
Corner shall mean the space between intersecting streets, the intersection of a street and an alley, the intersection of a driveway and an alley or the intersection of a street and a driveway. 
Fence shall mean an enclosing barrier that prohibits through passage. 
Fence, decorative, shall mean fencing that adds beauty and does not substantially block the view and maintains the open space characteristic provided for by zoning standards. 
Gate, self-closing, shall mean a gate which is kept in a normally closed position and is equipped with an approved device to ensure closing and latching after having been opened for use. 
Intersection shall mean a point where streets, roads, highways, alleys and driveways meet or cross. 
Member shall mean a structural component part of a whole fence. 
Private pool shall mean a swimming pool appurtenant to a single-family or duplex residence and used only by the occupants of the residence and their guests. 
Semipublic pool shall mean a swimming pool that is privately owned and open only to an identifiable class of persons, including, but not limited to, motel guests, apartment residents and club members. 
Swimming pool shall mean a pool of water 24 inches or greater in depth either indoors or outdoors and is used for swimming or water related recreations. This also includes spas and hot tubs. 
Visibility range shall mean distance required to afford proper vision for pedestrian and vehicular traffic at intersections and/or corners. 
Yard shall mean an open space on the same building lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a rear yard, and the depth of a front yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the building site and the lot line shall be used. A "yard" extends along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations of the zoning district in which such building is located. 
Yard, front, shall mean a yard extending along the whole length of the front lot line between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than steps, planter boxes, unenclosed porches and driveways. 
Yard, rear, shall mean a yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the principal building or any projections thereof other than steps, unenclosed balconies, unenclosed porches or driveways. 
Yard, side, shall mean a yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard, being the minimum horizontal distance, measured at the building line, between any building or projections thereof except steps or driveways and the side lot line. 
Zoning district map shall mean the map incorporated into this article as a part hereof by reference thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § I, 9-10-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-442. - Required at pools. 
All private swimming pools shall have a fence or enclosure around the entire pool a minimum height of six feet measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. This barrier shall comply with all conditions required by this article except requirements set forth in section 4-453(i), and all height requirements set forth in section 4-453(i)(1). 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § XV, 9-10-90) 
Cross reference— Swimming pool regulations, § 4-471 et seq.  
Sec. 4-443. - Permits required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, replace, remove or demolish any fence regulated by this article without first obtaining a separate permit for each fence from the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department. A fence permit shall not be required if it is determined by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department that only minor repair or painting is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § II, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 1, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 4-444. - Application for permit. 
To obtain a permit required by this division, the applicant shall first file an application for permit on a form furnished by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § III, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 2, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 4-445. - Plans and specifications. 
Three sets of plans and such other data as deemed necessary by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department shall be submitted with each application for a permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § IV, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 3, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 4-446. - Information on plans. 
Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall include the following: 
(1)  Building locations and area to be fenced. 
(2)  Legal description of land to be fenced. 
(3)  Height of fence and type of materials to be used. 
(4)  Intersections of streets, roads, highways, alleys and driveways. 
(5)  Zoning. 
(6)  Corner "visibility range," when required, shall be shown. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § V, 9-10-90)  
Sec. 4-447. - Permit issuance. 
(a)  The application, plans and other data, filed by an applicant for a permit under this article shall be reviewed by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department. If the work described in an application for a permit and the plans and other data filed therewith conform to the requirements of this article and all other pertinent laws and ordinances, and the fees specified in the city ordinance providing for permit, inspection and license fees have been paid, the permit shall be issued to the applicant. 
(b)  The plans shall be endorsed by the city in writing or stamped "approved" and shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. 
(c)  One set of approved plans shall be retained by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department for a period of not less than 90 days from the date of completion of the work covered, (one set of the approved plans shall be retained by the engineering department and one set of the approved plans shall be returned to the applicant.) 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § VI, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 4, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 4-448. - Validity of permit. 
The issuance or granting of a permit under this article or approval of plans shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other code or ordinance of the city. The issuance of a permit based upon plans and other data shall not prevent the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department from thereafter requiring correction of errors in such plans and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this article or any other code or ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § VII, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 5, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 4-449. - Permit expiration. 
Every permit issued by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department under the provisions of this article shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the authorized work is not commenced within 60 days from the date of permitting, or if the authorized work is not completed, or is abandoned for a period of 60 days. Before the work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided the elapsed time does not exceed 180 days from the date of permitting in which case the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee in order to renew the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § VIII, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 6, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 4-450. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
The building official of the building inspection division of the community development department may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this article whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any code or ordinance of the city or any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § IX, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 7, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 4-451. - Appeal. 
Any applicant for a fence permit whose request is denied by the city staff for noncompliance with this article, or whose permit is suspended or revoked, may, within ten days from the date of written notification, appeal such decision for consideration by the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § X, 9-10-90)  
Sec. 4-452. - Permit fees. 
The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in the city ordinance providing for permit, inspection and license fees which is set out in section 2-201. No permit fees shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § XI, 9-10-90)  
Sec. 4-453. - General requirements and restrictions. 
(a)  Fences constructed on any lot, and specifically corner lots, will be subject to, and shall conform to the visibility range requirements contained in the drawing at the end of this section. An additional clear zone may be required by the city engineer. 
(b)  No fence, guy wire, brace or post shall be constructed upon or extend over property that the city has control over, owns or has an easement over or under, except upon: 
(1)  Underground drainage easements that contain nonpressurized storm sewer pipes. 
(2)  Underground sanitary sewer easements that contain nonpressurized pipes. 
(3)  Utility easements if written permission is granted by all users. 
No public drainage easement shall be fenced or obstructed in any manner, if the drainage is above ground. A gate shall be constructed in a fence along easements to allow ingress and egress for maintenance purposes, when applicable. Fences shall be allowed to be erected within private drainage easements provided that the materials used are chain link, tubular steel or "good neighbor" board on board with open slat spacing. Such fencing shall be constructed to avoid backflow of water within the private drainage easement. 
(c)  No fence shall exceed ten feet in height measured from the finished grade of the lot or property upon which the fence is being erected except as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(d)  No fence erected within the city limits shall be electrically charged in any manner. 
(e)  No fence shall be constructed of barbed wire except on property zoned agriculture-open space and is five acres or greater in size, or except as provided for in subsection (g) of this section. 
(f)  All fences shall have a minimum of one gate for emergency ingress and egress. The minimum width of such gate shall be three feet. A driveway approach, in conformance with the general development ordinance and approved by the engineering division, shall be required for all vehicle gates. 
(g)  In LC, GB, WH, LI, HI, PK, PU and FP zoning districts, fences six feet or greater in height may be constructed with angle arms at the top and such angle arms may be armed with barbed wire. Such arms shall not extend over public property, city, county, or state rights-of-way, easements or private property. Any property that requires a screening device shall conform to the general development ordinance. 
(h)  Materials. 
(1)  Permitted materials. Materials permitted are wood, metal tubing or wrought iron, stone, masonry and chain link. Vinyl or fiberglass composite materials may be utilized if the material is listed, designed and constructed for fencing materials. Metal posts will be allowed on wood fences. 
(2)  Prohibited materials. 
a.  No person shall use rope, string, wire products including, but not limited to chicken wire, hog wire, wire fabric, barbed wire (except as allowed in other sections of this code), razor ribbon wire and similar welded or woven wire fabrics, chain, netting, cut or broken glass, paper, metal panels, corrugated metal panels, galvanized sheet metal, plywood, fiberglass panels or plastic panels in any fence or any other materials that are not manufactured specifically as fencing materials. The building official of the building inspection division of the community development department may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer's standards to establish the intended use of a proposed fencing material. 
b.  No person shall construct a fence of wood, metal or plastic products that are designed specifically for uses other than fence construction. 
c.  No person shall construct a fence of used, damaged or unsafe materials. 
d.  No person shall weave or use slats of any material, including but not limited to metal, fiberglass, or bamboo, through a chain link fence to create a blind fence, screening fence or any other type of fence addressed in this chapter. 
e.  Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless it can be determined by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department that they meet the requirements of the building code for new materials. 
(3)  Exceptions. See subsections 4-453(e) and 4-453(g) 
(i)  All semipublic swimming pools shall have a fence or enclosure which complies with the following: 
(1)  The top of the barrier shall be at least 72 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool shall be two inches. Where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be two inches. 
(2)  Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of more than a four-inch diameter sphere. 
(3)  Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints. 
(4)  Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1¾ inches in width. 
(5)  Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed four inches. Where there are decorative cut outs within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1¾ inches in width. 
(6)  Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 1¾-inch square unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top and the bottom which reduce the openings to no more than 1¾ inches. 
(7)  Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more than 1¾ inches. 
(8)  Access gates shall comply with the requirements of previous paragraphs (1) through (7) of this subsection, and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Gates shall have self-closing and self-latching devices which shall meet the following three requirements: 
a.  The release mechanism of the self-latching device must be located not less than 45 inches from the grade below the gate. 
b.  The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of the gate. 
c.  The gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. 
(9)  Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, direct access to the pool through the wall shall be limited to doors and windows which meet the following conditions: 
a.  Windows leading to the pool area shall have a latching device at least 54 inches above the floor. 
b.  Hinged doors leading to the pool area shall be self-closing and shall have a self-latching device. The release mechanism, if not self-locking, shall be located at least 54 inches above the floor. 
c.  Sliding doors or sliding screen doors leading to the pool area shall be self-closing and shall have a self-latching device. The release mechanism, if not self-locking, shall be located at least 54 inches above the floor. 
(10)  Barriers shall be located so as to prohibit permanent structures, landscaping objects, stationary equipment, or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers. 
(j)  No fence shall be constructed in the required front yard building setback area of R, DU, TH, PH, OD or MD zoning districts, except that a decorative fence may be constructed to a height no greater than three and one-half feet above the finished lot grade and the solid area of such fence shall not exceed 50 percent of the total. Where a single family residence on a corner lot has two front yards as required by city ordinance and the residence is constructed facing one of the two front yards, the second front yard may be fenced in the same manner as any other side yard provided that the adjoining lot does not have a residence that fronts the same setback. 
(k)  In all zoning districts where outside storage of material, equipment, goods and supplies is allowed, all fencing shall comply with the general development ordinance. 
 

Intersection Sight Triangle 
(l)  Yard fencing. Within the Old Town Center design district and the Old Town design district as defined in chapter 9.5, Old Town development, regardless of zoning classification or other provisions of this chapter, except as may be specifically required by the Old Town Development Ordinance, fences shall be constructed as follows. 
(1)  Right-of-way yard fence. No solid fence, except a decorative low profile yard fence, shall be constructed closer to a front yard right-of-way line than the primary structure on that lot or within ten feet of a front yard right-of-way line, whichever is more restrictive. In the event that portions of the front elevation of a primary structure are closer to the front property line than other portions, it is the intent of this chapter to not allow any solid fence to be constructed closer to the front property line than the portion of the front elevation nearest to the right-of-way yard fence. In no event shall any portion of the front elevation be blocked by a solid right-of-way yard fence. 
a.  Height. A right-of-way yard fence shall be constructed to a height no greater than eight feet above the finished lot grade at the location of the fence. 
b.  Permitted materials. Materials permitted for a right-of-way yard fence are brick, stone, decorative block, wood, metal tubing or wrought iron. Vinyl or fiberglass composite materials may be utilized if the material is listed, designed and constructed for fencing materials. Metal posts will be allowed on wood fences. 
c.  Prohibited materials. 
1.  No person shall use for a right-of-way yard fence chain link, rope, string, wire products including, but not limited to chicken wire, hog wire, wire fabric, barbed wire (except as allowed in other sections of this code), razor ribbon wire and similar welded or woven wire fabrics, chain, netting, cut or broken glass, paper, metal panels, corrugated metal panels, galvanized sheet metal, plywood, fiberglass panels or plastic panels in any fence or any other materials that are not manufactured specifically as fencing materials. The building official of the building inspection division of the community development department may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer's standards to establish the intended use of a proposed fencing material. 
2.  No person shall construct a fence of wood, metal or plastic products that are designed specifically for uses other than fence construction. 
3.  No person shall construct a fence of used, damaged or unsafe materials. 
4.  No person shall weave or use slats of any material, including but not limited to metal, fiberglass, or bamboo, through a chain link fence to create a blind fence, screening fence or any other type of fence addressed in this chapter. 
5.  Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless it can be determined by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department that they meet the requirements of the building code for new materials. 
(2)  Right-of-way decorative yard fence. Any fence, except a decorative low profile yard fence, that is constructed between any structure on the lot and the front yard right-of-way line shall be a minimum of 75 percent open. 
a.  Height. A right-of-way decorative yard fence shall be constructed to a height no greater than six feet above the finished lot grade at the location of the fence. 
b.  Permitted materials. Materials permitted for a right-of-way decorative yard fence are brick, stone, decorative block, wood, metal tubing or wrought iron. Vinyl or fiberglass composite materials may be utilized if the material is listed, designed and constructed for fencing materials. Metal posts will be allowed on wood fences. 
c.  Prohibited materials. 
1.  No person shall use for a right-of-way decorative yard fence chain link, rope, string, wire products including, but not limited to chicken wire, hog wire, wire fabric, barbed wire (except as allowed in other sections of this code), razor ribbon wire and similar welded or woven wire fabrics, chain, netting, cut or broken glass, paper, metal panels, corrugated metal panels, galvanized sheet metal, plywood, fiberglass panels or plastic panels in any fence or any other materials that are not manufactured specifically as fencing materials. The building official of the building inspection division of the community development department may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer's standards to establish the intended use of a proposed fencing material. 
2.  No person shall construct a fence of wood, metal or plastic products that are designed specifically for uses other than fence construction. 
3.  No person shall construct a fence of used, damaged or unsafe materials. 
4.  No person shall weave or use slats of any material, including but not limited to metal, fiberglass, or bamboo, through a chain link fence to create a blind fence, screening fence or any other type of fence addressed in this chapter. 
5.  Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless it can be determined by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department that they meet the requirements of the building code for new materials. 
(3)  Decorative low-profile yard fence. Fences that are constructed to a height no greater than 24 inches above the finished lot grade at the location of the fence may be constructed at the right-of-way line. 
a.  Permitted materials. Materials permitted for a decorative low-profile yard fence are brick, stone, decorative block, wood, metal tubing or wrought iron. Vinyl or fiberglass composite materials may be utilized if the material is listed, designed and constructed for fencing materials. Metal posts will be allowed on wood fences. 
b.  Prohibited materials. 
1.  No person shall use for a decorative low-profile yard fence chain link, rope, string, wire products including, but not limited to chicken wire, hog wire, wire fabric, barbed wire (except as allowed in other sections of this code), razor ribbon wire and similar welded or woven wire fabrics, chain, netting, cut or broken glass, paper, metal panels, corrugated metal panels, galvanized sheet metal, plywood, fiberglass panels or plastic panels in any fence or any other materials that are not manufactured specifically as fencing materials. The building official of the building inspection division of the community development department may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer's standards to establish the intended use of a proposed fencing material. 
2.  No person shall construct a fence of wood, metal or plastic products that are designed specifically for uses other than fence construction. 
3.  No person shall construct a fence of used, damaged or unsafe materials. 
4.  No person shall weave or use slats of any material, including but not limited to metal, fiberglass, or bamboo, through a chain link fence to create a blind fence, screening fence or any other type of fence addressed in this chapter. 
5.  Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless it can be determined by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department that they meet the requirements of the building code for new materials. 
(4)  Property line/other fence. A fence that is on a side or rear property line, not meeting the requirements of the fence types above may be a solid fence meeting the requirements of this section. 
a.  Height. A property line/other fence shall be constructed to a height no greater than six feet above the finished lot grade at the location of the fence when located between the primary structure and a side yard right-of-way line. In all other allowed locations, the maximum height shall be no greater than eight feet above the finished lot grade at the location of the fence. 
b.  Location. A property line/other fence may be constructed on a side or rear property line when the side or rear property line is not a street right-of-way. If the side or rear property line is a right-of-way then the fence must have a minimum two-foot setback from the right-of-way. If a driveway enters the lot from a side or rear property line the fence must have a minimum ten-foot setback from the right-of-way. A solid property line/other fence may not extend closer to a front right-of-way line than the established fence line allowed by a right-of-way yard fence. 
c.  Permitted materials. Materials permitted for a property line/other fence are brick, stone, decorative block, wood, chain link, metal tubing or wrought iron. Vinyl or fiberglass composite materials may be utilized if the material is listed, designed and constructed for fencing materials. Metal posts will be allowed on wood fences. 
d.  Prohibited materials. 
1.  No person shall use for a property line/other fence rope, string, wire products including, but not limited to chicken wire, hog wire, wire fabric, barbed wire (except as allowed in other sections of this code), razor ribbon wire and similar welded or woven wire fabrics, chain, netting, cut or broken glass, paper, metal panels, corrugated metal panels, galvanized sheet metal, plywood, fiberglass panels or plastic panels in any fence or any other materials that are not manufactured specifically as fencing materials. The building official of the building inspection division of the community development department may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer's standards to establish the intended use of a proposed fencing material. 
2.  No person shall construct a fence of wood, metal or plastic products that are designed specifically for uses other than fence construction. 
3.  No person shall construct a fence of used, damaged or unsafe materials. 
4.  No person shall weave or use slats of any material, including but not limited to metal, fiberglass, or bamboo, through a chain link fence to create a blind fence, screening fence or any other type of fence addressed in this chapter. 
5.  Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless it can be determined by the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department that they meet the requirements of the building code for new materials. 
(5)  Fence diagrams. The following fence diagrams shall be used for reference purposes as allowable locations of fences in the Old Town Center design district and the Old Town design district. 
 

Fence Diagram, Example 1 
 

Fence Diagram, Example 2 
 

Fence Diagram, Example 3 
 

Fence Diagram, Example 4 
 

Fence Diagram, Example 5 
(6)  Non-conforming fence. In the Old Town Center design district and the Old Town design district, any fence legally in existence at the time of the creation of this subsection that does not fully comply with the requirements of this subsection shall be considered legally nonconforming and may remain in place. Any nonconforming fence may be replaced, repaired or maintained in its current location without losing its nonconforming status. Any nonconforming fence that is enlarged, expanded or modified shall be made to conform to the specific requirements of fences in the Old Town Center design district and the Old Town design district or be removed. No addition, expansion or construction of a structure on a lot in the Old Town Center design district and the Old Town design district shall be allowed to create a nonconforming fence. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § XIV, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 1688-3-92, § I, 3-16-92; Ord. No. 1910-4-94, § I(1)—(4), 4-4-94; Ord. No. 1978-10-94, § I, 10-3-94; Ord. No. 2165-10-96, § I, 10-21-96; Ord. No. 2345-6-98, § I, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 2602-9-2000, § A, 9-18-00; Ord. No. 3107-08-2004, § I, 8-16-04; Ord. No. 3300-01-2006, § I, 1-9-06; Ord. No. 3330-04-2006, § I, 4-3-06; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-06; Ord. No. 3764-05-2010 , § 1, 5-3-10; Ord. No. 4053-03-2014 , § 1, 3-17-14)  
Sec. 4-454. - Inspections. 
Upon completion of work authorized under this article it shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department that such work is ready for inspection. Required inspections shall include: 
(1)  Alignment inspection. To be made after all post or support structures are in place. 
(2)  Final inspection. To be made after the fence has been completed. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § XII, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 10, 7-10-06)  
Sec. 4-455. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All fences, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and aesthetically pleasing condition. Graffiti shall be removed immediately upon notification. All devices or safeguards which are required by this article shall be maintained operable. 
(b)  The owner or his designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of the fence, and to determine compliance of this section, the building official of the building inspection division of the community development department may cause any fence to be reinspected. 
(Ord. No. 1561-9-90, § XIII, 9-10-90; Ord. No. 3358-07-2006, § 11, 7-10-06)  
Secs. 4-456—4-470. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SWIMMING POOLS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing standards, § 4-111 et seq.; fences required at certain pools, § 4-442. 
 
Sec. 4-471. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Director shall mean the director of the health and code enforcement division of the department of community development or his designated representatives. 
Owner shall mean any person in whom is vested ownership, dominion or title, or who has a legal interest in the property, and such ownership shall be prima facie evidence of care and control of the premises. 
Private pool shall mean a swimming pool appurtenant to a single-family or duplex residence and used only by the occupants of the residence and their guests. 
Public pool shall mean a swimming pool to which the general public has access. 
Semi-public pool shall mean a swimming pool that is privately owned and open only to an identifiable class of persons, including, but not limited to, motel guests, apartment residents, and club members. 
Swimming pool or pool shall mean a structure that is used for swimming, bathing, wading, soaking or water play, including all equipment, appurtenant facilities, spas, and hot tubs. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 4-472. - Inspections. 
The director may inspect any pool at any reasonable time and has the authority to enter upon the premises where a pool is located to the extent necessary to make a full examination. Water samples from a pool may be taken. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-2)  
Sec. 4-473. - Construction permit fees. 
Swimming pool construction permit fees are set out in section 2-201. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-4)  
Sec. 4-474. - Operation permit, manager required. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a public or semi-public pool without a permit. To obtain a permit an applicant must complete a form provided by the director. An applicant must designate a manager of operations of each pool for which a permit is sought. A person designated as manager of operations of a pool must reside or be employed on the premises where the pool is located. 
(b)  If a manager of operations of a pool ceases to perform that function for any reason, the owner of the pool shall designate a new manager within a reasonable period of time set by the director. 
(c)  The director shall authorize a permit to be issued to an applicant if a qualified manager of operations has been designated and the fee has been paid. The amount of the fee is set out in section 2-201. The fee is due on or before March 1 of each calendar year. If a permit is initially issued after March 1 of a calendar year, the fee for that year will be prorated according to the number of whole months remaining in the year. No refunds will be made. 
(d)  This section does not apply to pools owned or operated by the city. 
(e)  This section does not apply to private pools. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(A))  
Sec. 4-475. - Certification of manager of operations. 
(a)  A manager of operations of a public or semi-public pool shall obtain certification by successfully completing a training course approved by the director. If a person designated by an owner as manager of operations of a pool is not certified, he shall attend and complete an approved training course at the earliest possible date. 
(b)  The certificate of a manager of operations must be kept current. 
(c)  This section does not apply to private pools. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(B))  
Sec. 4-476. - Operation of a pool. 
(a)  A manager of operations, a manager of premises on which a public or semi-public pool is located, or the owner of a public or semi-public pool shall not: 
(1)  Knowingly permit a condition to exist that endangers the life, health or safety of a swimmer or that violates a provision of this article. 
(2)  Knowingly permit a person to swim in a pool who has skin abrasions, open sores, cuts, skin disease, eye disease, nasal or ear discharge or communicable disease. 
(3)  Knowingly permit a person to carry glass within a pool area or enclosure. 
(4)  Knowingly allow dogs within a pool area or enclosure. 
(5)  Fail to post placards containing pool regulations and instructions in conspicuous places within a pool area or enclosure. 
(6)  Fail to maintain a pool in accordance with the standards of health and safety required by the city. 
(b)  This section does not apply to private pools. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(C)) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 3.  
Sec. 4-477. - Quality of water; public, private and semi-public pools. 
(a)  Acidity-alkalinity. The water in any pool must be maintained in an alkaline condition so that the pH of the water is between 7.2 and 8.2. 
(b)  Clarity. The water in any pool must be sufficiently clear to permit a distinct view of the main drain from outside the pool. 
(c)  Disinfectant. In any pool, disinfectant capable of killing bacteria and algae, but not harmful to humans, shall be added to the pool water through a continuous-feed machine. If chlorine is used, a residual level shall be maintained of one part per million of chlorine, or greater. 
(d)  Algae. All pools must be kept free of algae. 
(e)  Circulation. The recirculation system of any pool must be in operation at all times. 
(f)  Heating. Hot water must not enter a public or semi-public pool at a temperature exceeding 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(g)  Level. Fresh water must be added to any pool at a rate that will keep the pool water at a level sufficient to allow skimming devices or overflow gutters to work properly. 
(h)  Cleaning. The walls, floors, equipment and appurtenant facilities of any pool shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(D))  
Sec. 4-478. - Pools not maintained. 
(a)  The owner of a private or semi-public pool that is not being maintained as a swimming pool in accordance with this article shall drain all water from the pool and either: 
(1)  Fill the pool with dirt or sand that is not capable of holding water; or 
(2)  Cover the pool with a material of sufficient strength, durability, and water tightness to prevent the entrance of water or children. 
(b)  A pool that remains drained of water for 60 days is presumed to be no longer maintained. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(E))  
Sec. 4-479. - Safety equipment. 
(a)  The following safety equipment must be readily available for use at any time a public or semi-public pool is open: 
(1)  A life pole or shepherd's crook pole capable of reaching each part of a pool; and 
(2)  A guard line separating the shallow from the deep portion of a pool at the break point depth. 
(b)  This section does not apply to private pools. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(F))  
Sec. 4-480. - Regulation in pool area. 
A person commits an offense if he: 
(1)  Allows a dog under his control to remain within the pool area or pool enclosure of a public or semi-public pool; 
(2)  Has skin abrasions, open sores, cuts, skin disease, eye disease, nasal or ear discharge or communicable disease and swims in a public or semi-public pool; 
(3)  Carries glass within a public or semi-public pool area or enclosure; or 
(4)  Alters or removes safety equipment from a public or semi-public pool except in a bona fide emergency. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(G))  
Sec. 4-481. - Pool drainage. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he drains water from any pool at a rate that causes the water to leave a natural drainage course and flow onto or collect on another's property. 
(b)  All pools must be drained into the storm sewers whenever possible. 
(c)  When any pool must be drained into the sanitary sewer it shall be at a rate equal to three gallons per minute or less. The owner shall give notification to the water department prior to beginning draining. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(H))  
Sec. 4-482. - Suspension of permit. 
(a)  The director shall suspend a permit to operate a public or semi-public pool if: 
(1)  The annual permit fee is not paid; 
(2)  An owner fails to designate and retain a certified manager of operations as specified in this article; 
(3)  The condition of a pool is hazardous to the health or safety of swimmers or the general public; 
(4)  The owner fails to keep all pool equipment and devices working properly; 
(5)  The owner fails to comply with any provision of this article; or 
(6)  The suspension shall continue until the cause of suspension is corrected. 
(b)  Any person who believes that the director has wrongfully suspended a permit to operate a public or semi-public pool may appeal such decision by giving written notice to the city secretary within ten days of such suspension, whereupon the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon within 20 days thereafter; the decision of the council shall be final. 
(Code 1990, § 3-8-3(I))  
Secs. 4-483—4-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TEMPORARY SNOW CONE STANDS 
 
Sec. 4-501. - Permit fees. 
All persons or entities seeking to operate a snow cone stand within the city shall first obtain a permit for such business from the community development department of the city. Each location shall require a separate permit and fee. A fee per location shall be collected by the city for each location and shall be as set forth in section 2-201 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2560-4-00, § 1, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 4-502. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for a snow cone stand until a site plan of the proposed location is submitted to the community development department of the city, including therein the location and size of the following: 
(1)  All portable buildings; 
(2)  All electrical service; 
(3)  All signs; 
(4)  All traffic egress, parking and fire lanes. 
(b)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to any erection or construction of structures upon a location or sales of any type from the location, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  If the location of the snow cone stand has not been previously approved by city council for snow cone stand use, city council approval must be obtained prior to issuance of the initial permit. 
(d)  Failure to restore the location to its pre-permit condition after lapse of all snow cone sales related business on or before October 15 of the same year shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2560-4-00, § 2, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 4-503. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked when it is determined by the building official that: 
(1)  It is used for a location other than that for which it was issued; 
(2)  Any conditions or limitations set forth in this article which have been violated; 
(3)  The possessor of the permit fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with any order or notice served upon him under the provisions of this article within the time period provided therein; 
(4)  There has been any false statement or misrepresentations as to a material fact in the plans, specifications, or documentation upon which the permit was based; or 
(5)  Any deviation from any element or item contained within the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 2560-4-00, § 3, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 4-504. - Additional requirements. 
The requirements of this article shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other permit requirements, code requirements, and ordinances currently in force and effect or hereafter adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2560-4-00, § 4, 4-3-00)  
Sec. 4-505. - Effective date of permit. 
The effective date of each permit shall be from April 1 to October 1 of the same year. It shall be a violation of this article to operate or conduct business at a time other than permitted by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2560-4-00, § 5, 4-3-00)  
Secs. 4-506—4-520. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3404-12-2006, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2006, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as article XIII, section 4-521, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 4-521. - Prohibited; variance. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, or install a wind energy conversion system within the city limits unless a variance to do so has been granted by the city council. A wind energy conversion system is defined as an aggregation of parts including the base, tower, generator, rotor, blades, supports, guy wires and accessory equipment such as utility interconnect and battery banks, etc., in such configuration as necessary to convert the power of wind into mechanical or electrical energy, e.g., wind charger, windmill or wind turbine. 
(Ord. No. 3404-12-2006, § 1, 12-18-06  
ARTICLE XIV. - VACANT BUILDINGS 
 
Sec. 4-522. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner shall mean any person, partnership, association, corporation, fiduciary or other legal entity having legal or equitable title or interest in the real property regulated by this article. There is a rebuttable presumption that the Denton County Appraisal District's records identify the owner of the property and the owner's address. The word "owner" applied to a building or property shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or property. The duties and obligations in this section shall be joint and several among all owners as defined herein and their respective agents. 
Properly maintain means to maintain a vacant building and the property where it is located in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary condition and to take all necessary actions to keep the building and property in full compliance with all federal, state and local laws. It shall also mean that any fire safety system installed in the vacant building shall remain fully operational during vacancy. 
Secure shall mean all openings of the building are effectively kept closed to prevent access to the interior by animals, unauthorized persons, and the elements. Measures for securing may include repairing fences and walls, chaining and locking gates, and repairing or boarding doors, windows, or other openings, as required by the city. 
Vacant building shall mean any building or structure that is unoccupied or is occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. Multi-tenant buildings will be considered vacant if 75 percent or more of the total floor area of the building is unoccupied or occupied by a person without a legal right of occupancy. There is a presumption of vacancy if all lawful uses in the buildings or structures have ceased or reasonably appear to have ceased for more than 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Sec. 4-523. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and monitoring the status of vacant buildings within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Sec. 4-524. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all vacant buildings, except as otherwise stated herein. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to a vacant building that: 
(1)  Has a valid open building permit for construction, remodeling or repair; 
(2)  Is being actively marketed for sale or lease for a period of less than six consecutive months following the date that the building became a vacant building by a licensed real estate broker or an owner who is regularly advertising the property for sale; or 
(3)  Is under a contract for sale or lease for a period of less than six months following the date that the building became a vacant building. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Sec. 4-525. - Construction. 
Nothing contained herein shall limit the city's authority to enforce its ordinances. Submittal or acceptance of an application hereunder shall not be considered evidence of or authorization of continued nonconformity in conflict with the city's zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Sec. 4-526. - Registration. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the time that the building becomes a vacant building, the owner shall register that building by completing and filing with the city a registration form and remitting to the city the required registration fee as set forth in City of Lewisville chapter 2, article VIII, section 2-201. On or before October 31 of each year thereafter, the owner of the vacant building shall annually re-register their vacant building using the process outlined in this section. 
(b)  The registration form shall include: 
(1)  The street address of each vacant building, 
(2)  The floor plan, 
(3)  The name and address of each owner, 
(4)  The name and contact information of a designated local agent who can provide access to the building upon request, 
(5)  Proof of liability insurance as required by section 4-527 of this Code, 
(6)  A plan of action for the structure, including: 
a.  A narrative that describes the plans that the owner has for the current and future use of the property; and 
b.  A narrative of the owner's ongoing maintenance schedule for the building and the property where it is located, and 
(7)  A criminal trespass affidavit with an opt-out provision. 
(c)  The fire marshal or his designee shall have the authority to deny a registration or a re-registration if he determines that all requirements for registration have not been met, that the owner has made a false statement as to a material matter in the registration, or if the owner has outstanding fees assessed under this article. Upon such denial, the fire marshal or his designee shall deliver written notice of the denial to the owner including the basis for the denial and a statement informing the owner of the right to appeal. Such denial does not extend the deadline set out in this section for registration of a vacant building. 
(d)  If the fire marshal or his designee denies a registration or re-registration, the owner may either rectify the issues causing denial and attempt to register again, or the owner may file an appeal with the office of the city manager, or their designee, within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the written notice of denial. Such appeal shall be filed with the office of the city manager, or their designee, on a form created by the city. 
(e)  A registration of a vacant building issued pursuant to this section is not transferrable. New owners shall submit a new registration upon transfer of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Sec. 4-527. - Required insurance. 
(a)  The owner shall procure, prior to registration, and keep in full force and effect at all times during the registration term, a liability insurance policy covering the vacant building and the property on which it is located, including at minimum: 
(1)  For commercial properties, commercial general liability insurance coverage including, but not limited to, bodily injury (including death), property damage, premises/operations and personal and advertising injury, protecting the City of Lewisville against any and all claims for damages to persons or property as a result of, or arising out of, the registrant's operation, maintenance, or use of the vacant building, with minimum limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 for each occurrence and $2,000,000.00 annual aggregate; and 
(2)  For residential properties, liability insurance coverage with minimum limits of not less than $500,000.00. 
(b)  The insurance policy must be written by an insurance company approved by the State of Texas and acceptable to the city and issued in a standard form approved by the Texas Department of Insurance. All provisions of the policy must be acceptable to the city and must name the City of Lewisville and its officers and employees as additional insureds and provide for 30 days' written notice to the fire marshal or his designee of cancellation, non-renewal, or material change to the insurance policy. 
(c)  An owner shall provide to the fire marshal or his designee an updated certificate of insurance for the vacant building every six months during the period that the vacant building is required to be registered under this article. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Sec. 4-528. - Property maintenance. 
(a)  The owner of a vacant building shall maintain the building and the property where it is located in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary condition and to take all necessary actions to keep the building and property in full compliance with all federal, state and local laws. 
(b)  Any fire safety system installed in the vacant building shall remain fully operational during the period of vacancy. 
(c)  The owner shall secure the vacant building at all times by keeping all openings of the building effectively closed to prevent access to the interior by animals, unauthorized persons, and the elements. Measures for securing include, but are not limited to: erecting and/or maintaining fences and walls, chaining and locking gates, and repairing or boarding doors, windows, or other openings, as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Sec. 4-529. - Property inspections. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining whether the vacant building is being maintained in compliance with this article and any other applicable law, the fire marshal or his designee is authorized at a reasonable time to inspect: 
(1)  The exterior of a vacant building; 
(2)  The interior of a vacant building, if the permission of the owner, operator, or other person in control of the building is given or a search warrant is obtained; and 
(3)  The property upon which a vacant building is located. 
(b)  At the time of registration, the owner shall schedule an inspection of the vacant building by the city, to be executed within 60 days after registration. The fire marshal or his designee shall inspect said vacant building and the property where it is located to determine if it is maintained in compliance with this article and any other applicable law. If the owner fails or refuses to schedule an inspection, the city shall schedule an inspection window of up to three consecutive business days, beginning not sooner than one week following the date of registration, and provide written notice of the scheduled inspection window to the owner. The inspection shall be performed during regular business hours. 
(c)  After the initial inspection, the fire marshal or his designee shall inspect a vacant building and the property upon which it is located at least once during each 12-month period that the building remains vacant. 
(d)  An owner of a vacant building shall permit the fire marshal or his designee perform a lawful inspection of the interior and exterior of a vacant building and the property upon which it is located, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article and any other applicable law, at reasonable times upon request. The owner commits an offense if he, either personally or through an agent or employee, refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the vacant building as required by this subsection. 
(e)  If the vacant building or property where the vacant building is located is not maintained in compliance with this article or any other applicable law, the fire marshal or his designee shall issue a written notice of non-compliance to the owner giving them a specific amount of time to resolve the identified violations and schedule a reinspection. If the owner fails or refuses to schedule a reinspection by the resolution date given in the notice of non-compliance, the fire marshal or his designee may perform a lawful inspection of the property and vacant building at any time following the resolution date, during regular business hours. If entry to the interior of the building for reinspection purposes is refused, the fire marshal or his designee will obtain a search warrant to perform an interior reinspection. A separate fee shall be charged for reinspection. If violations are not resolved by the time of reinspection, the city may seek any remedy provided by law. 
(f)  Nothing herein shall limit the city's authority to request additional inspections, pursue other enforcement measures, or take immediate abatement measures as otherwise allowed pursuant to city ordinances and state law. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Sec. 4-530. - Violations; penalty. 
In addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under other city ordinances or other applicable law, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in municipal court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues, it shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4417-09-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-18-17)  
Secs. 4-531—4-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION 
 
Sec. 4-551. - Contractor registration required. 
(a)  Registration under this article is required of any individual operating as a sole proprietorship, or any firm, corporation or business entity (hereinafter referred to as "contractor") providing the following contracting, inspecting, or testing services in the city: 
(1)  Any services involving erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, improving, removing, converting, or demolishing any structure, irrigation, water well, pool, fence or sign; 
(2)  Any services which require, by state law, a license or registration to perform any mechanical, electrical, plumbing work; 
(3)  Removal and disposal of construction debris services, including roofing contractors; 
(4)  Approval by a backflow tester of test reports for backflow devices as required by this Code; or 
(5)  Performance of inspections by customer service inspectors and water supply protection specialists. 
(b)  In extending the rights and privileges of registration under this article, the city makes no statement of the technical competency of those so registered, and no manner of license is offered. 
(c)  No permit to perform any type of building, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, irrigation, water well drilling, or sign installation work shall be issued to any contractor which is not registered with the city under this article. 
(d)  Property owners performing work on their primary place of residence, as shown by a homestead exemption for the property in the records of the Denton County Appraisal District, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Sec. 4-552. - Application for registration. 
(a)  A completed contractor registration application shall be submitted by all applicants on a form provided by the city. 
(b)  Except for sign contractors, where a bond or insurance is required under this section, the bond or insurance policy shall be for the use and benefit of the city and any person having a cause of action arising out of the provision of services requiring registration under this article which are in violation of the laws and ordinances relating to such services, except where denoted herein. The bond or insurance policy shall fully indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs or damages arising out of any real or asserted claim or cause of action against it and from all costs and damages arising out of any wrongs or injuries for damages, either real or asserted, claimed against it that may be occasioned by negligence or fault of the principal of the bond or insurance policy, his agents, servants, subcontractors, or employees, by reasons of the work done under authorization or a permit issued to the principal. The bond or insurance policy shall further condition that the liability of the surety under the bond or insurance policy shall cease and terminate of its own force and effect one year from the date of execution, save and except for expenses, losses, claims for damages, judgments, or other costs which may arise or be incurred or sustained by any person against the principal by reason of failure to comply with the provisions of the laws and ordinances relating to services provided which require registration under this article. 
(c)  Applications for the following types of contractor registration shall include the following information: 
(1)  General contractors: Contractors providing any services for which a registration is required under this article, which do not fall under any of the other categories listed in this section, shall provide the following information: 
a.  Proof that the contractor maintains surety bond or liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000.00. 
b.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(2)  Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) and refrigeration contractors: Contractors providing services requiring a valid air conditioning and refrigeration contractor license issued by the State of Texas shall provide the following information: 
a.  Proof that the contractor maintains liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 or a bond of equal value. 
b.  A valid air conditioning and refrigeration contractor license issued by the State of Texas to the individual performing the work or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity. 
c.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(3)  Electrical contractors: Contractors providing services requiring a valid electrical contractor license issued by the State of Texas shall provide the following information: 
a.  Proof that the contractor maintains liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 or a bond of equal value. 
b.  A valid electrical contractor license issued by the State of Texas to the individual performing the work or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity. 
c.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(4)  Plumbing contractors: Contractors providing plumbing services shall provide the following information: 
a.  A valid responsible master plumber license issued by the State of Texas to the individual performing the work or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity. 
b.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(5)  Landscape irrigation contractors: Contractors providing services requiring a valid landscape irrigator license issued by the State of Texas shall provide the following information: 
a.  Proof that the contractor maintains liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 or a bond of equal value. 
b.  A valid landscape irrigator license issued by the State of Texas to the individual performing the work or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity. 
c.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(6)  Backflow testing contractors: Contractors providing services requiring a valid backflow prevention assembly tester license issued by the State of Texas shall provide the following information: 
a.  A valid backflow prevention assembly tester license issued by the State of Texas to the individual performing the work or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity. 
b.  Proof of gauge calibration within the preceding 12 months. 
c.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(7)  Customer service inspector (CSI) contractors: Contractors providing services requiring a valid customer service inspector license issued by the State of Texas shall provide the following information: 
a.  A valid customer service inspector license issued by the State of Texas or a valid water supply protection specialist (WSPS) endorsement issued by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners (TSBPE) to the inspector or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity. 
b.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(8)  Water well installers: Contractors providing water well installation services requiring a valid license issued by the State of Texas shall provide the following information: 
a.  Proof that the contractor maintains liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 or a bond of equal value. 
b.  A valid license issued by the State of Texas for the specified trade to the installer or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity for such installation. 
c.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(9)  On-site septic facility (OSSF) installers: Contractors providing services to install on-site septic facilities (OSSFs) shall provide the following information: 
a.  Proof that the contractor maintains liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 or a bond of equal value. 
b.  A valid license issued by the State of Texas for the specified trade to the installer or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity for such installation. 
c.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(10)  Sign contractors: Contractors providing services to install, erect, or maintain a sign shall provide the following information: 
a.  Proof that the contractor maintains liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 or a surety bond in the sum of $5,000.00. The bond or insurance policy shall be for the use and benefit of the city and any person having a cause of action arising out of the provision of services under this chapter which are in violation of the provisions of chapter 11 (Signs) of this Code, except where denoted herein. The bond or insurance policy shall fully indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs or damages arising out of any real or asserted claim or cause of action against it and from all costs and damages arising out of any wrongs or injuries for damages, either real or asserted, claimed against it that may be occasioned by negligence or fault of the principal of the bond or insurance policy, his agents, servants, subcontractors, or employees, by reasons of the work done under authorization or a permit issued to the principal. The bond or insurance policy shall further condition that the liability of the surety under the bond or insurance policy shall cease and terminate of its own force and effect one year from the date of execution, save and except for expenses, losses, claims for damages, judgments, or other costs which may arise or be incurred or sustained by any person against the principal by reason of failure to comply with the provisions of chapter 11 (Signs) of this Code. 
b.  If the contractor plans to perform work on signs containing electrical components, a valid master sign electrician or a valid master electrician license issued by the State of Texas to the individual performing the work or, if the application is made on behalf of a firm, corporation, or business entity, a responsible officer of the firm, corporation, or business entity. 
c.  Any other information deemed necessary by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Sec. 4-553. - Transfer of registration prohibited. 
A registration under this article may not be transferred to, assigned to, or in any manner directly or indirectly used by, any person, firm, corporation or business entity other than the person, firm, corporation or business entity to which the registration was issued. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Sec. 4-554. - Requirement to update information. 
If a change occurs in the information previously provided by the holder of a registration, then the contractor shall provide written notice of the updated information to the building official within 30 days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Sec. 4-555. - Registration fee and renewal. 
The annual fee for registration as prescribed by section 2-201 of this Code shall be submitted with each complete application for registration, except that registrations for plumbing and electrical contractors are exempt from the registration fee. Registration under this article shall expire one year after the date of issue. Renewal of registration shall be accomplished by payment of the fee prescribed by section 2-201 of this Code with a new application under this article. Renewal of registration shall extend the validity of the corresponding registration for one year only. Contractor registration or renewal fees shall not be pro-rated. Where a registration is required under this article in order to receive a permit or inspection, no permits shall be issued and inspections may be placed on hold if a required registration has expired. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Sec. 4-556. - Suspension or revocation of registration. 
A registration under this article may be suspended or permanently revoked by the building official for any of the following actions or failures to act by a contractor: 
(1)  Failure to request and obtain a final inspection prior to the expiration of a permit; 
(2)  Allowing use or occupancy of a structure for which a permit was obtained without first obtaining the required authorization from the city; 
(3)  A finding by the building official that the contractor has been grossly negligent in the performance of work; 
(4)  Expiration, suspension or revocation of a license issued by the State of Texas and required by this article; 
(5)  Providing false or misleading information; 
(6)  Failure to provide updated information within 30 days of any changes as required by section 4-554; 
(7)  Transferring or permitting the use by another person, firm, or corporation of a contractor's registration; 
(8)  Failure to maintain the minimum liability insurance or bond, where required; 
(9)  Commission of two violations of this section or any ordinance of the City of Lewisville directly related to the building and construction trades by any responsible officer of a contractor within a 12-month period; or 
(10)  Conviction for a violation of any law of the State of Texas directly related to the building and construction trades by any responsible officer of a contractor. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Sec. 4-557. - Appeal of revocation by the building official. 
(a)  A contractor whose registration has been suspended or revoked may appeal the action to the city's contractor registration board. In the case of an appeal, the action of the building official shall stand until the final determination of the appeal is made by the contractor registration board. The appeal must be filed, in writing, within ten business days of the suspension or revocation of the registration. After hearing the appeal, the contractor registration board may take the following action: 
(1)  Overrule a suspension or revocation and reinstate the registration of the contractor for the remaining period of time paid for; 
(2)  Affirm a suspension or revocation; 
(3)  Affirm a suspension, but waive any or all of the reinstatement requirements set forth in section 4-558 of this article; or 
(4)  Affirm a suspension and require conditions for reinstatement in addition to those set forth in section 4-558 of this article including, but not limited to, prohibiting reinstatement for up to six months. 
(b)  The decision of the contractor registration board is final. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Sec. 4-558. - Reinstatement of registration. 
A contractor whose registration has been suspended may reapply for registration if: 
(1)  All circumstances leading to the suspension have been corrected; 
(2)  The contractor reapplies for registration; 
(3)  The registration fee is paid; and 
(4)  Any additional conditions set by the contractor registration board pursuant to section 4-557 of this article have been met. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Sec. 4-559. - Contractor registration board. 
(a)  Establishment. A contractor registration board is hereby established. 
(b)  Membership. 
(1)  The board shall consist of five members and two alternates, each to be appointed or reappointed by the city council. 
(2)  Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
(3)  Board members serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by the city council for any or no reason. 
(4)  The board shall elect its own chairman. 
(c)  Meetings. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. 
(d)  Appeals. All appeals from a decision of the building official heard by the board shall be heard by a simple majority of the members of the board as established by this section. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. 
(1)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(2)  The board shall act by resolution in which a simple majority of those present and voting must concur. 
(3)  The board shall adopt from time to time such additional rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of the ordinance, and shall furnish a copy of the same to the building official, all of which rules and regulations shall operate uniformly in all cases. All of its resolutions and orders shall be in accordance therewith. 
(f)  Powers and duties of board. The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals requested under section 4-557 of this article and take actions as outlined therein. 
(Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-18-17)  
Secs. 4-560—4-585. - Reserved.  
Chapter 4.5 - FAIR HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2292-12-97, adopted December 15, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of § 1(1.01—1.18) as §§ 4.5-1—4.5-18 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 4.5-1. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to promote, through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity for each person to obtain housing without regard to his/her race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability or familial status. Further, this policy is based upon a recognition that the denial of such rights through considerations based upon race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability or familial status is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of an inalienable right which is within the power and the proper responsibility of government. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.01), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggrieved person shall mean and include any person who: 
(1)  Claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice; or 
(2)  Believes that he/she will be injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur. 
Complainant shall mean a person, including the fair housing officer for the city, who files a complaint under section 4.5-10 of this chapter. 
Disability shall mean, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment; 
but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance as defined under state or federal law. 
Discriminatory housing practice shall mean an act prohibited by section 4.5-3 of this chapter. 
Dwelling shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure or part of a building or structure that is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families; or 
(2)  Any vacant land that is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location of a building, structure or part of a building or structure described in subsection (1) immediately above. 
Fair Housing Act shall mean the federal Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., as amended (1977 and Supp. 1994). 
Fair housing officer (FHO) shall mean the director of community development or his/her designated representative authorized to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Familial status shall mean the status of a person resulting from being: 
(1)  Pregnant; 
(2)  Domiciled with an individual younger than 18 years of age in regard to whom the person: 
a.  Is the parent or legal custodian: 
b.  Has the written permission of the parent or legal custodian for domicile with that person; or 
c.  Is in the process of obtaining legal custody of any individual younger than 18 years of age. 
Family shall mean and include a single individual. 
Person shall mean and include one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, trustees, trustees in cases under Title 11, receivers and fiduciaries. 
Rent shall mean to lease, to sublease, to let or to otherwise grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
Respondent shall mean the person or other entity accused in a complaint of an unfair housing practice. 
Secretary shall mean the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.02), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-3. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  Sale or rental of housing based on race, religion, etc. A person engages in a prohibited discriminatory act if, because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, he/she: 
(1)  Refuses to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer; 
(2)  Refuses to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise makes unavailable or denies, a dwelling to a person; or 
(3)  Discriminates against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith. 
(b)  Sale or rental of housing based on disability. 
(1)  A person engages in a prohibited discriminatory act if he/she discriminates in the sale or rental, or otherwise makes unavailable or denies, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes: 
a.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with a disability, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises. Except, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so, condition permission for a modification on the renter agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; or 
b.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services, when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. 
(3)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to invalidate or limit any ordinance of the city from requiring dwellings to be designed and constructed in a manner that affords persons with disabilities greater access than is required by this chapter. 
(4)  Nothing in this subsection requires that a dwelling be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(c)  Other prohibited discriminatory acts. 
(1)  Publication. A person may not make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, or an intention to make such a preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(2)  Inspection. A person may not, because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin, represent to any person that a dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is available for inspection, sale or rental. 
(3)  Entry into neighborhood. A person may not, for profit, induce or attempt to induce a person to sell or rent a dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into a neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin. 
(4)  Residential real-estate-related transactions. 
a.  A person whose business includes engaging in residential real-estate-related transactions may not discriminate against a person in making a real-estate-related transaction available or in the terms or conditions of a real-estate-related transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin. 
b.  In this section, "residential real-estate-related transaction" means any of the following: 
1.  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or secured by residential real estate; 
2.  The reselling, brokering or appraising of residential real property. 
(5)  Brokerage services. A person may not deny any person access to, or membership or participation in, a multiple listing service, real estate brokers organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or discriminate against a person in the terms or conditions of access, membership or participation in such an organization, service or facility because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.03), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-4. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Certain sales and rentals. 
(1)  The following transactions are exempt from all provisions of section 4.5-3, except section 4.5-3(c)(1): 
a.  The sale or rental of a single-family house sold or rented by an owner is exempt if: 
1.  The owner does not: 
(i)  Own more than three single-family houses at any one time; or 
(ii)  Own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his/her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to any part of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three single-family houses at one time; and 
2.  The house was sold or rented without: 
(i)  The use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sale or rental services of a real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; and 
(ii)  Such house is sold or rented without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 4.5-3(c)(1) of this chapter. 
b.  The exemption of section 4.5-4(a)(1)a shall exempt only one such sale within any 24-month period where a single-family house is sold by a private individual owner who did not reside in the house at the time of the sale or who was not the most recent resident of the house prior to sale. 
c.  The sale or rental of rooms or units in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other is exempt if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of the living quarters as the owner's residence. 
(2)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer title. 
(b)  Business of selling or renting dwellings defined. For the purpose of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He/she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  He/she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his/her own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He/she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.04), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-5. - Housing for elderly. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter relating to familial status do not apply to housing for older persons. 
(b)  In this section, "housing for older persons" means: 
(1)  Housing provided under any state or federal program that the secretary of HUD determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons, as that term is defined in the state or federal program; 
(2)  Housing intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Housing intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. As determined by regulations developed by the secretary of HUD, the following minimum requirements must be present for the dwelling(s) to qualify as housing for older persons: 
a.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
b.  At least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
c.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(c)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for classification as housing for older persons by reason of: 
(1)  The presence of persons residing in such housing who do not meet the age requirements of subsections (b) (2) or (3) and who were in residence as of September 13, 1988. New occupants of such housing must meet the age requirements of subsection (b) (2) or (3); or 
(2)  The presence of unoccupied units where such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsections (b) (2) or (3). 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.05), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-6. - Religious organizations, nonprofit organizations and private clubs. 
This chapter does not prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or a nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, from: 
(1)  Limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion; or 
(2)  Giving preference to persons of the same religion, unless membership in the religion is restricted because of race, color or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.06), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-7. - Appraisals. 
This chapter does not prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.07), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-8. - Effect on other laws. 
(a)  This chapter does not affect any reasonable local, state or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling or relating to health or safety standards. 
(b)  This chapter does not affect any requirement of nondiscrimination in any other local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.08), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-9. - Fair housing officer. 
(a)  Duties. It shall be the duty of the city's fair housing officer (FHO) to implement the provisions of this chapter and to facilitate compliance with its provisions. The FHO shall perform this duty in accordance with the policy directives of the city council, and may recommend rules and regulations to aid in the implementation and facilitation of the fair housing policy of the city, such rules and regulations being subject to the approval of the city council. 
(b)  Cooperation with state and federal agencies. 
(1)  The fair housing officer is encouraged to cooperate with the secretary of housing and urban development and the Attorney General of the United States in the enforcement of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq., as amended, and may assist the secretary or attorney general in any way consistent with the policy of this chapter. 
(2)  The fair housing officer is encouraged to cooperate with the Texas Commission on Human Rights in the enforcement of the Texas Fair Housing Act, and may assist the Texas Commission on Human Rights in any way consistent with the policy of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.09), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-10. - Complaints—Requirements. 
A complaint must be in writing, made under oath or affirmation, and contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the respondent. 
(2)  Name, address and signature of the complainant. 
(3)  Name and address of the aggrieved person, if different from the complainant. 
(4)  Date of the occurrence or termination of the discriminatory housing practice and date of the filing of the complaint. 
(5)  Description and address of the housing accommodation involved in the discriminatory housing practice, if appropriate. 
(6)  Concise statement of the facts of the discriminatory housing practice, including the basis of the discrimination (race, color, sex, religion, disability, familial status or national origin). 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.10), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-11. - Same—Filing. 
(a)  An aggrieved person, or any authorized representative or an aggrieved person, may file a complaint with the fair housing officer no later than one year after an alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated. 
(b)  A complaint may be filed by the fair housing officer with the department of housing and urban development (HUD) no later than one year after an alleged discriminatory housing practice has occurred or terminated, if the fair housing officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed a discriminatory housing practice. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a complaint, the FHO shall, in writing: 
(1)  Notify the complainant and the aggrieved person, if different from the complainant, that a complaint has been filed; and 
(2)  Advise the complainant and the aggrieved person, if different from the complainant, of time limits applicable to the complaint and of all rights, obligations and remedies of the aggrieved person under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.11), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-12. - Same—Role of fair housing officer. 
Upon the receipt of information from any person attempting to obtain housing within the city that a discriminatory act or practice has occurred, the fair housing officer may provide the complainant with information and assistance in the filing of a discrimination complaint as requested by such aggrieved person. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.12), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-13. - Additional remedies. 
The procedures prescribed by this chapter do not constitute an administrative prerequisite to another action or remedy available to the city or to an aggrieved person under federal or state law. An aggrieved person may seek a private enforcement remedy as allowed by section 3613 of the Fair Housing Act. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.13), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-14. - Effect of civil action on certain contracts. 
Relief granted under section 4.5-13 does not affect a contract, sale, encumbrance or lease that: 
(1)  Was consummated before the granting of the relief; and 
(2)  Involved a bona fide purchaser, encumbrancer or tenant who did not have actual notice of the filing of a complaint under this chapter or a civil action filed under the authority of the Fair Housing Act. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.14), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-15. - Education and public information. 
The fair housing officer may conduct educational and public information activities that are designed to promote the policy of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.15), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-16. - Interference with exercise of rights. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his/her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his/her having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this chapter, including the giving of testimony or provision of information in aid of investigation or discovery under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.16), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-17. - Criminal penalties for violation. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of section 4.5-3 of this chapter commits a misdemeanor criminal offense. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which a violation is committed, continued or permitted. 
(b)  A criminal offense under this chapter is punishable in municipal court. An offense is punishable by fine only, and the amount of fine assessed shall not exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.17), 12-15-97)  
Sec. 4.5-18. - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of the provisions to other persons not similarly situated or to other circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2292-12-97, § 1(1.18), 12-15-97)  
Chapter 5 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 4-46 et seq.; building numbering system, § 4-361 et seq.; alarm systems, § 4-386 et seq.; fire prevention requirements for engineering site plans for land served by substandard public improvements, § 6-440; requirements for fire protection in the land development regulations, § 6-751 et seq. 
State Law reference— Fire safety, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq.; liquified petroleum gas, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code § 113.001 et seq.; liquified petroleum gas containers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 8610a; gasoline stations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 753.001 et seq.; duties of state fire marshal, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 417.001 et seq.; fire protection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Arson. 
The city will pay to any person $250.00 for information given the fire chief which shall lead to the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of burning or attempting to burn any building or structure within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1990, § 5-1-2) 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous offenses, ch. 8.  
Secs. 5-2—5-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 5-26—5-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-66 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-51. - Investigation of fires. 
The fire chief shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire chief shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by such investigation. 
(Code 1990, § 1-23-2(A))  
Sec. 5-52. - Taking of testimony. 
The fire chief, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken in the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1990, § 1-23-2(B))  
Sec. 5-53. - Initiation of prosecution. 
If the fire chief shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1990, § 1-23-2(B))  
Sec. 5-54. - Right of entry. 
The fire chief shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this division, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 1990, § 1-23-2(C))  
Sec. 5-55. - Witnesses. 
(a)  The fire chief shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this division a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire chief is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(b)  All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire chief may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(c)  Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire chief, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire chief in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid. It shall be the duty of the fire chief to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such demeanor shall be fined in a sum not exceeding $25.00. Provided, however, that any person so convicted shall have the right to appeal. 
(Code 1990, § 1-23-3)  
Secs. 5-56—5-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FIRE MARSHAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-66 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-71. - Examine buildings, property. 
(a)  The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent to such building and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city. It shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. 
(b)  Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of such building or premises. If such owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five days, appeal to the city manager, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by such owner or occupant. 
(c)  At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the city during the month. 
(Code 1990, § 1-23-4)  
Secs. 5-72—5-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 5-91. - Fire code—Adopted. 
(a)  The 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code of the International Code Council including all appendices and supplements, as amended by sections 5-92, 5-94 and 5-95 of this chapter, is adopted as the fire code of the city and is hereby incorporated as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  One copy of the code set forth in subsection (a) of this section is filed in the office of the fire prevention division of the city's community development department. 
(Code 1990, §§ 6-2-1—6-2-3; Ord. No. 1674-2-92, § I(1)—(3), 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2012-3-95, § I, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 2757-12-2001, § I, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3266-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 3522-12-2007, § I, 12-17-07; Ord. No. 4040-12-2013 , § 1, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4273-05-2016 , § 1, 5-2-16) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4.  
Sec. 5-92. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the fire code adopted by this article, it shall mean "City of Lewisville." 
(b)  Wherever the words "fire code official" are used, they shall mean, "fire marshal." 
(c)  Whenever the words "certificate of inspection" are used in the code, or elsewhere, they shall mean "certificate of inspection permit." 
(d)  Wherever the words "fire apparatus access roads" are used in the International Fire Code they shall mean "fire lane." 
(Code 1990, § 6-2-5; Ord. No. 1674-2-92, § I(5), 2-3-92; Ord. No. 2012-3-95, § II, 3-6-95; Ord. No. 2757-12-2001, § I, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3266-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05; Ord. No. 4040-12-2013 , § 2, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4273-05-2016 , § 2, 5-2-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-93. - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the fire code or standards adopted by this article or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter or to violate or fail to comply with any order made hereunder, or to build in violation of any detailed statement or specification or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate of inspection permit issued thereunder from which no appeal has been taken, or to fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defect within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1990, § 6-2-9; Ord. No. 1674-2-92, § I(9), 2-3-92; Ord. No. 3266-10-2005, § I, 10-17-05)  
Sec. 5-94. - Automatic sprinkler systems for townhomes. 
The following provision was enacted by the Lewisville City Council in 2007, prior to the effective date of V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1301.551(i) and, therefore, shall remain in full effect as a revision to any version of the International Fire Code adopted under this article and shall be read in conjunction with any other local amendments set forth in section 5-94.5 of this article. 
Section 903.2(2); maintain provision to read as follows: 
2.  Townhomes—An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all townhouse occupancies with more than two dwelling units per building. The automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13-R to include garages, exterior balconies and attached breezeways. Each building shall be provided with not less than a Class A roof covering. 
(Ord. No. 4040-12-2013 , § 3, 12-16-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4040-12-2013 adopted Dec. 16, 2013, amended § 5-94 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 5-94 pertained to amendments to the 2006 International Fire Code and derived from: Code of 1990; Ord. No. 1674-2-92, adopted Feb. 3, 1992; Ord. No. 1833-9-93, adopted Sept. 13, 1993; Ord. No. 2012-3-95, adopted Mar. 6, 1995; Ord. No. 2757-12-2001, adopted Dec. 10, 2001; Ord. No. 3117-09-2004, adopted Sept. 13, 2004; Ord. No. 3266-10-2005, adopted Oct. 17, 2005; Ord. No. 3390-11-2006, adopted Nov. 6, 2006; Ord. No. 3477-08-2007, adopted Aug. 6, 2007; Ord. No. 3522-12-2007, adopted Dec. 17, 2007; and Ord. No. 3955-08-2012 , adopted Aug. 6, 2012.  
Sec. 5-94.5. - Amendments to the International Fire Code 2015 Edition. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Fire Code 2015 Edition adopted by this article: 
Section 101.1; change to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Lewisville Fire Code, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 101.2.1; change to read as follows: 
101.2.1 Appendices. All appendices as published in the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, are adopted in their entirety. 
Section 102.1; #3; change to read as follows: 
3.  Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required in Chapter 11 or in other specific sections of this code. 
Section 102.7; change to read as follows: 
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 80, and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections 102.7.1 and 102.7.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the ICC Electrical Code shall be the electrical code as adopted by the City. Unless prohibited by other State laws, the most recently published edition of referenced code and standard shall be used. 
Section 102.7.2; change to read as follows: 
102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards. Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter that is within the scope of this code and any adopted amendments, the provisions of this code and any adopted amendments, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard. 
Section 103.2; change to read as follows: 
103.2 Appointment. The fire code official in charge of the fire prevention division shall be appointed by the city manager or his/her designee on the basis of examination to determine qualifications. 
Section 105.3.3; change to read as follows: 
105.3.3 Occupancy Prohibited before Approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the fire code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections indicating the applicable provisions of this code have been met. 
Section 105.7.19; add this new section to read as follows: 
105.7.19 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Chapter 10. A separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
Section 108; change to read as follows: 
108.1 Means of Appeal. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, the City Council shall act as the Board of Appeals. 
Section 108.1.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
108.1.1 An applicant may appeal any order, decision, or determination made by the fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code. 
a.  Permitted Applications. If the appeal is of the fire code official's denial, disapproval, revocation, or other refusal to grant the applicant's submitted permit application, such an appeal must be filed in writing with the City Manager within thirty (30) days after the date of the denial, disapproval, refusal, and/or revocation. The appeal must also state how the fire code official allegedly misconstrued or wrongly interpreted the fire code. After receiving an appeal in accordance with this section, the City Manager shall submit the appeal to the City Council for their consideration. The City Council's decision on the appeal shall be final decision. 
b.  All Other Actions of the Fire Code Official. For all other appeals, the process shall be promulgated by the fire code official. 
Section 108.3 Qualifications; delete this section. 
Section 202; change to amend and add those definitions as set forth below: 
[B] AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing, or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
-  Dialysis centers 
-  Providers of procedures involving sedation 
-  Providers of sedation dentistry 
-  Surgery centers 
-  Colonic centers 
-  Psychiatric centers 
[B] ATRIUM. An opening connecting three or more stories other than enclosed stairways, elevators, hoistways, escalators, plumbing, electrical, air-conditioning or other equipment, which is closed at the top and not defined as a mall. Stories, as used in this definition, do not include balconies within assembly groups or mezzanines that comply with Section 505 of the International Building Code. 
[B] DEFEND IN PLACE. A method of emergency response that engages building components and trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building. 
FIRE WATCH. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. 
FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, detonation, and/or activated by ignition with a match or other heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks as set forth herein. …[remainder of text unchanged]… 
HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE: add a second paragraph to read as follows: 
Any building classified as a group S Occupancy or Speculative Building exceeding 3,600 sq. ft. that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height. 
HIGH-RISE BUILDING. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55-feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION Business Group B, add: 
Fire Stations—if protected with an automatic smoke detection system as specified in Section 907.2.11.2 and emergency escape and rescue windows in the sleeping areas as specified in the International Building Code section 1030. 
Police Stations with detention facilities for 5 or less. 
REPAIR GARAGE. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, and watercraft. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis. 
STANDBY PERSONNEL. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the Fire Chief. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the Fire Chief. Charges for utilization shall be as normally calculated by the jurisdiction. 
STRIP MALL BUILDING. A single building, of two or less floors, enclosing a number of tenants and occupants such as retail stores, drinking and dining establishments, offices, or other similar uses each tenant of which shall have a separate exit directly to the exterior of the building. 
UPGRADED OR REPLACED FIRE ALARM SYSTEM. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or replaced includes, but is not limited to the following: 
•  Replacing one single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model 
•  Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one 
•  Conversion from a horn system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system 
•  Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices. 
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement: 
•  Firmware updates 
•  Software updates 
•  Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer firmware. 
Section 307.1.1; change to read as follows: 
307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning is prohibited within the city limits. 
EXCEPTIONS: 
1.  Open burning for the purpose of reducing the impact of wildland fire when authorized by the fire code official by permit described in Section 307.2. 
2.  Open burning on government owned/managed property for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests when prior written notice of such open burning is provided to the fire marshal at least one month prior to the burn and the open burn complies with all federal, state, and local laws, guidelines, restrictions, and/or bans. 
Section 307.2; change to read as follows: 
307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for reducing the impact of wildland fire. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. A permit may not be granted unless the proposed burn complies with all federal, state, and local laws, guidelines, restrictions, and/or bans. 
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality guidelines and/or restrictions. 
2.  State, County, or Local temporary or permanent bans on open burning. 
3.  Local written policies as established by the fire code official. 
Section 307.3; change to read as follows: 
307.3 Extinguishment authority. Thefire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment of any open burning by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department, whether a valid permit is obtained or not, that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
Section 307.4; change to read as follows and delete all exceptions: 
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet of any structure. 
Section 307.4.1; change to read as follows: 
307.4.1 Bonfires. Bonfires are prohibited inside City limits. 
Section 307.4.2; change to read as follows: 
307.4.2 Recreational Fires. Recreational fires are prohibited within the City limits. 
Section 307.4.4; add this new section to read as follows: 
307.4.4 Permanent outdoor firepit. Permanently installed outdoor firepits for recreational fire purposes shall not be installed within 10 feet of a structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the International Building Code. 
Section 307.4.5; add this new section to read as follows: 
307.4.5 Trench Burns. Trench burns shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in accordance with Section 307.2. Trench burns shall be only be authorized and permitted by the fire prevention division in accordance with the following rules and requirements. 
Section 307.4.5.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
307.4.5.1 Approvals. All outdoor burning must utilize a mechanical trench/pit burning assembly approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). All applicants must obtain approval through the TCEQ for the site specific burning in the city. 
Section 307.4.5.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
307.4.5.2 Materials. Burning shall include only materials authorized on an approved burning permit for the purpose of clearing land for future development. 
Section 307.4.5.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
307.4.5.3 Location. Areas for burning shall be located a minimum distance of 1,800 feet from all structures downwind and 500 feet from any other structures not classified as being downwind. In addition, areas for burning shall be located a minimum distance of 500 feet from wooded areas, roadways, and overhead power lines. Surrounding grass and/or brush must be mowed or maintained as to not present a fire hazard. 
Section 307.4.5.4; add this new section to read as follows: 
307.4.5.4 Other Materials. No fuel storage tank or other hazardous material is to be stored within the burn area. 
Section 307.4.5.5; add this new section to read as follows: 
307.4.5.5 Requirements. Each day, after 8:00 a.m., prior to any permitted burning operation, the below listed agencies must be contacted: 
•  TCEQ 817-588-5800 Ask for Air Quality Person 
•  Fire prevention division, 972-219-3462 
1.  Hours of burning shall be between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. On ozone action days, burning shall not begin before 10:00 a.m. The pit shall be covered with dirt and completely extinguished by 5:00 p.m. each day. No smoke or burning objects shall be visible. 
2.  No burning allowed on holidays or weekends. 
3.  Approved stand-by equipment must be on location and shall include at least one piece of earth moving equipment (bull dozer, backhoe, track loader, etc.). 
4.  All burning must be constantly attended by at least one competent person on location to operate stand-by equipment, and all fires shall be completely extinguished by 5:00 p.m. or before being left alone. 
5.  Wind velocity for below ground pit/trench burning operation shall not exceed 20 miles per hour. 
Section 307.4.5.6; add this new section to read as follows: 
307.4.5.6 Failure to Comply. Burning permits will be revoked for failure to comply with any of the following: 
1.  Violation of any site-specific or general rules regulating burning. 
2.  Extreme dry weather. 
3.  Change in wind direction. 
4.  If in the case that ash, excessive smoke, or excessive odor is documented by fire prevention in relation to any surrounding property for whatever reason. 
5.  Where any life, health, nuisance, or other hazard is indicated to surrounding persons or property. 
Note: If permits are revoked by fire prevention for any of the reasons listed above, materials shall be disposed of in a different manner. Further information may be obtained by contacting the fire prevention division weekdays at (972) 219-3462. 
Section 307.5; change to read as follows: 
307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, bonfires, and use of permanent outdoor fire pits or portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the&hellip {remainder of section unchanged} 
Section 308.1.4; change to read as follows and delete exception 3: 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills and other similar devices used for cooking shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within 10 feet of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds [nominal 20 pound LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs. (5 containers). 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds [nominal 20 pound LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 lbs. (2 containers). 
Section 308.1.6.2, Exception #3; change to read as follows: 
3.  Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3. 
Section 308.1.6.3: change to read as follows: 
Sky lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released unmanned free-floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not limited to a sky lantern. 
Section 310.1.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
310.1.1 Definitions. 
Administrative area means the area of an establishment not generally accessible to the public, including, but not limited to individual offices, stockrooms, and employee lounges, or meeting rooms. 
Bar means an establishment licensed by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages which derives more than 75 percent of its annual gross sales from the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this ordinance or the director's designated representative. 
Food products establishment means any fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, grill, tea room, sandwich shop, soda fountain, confectionery, ice cream store, refreshment stand, fruit stand, country club, catering service, industrial feeding establishment, or grocery store; private or public where food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any other eating or drinking is prepared for sale or for eating or drinking establishment or operation where food or drink is served or provided for the public with or without charge. 
Health care facility means any institution that provides medical, surgical, or overnight facilities for patients. 
Retail and service establishment means any establishment which sells goods or services to the general public. 
Public service area means any area to which the general public routinely has access for municipal services or which is designated a public service area in a written policy prepared in compliance with this ordinance. 
Sign means the official placard designating an area or facility where smoking is prohibited, and must conform to one of the following choices of wording, to-wit: 
1.  No smoking. Violators fined up to $500.00. 
2.  The universal symbol for no smoking; or 
3.  Any other language indicating that the area marked is designated as a nonsmoking area. 
All signs must be of sufficient size to accommodate the message contained thereon in letters at least one inch in height. 
Section 310.1.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
310.1.2 Smoking prohibited in certain public areas. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, or other plant product in any of the following: 
(1)  A public library, or museum; 
(2)  Hearing rooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms or any public service area of any facility owned, operated, or managed by the city in which public business is conducted, when the public business requires or provides an opportunity for direct participation or observation by the general public; 
(3)  Every publicly or privately owned theater, auditorium, or other enclosed facility which is open to the public for primary purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, musical recital, athletic event, or any other performance or event, in all areas except either in that area commonly known as the lobby, or in areas not open to the public; 
(4)  An elevator used by the public; 
(5)  Any retail or service establishment serving the general public, including, but not limited to any department store, grocery store, or drug store; 
(6)  Any food product establishment; 
(7)  Any bar, including a bar within a food product establishment; 
(8)  In or within 15 feet of any door, operable window/vent or other opening to a place where smoking is prohibited, except as provided for in section 310.1.4, below; 
(9)  Hotels and motels, except as provided for in section 310.1.4, below; or 
(10)  Bowling centers. 
(b)  The owner or person in control of an establishment or area designated in subsection (a) of this section shall post a conspicuous sign at the main entrance to the establishment or area. 
(c)  The owner or person in control of an establishment or area regulated by this section commits an offense if he fails to: 
(1)  Post a sign in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; 
(2)  Advise a person who violates this section that smoking is not allowed; or 
(3)  Request a person to remove himself from the location after that person has been advised that smoking is not allowed and that person willfully continues to smoke. 
(d)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the establishment or area in which the offense takes place does not have displayed a conspicuous sign that smoking is prohibited. 
Section 310.1.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
310.1.3 Regulation of smoking —Workplace, schools, health care facilities. Notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance, any employer, primary or secondary school administrator, or health care facility provider may designate any building, or portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area. Any employer, primary or secondary school administrator, or health care facility provider who chooses to designate any building, or portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area shall: 
(a)  Adopt, implement, and maintain a written smoking policy which shall be communicated to all employees at least three weeks prior to its adoption; 
(b)  Prominently display reasonable sized signs that smoking is prohibited; and 
(c)  Provide facilities in sufficient numbers and at such locations to be readily accessible for the extinguishment of smoking materials. 
Section 310.1.4; add this new section to read as follows: 
310.1.4 Exceptions. The following areas are exempted from the provisions of this ordinance: 
(a)  A retail or service establishment which derives more than 50 percent of its annual gross sales from the sale of tobacco, tobacco products, or smoking implements. 
(b)  An administrative area within the workplace. 
(c)  An unenclosed outdoor seating area associated with a food product establishment, so long as: 
(1)  Smoking is prohibited in or within 15 feet of any door, operable window/vent or other opening to a place where smoking is prohibited; 
(2)  The outdoor seating area is not adjacent to a playground or play area for children; or 
(3)  The outdoor seating area is not posted as a nonsmoking area by the owner, operator or person in control of the establishment. 
(d)  Not more than ten percent of hotel and motel rooms rented to guests and designated as smoking rooms. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under provisions of this ordinance. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
Section 311.5; change to read as follows: 
311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards, as required by Sections 311.5.1 through 311.5.5. 
Section 403.5; change Section 403.5 to read as follows: 
403.5 Group E Occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with Section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings containing both a Group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall also comply with Sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.3. 
Section 404.2.2; add Number 4.10 to read as follows: 
4.10 Fire extinguishing system controls. 
Section 405.4; change Section 405.4 to read as follows: 
405.4 Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be held at unexpected times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case of fire. 
Section 501.4; change to read as follows: 
501.4 Timing of installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
Section 503.1.1; change to read as follows: 
503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to within 150 feet (45,720 mm) of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility. Except for one- or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten feet (10') wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure. [Exceptions remain unchanged] 
Section 503.2.1; change to read as follows: 
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet, exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet. For buildings exceeding 30 feet in height, see appendix Section D105. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Vertical clearances may be reduced with the approval of the fire code official provided such reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical clearance. 
2.  Minimum widths may be reduced with the approval of the fire code official when site conditions prohibit constructing or maintaining required widths. 
Fire apparatus access roads shall be constructed to accommodate the imposed load of 85,000 GVW of fire apparatus. 
Section 503.2.3; change to read as follows: 
503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus (minimum 85,000 GVW) and shall be provided with an all-weather paved driving surface. Paved driving surface as used in this section shall mean reinforced concrete or asphalt sufficiently designed to support any fire department vehicle and surface capable of being striped as a fire lane. 
Section 503.2.4; change to read as follows: 
503.2.4 Turning radius. The turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire code official. The minimum inside turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be 20 feet. The minimum outside turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be 40 feet. 
Section 503.3; change to read as follows: 
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
1.  Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 25 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
2.  Signs - Signs shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 503.4; change to read as follows: 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times. 
Section 505.1; change to read as follows: 
Section 505.1 Address numbers. 
(a)  Owners of single-family, two-family, multi-family dwellings, commercial and industrial structures in the city are required to place or have placed, the proper street number, building number, suite and/or unit number, in a designated location so that same can be plainly seen and read from the street and alley, when alleys are provided. Street numbers will be designated by the director of Neighborhood Services or his designee. Building numbers, suite and/or unit numbers for multi-family and commercial structures shall be submitted to the city for approval by the owner or developer. 
(b)  Where the owner is a nonresident of the city, the duty outlined in subsection (a) of this section shall devolve on the occupant or manager of such structures. 
Section 505.1.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
Section 505.1.1 Size and location of numbers. 
(a)  One- and two-family dwellings; numbers shall be a minimum three inches high, posted front and rear when rear access is available. Numbers shall be posted on the principal structure at a minimum height of five feet above existing grade. Numbers may also be posted on curbside mailboxes when available. Numbers shall be posted on a contrasting background and maintained clearly visible from the street and alley, when rear access is available. 
(b)  Multi-family dwellings; building numbers shall be a minimum 12 inches high, unit range numbers shall be minimum four inches and unit numbers shall be a minimum three inches high. Building and unit range numbers shall be posted on two sides of every building. Location of building numbers and unit range numbers shall be designated by the fire marshal. Individual unit numbers shall be posted a minimum five feet above existing grade. All numbers shall be posted on a contrasting background and maintained clearly visible as defined by the fire marshal. 
(c)  Commercial and industrial structures; all street numbers, suite or lease space numbers shall be a minimum of six inches high, posted front and rear when rear access is available. All numbers shall be posted on a contrasting background and maintained clearly visible as defined by the fire marshal. 
Section 505.1.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
Section 505.1.2 Display of numbers. 
(a)  All numbers for new construction shall be fixed and properly displayed as required by this article at the time the building, lease space, suite or unit is released for occupancy. 
(b)  All numbers for existing buildings, lease space, suites or units shall be fixed and properly displayed after notification to the owner/occupant. A reasonable time, to be determined by the director of community development, will be granted for purposes of compliance. 
Section 507.2.3; add new section to read as follows: 
507.2.3 Connections to public water mains. Two separate isolated points of connection to the public water main, forming a grid arranged and valved so that no single obstruction to the water system will shut-off the water supply for any hydrants or fire sprinkler system, shall be required when any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Whenever a newly constructed building exceeds 35,000 square feet, or 
2.  Whenever three or more on-site fire hydrants are required, or 
3.  A dead-end fire water main exceeds 300 feet in length. 
Section 507.4; change to read as follows: 
507.4 Water supply test date and information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 "Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants" and within one year of sprinkler plan submittal. The fire code official shall be notified prior to the water supply test. A permit shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention Division for water supply tests and shall be witnessed by the fire code official, as required. The exact location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the waterflow test report, or as approved by the fire code official. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time of the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference Section 903.3.5 for additional design requirements. 
Section 507.5.4; change to read as follows: 
507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants. 
Section 509.1.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
509.1.2 Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by this section shall have a minimum height of 2 inches (50.8 mm) when located inside a building and 4 inches (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved by the fire code official. The letters shall be of a color that contrasts with the background. 
Section 603.3.2.1; Exception; change exception to read as follows: 
Exception: The aggregate capacity limit shall be permitted to be increased to 3,000 gallons in accordance with all requirements of Chapter 57. 
Section 603.3.2.2; change to read as follows: 
603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2 shall be used only to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2.4. Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be made using closed piping systems. 
Section 603.6.6; add this new section to read as follows: 
Section 603.6.6 Maintenance of Chimneys. All chimneys in multi-family occupancies utilizing solid fuel fireplaces shall have the chimneys inspected and, if needed, cleaned by a state or nationally-recognized/certified chimney sweep on a yearly basis. A report of each of each inspection/cleaning shall be maintained on the premises and available for review at the request of the fire prevention division. All records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years. 
Section 603.8.5; change to read as follows: 
603.8.5 Discontinuance. The fire code official is authorized to require incinerator and crematory use to be discontinued immediately if the fire code official determines that smoke emissions are offensive to occupants of surrounding property or if the use of incinerators and crematories is determined by the fire code official to constitute a hazardous condition. 
Section 604; change and add to read as follows: 
604.1.1 Stationary Generators. Stationary emergency and standby power generators required by this code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200. 
604.1.2 Installation. Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in accordance with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11. 
604.1.3 through 604.1.8 {No change.} 
604.1.9 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70. 
604.2 Where Required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.16 604.2.24 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other referenced code. 
604.2.1 through 604.2.3 {No change.} 
604.2.4 Emergency Voice/alarm Communications Systems. Emergency power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 907.5.2.2.5. The system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24 hours, as required in NFPA 72. 
Covered and Open Malls, Sections 907.2.20 and 914.2.3 
Group A Occupancies, Sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4. 
Special Amusement Buildings, Section 907.2.12.3 
High-rise Buildings, Section 907.2.13 
Atriums, Section 907.2.14 
Deep Underground Buildings 
Sections 604.2.5 through 604.2.11 {No change.} 
604.2.12 Means of Egress Illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes) 
604.2.13 Membrane Structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6.1. (90 minutes) Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures in accordance with Section 2702 of the International Building Code. (4 hours) Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.10.4. 
604.2.14 {No change.} 
604.2.15 Smoke Control Systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 909.11: 
Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, Section 402.7 
Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7 
Underground Buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.8 
Group I-3, International Building Code, Section 408.4.2 
Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.3.7.2 
Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group A's), International Building Code, Section 411.1 
Smoke Protected Seating, Section 1029.6.2.1 
604.2.17 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in accordance with Sections 907.2.20 and 914.2.3. 
604.2.18 Airport Traffic Control Towers. A standby power system shall be provided in airport traffic control towers more than 65 ft. in height. Power shall be provided to the following equipment: 
1.  Pressurization equipment, mechanical equipment and lighting. 
2.  Elevator operating equipment. 
3.  Fire alarm and smoke detection systems. 
604.2.19 Smokeproof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power shall be provided for smokeproof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2. 
604.2.20 Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization system as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5. 
604.2.21 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3. 
604.2.22 Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, Section 504.10, Item 7. 
604.2.23 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 421.8. 
604.2.24 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 when required by the fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.) 
604.3 through 604.7 {No change.} 
604.8 Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system. 
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved. 
Section 609.2; change to read as follows: 
609.2 Where Required. A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors, including but not limited to cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary concessions, such as trucks, buses, trailers, pavilions, or any form of roofed enclosure, as required by the fire code official. 
Exceptions: 1. Tents, as provided for in Chapter 31. 
A Type I hood shall not be required for an electric cooking appliance where an approved testing agency provides documentation that the appliance effluent contains 5 mg/m3 or less of grease when tested at an exhaust flow rate of 500 cfm in accordance with UL 710B. 
Additionally, fuel gas and power provided for such cooking appliances shall be interlocked with the extinguishing system, as required by Section 904.12.2. Fuel gas containers and piping/hose shall be properly maintained in good working order and in accordance with all applicable regulations. 
Section 704.1; change to read as follows: 
704.1 Enclosure. Interior vertical shafts, including but not limited to stairways, elevator hoistways, service and utility shafts, that connect two or more stories of a building shall be enclosed or protected in accordance with the codes in effect at the time of construction but, regardless of when constructed, not less than as required in Chapter 11. New floor openings in existing buildings shall comply with the International Building Code. 
Section 807.3; change to read as follows: 
Combustible Decorative Materials. In occupancies in Groups A, E, I, and R-1, and dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and other similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with Section 807.4 and shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which they are attached. 
Section 807.5.2.2 and 807.5.2.3; change to read as follows: 
807.5.2.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings, and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic fire sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
807.5.2.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Section 901.6.1.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be backflushed when foreign material is present, and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
Section 901.6.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
901.6.3 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner. 
Section 901.7; change to read as follows: 
901.7 Systems out of service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service. 
Where utilized, fire watches shall be provided with at least one approved means for notification of the fire department and their only duty shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires. 
Section 901.8.2: change to read as follows: 
901.8.2 Removal of Occupant-use Hose Lines. The fire code official is authorized to permit the removal of occupant-use hose lines and hose valves where all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire department. 
2.  If the occupant-use hose lines are to be removed, but the hose valves are required to remain as per the fire code official, such shall be compatible with the local fire department fittings. 
Section 903.1.1; change to read as follows: 
903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard, or as approved by the fire code official. 
Section 903.2; delete the exception and change to read as follows: 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12, and as follows: 
1.  Commercial buildings—Automatic sprinkler systems will be required in all newly constructed buildings exceeding 3,600 square feet of fire area, any remodel or addition that changes the square footage beyond 3,600 square feet or any single tenant expansion requiring a new certificate of occupancy that exceeds 12,000 square feet of fire area. Whichever requirement listed in this chapter, including exceptions, or defined in this amendment that is more restrictive will apply. Credit will not be given for fire barrier walls with a fire resistive rating in lieu of automatic fire sprinkler systems. 
2.  Whenever Section 903.2 requires the installation of an approved automatic sprinkler system, the automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building. 
Exceptions: 
1.  In strip mall buildings, the installation of fire barrier walls with not less than a two-hour fire resistive rating may be allowed to separate the occupancy from the rest of the building in lieu of providing fire sprinkler protection throughout the entire building as approved by the fire code official. 
2.  As allowed in Section 903.3.8, limited area sprinkler systems. 
3.  When a change in Occupancy Classification is required for an existing building or tenant space, the building or tenant space shall comply with the provisions of Section 903.2. 
Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
Section 903.2.1; change to read as follows: 
903.2.1 Group A. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building housing a Group A occupancy as provided in this section. 
Section 903.2.1.1; change to read as follows: 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building housing a Group A-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
4.  The fire area contains a multi-theater complex. 
Section 903.2.1.2; change to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.1.2 Group A-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building housing a Group A-2 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
Section 903.2.1.3; change to read as follows: 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building housing a Group A-3 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
Section 903.2.1.4; change to read as follows: 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the entire building housing a Group A-4 occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies. 
Section 903.2.1.5; (no change) 
903.2.1.5 Group A-5. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-5 occupancies in the following areas: concession stands, retail area, press boxes and other accessory use areas in excess of 1,000 square feet. 
Section 903.2.1.6; change to read as follows: 
903.2.1.6 Assembly occupancies on roofs: Where an occupied roof has an assembly occupancy with an occupant load in excess of 100 persons, the entire building shall be equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with Sections 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
Exception: Open parking garages of Type I or Type II construction. 
Section 903.2.1.7; change to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.1.7 Multiple fire areas. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided where multiple fire areas of Groups A-1, A-2, A-3 or A-4 occupancies share exit or exit access components and the combined occupant load of these fire areas is 100 or more. 
Section 903.2.2: change to read as follows: 
Ambulatory care facilities. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building housing an ambulatory care facility when any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet. 
2.  Four or more care recipients are incapable of self-preservation, whether rendered incapable by staff or staff has accepted responsibility for care recipients already incapable. 
3.  One or more care recipients that are incapable of self-preservation are located at other than the level of exit discharge serving such facility. 
In buildings where ambulatory care is provided on levels other than the level of exit discharge, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout the entire building. 
Section 903.2.1.8; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.1.8 Group B. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group B occupancies where the floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
Section 903.2.3; change to read as follows: 
903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group E occupancies where the floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
Section 903.2.4; change to read as follows: 
903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group F-1 occupancies where either: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area; 
2.  A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade; or 
3.  A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
Section 903.2.4.1: 
903.2.4.1 Woodworking operations. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all Group F-1 occupancy fire areas that contain woodworking operations in excess of 2,500 square feet in area which generate finely divided combustible waste or which use finely divided combustible materials. 
Section 903.2.4.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.4.2 Group F-2. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group F-2 occupancies where the floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area. 
Section 903.2.5 {No change.} 
Section 903.2.6; change to read as follows: 
Section 903.2.6 Group I. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings with a Group I fire area conforming to Section 903.3.1.1. 
Section 903.2.7; change to read as follows: 
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy when the floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area or for Group M occupancies located more than three stories above grade plane. 
903.2.7.1 {No change.} 
Section 903.2.8; change to read as follows: 
903.2.8. Group R-1, R-2, R-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Groups R-1, R-2, and R-4 occupancies throughout and shall include the following criteria: 
1.  Throughout Groups R-1, 2, and 4 occupancies in all areas, including but not limited to attics, balconies, breezeways, garages and exterior storerooms, shall have an approved hydraulically designed fire sprinkler system installed. 
2.  Residential or quick response standard sprinklers shall be used in dwelling units and guestroom portions of the building. 
3.  Attics are to be in accordance with NFPA 13. 
Section 903.2.9; change to read as follows: 
903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area; 
2.  A Group S-1 occupancy is located more than three stories above the grade plane; or 
3.  A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
Section 903.2.9.1; change to read as follows: 
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with Section 406.8 of the International Building Code, if: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area; or 
2.  Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements. 
Section 903.2.9.2; change to read as follows: 
903.2.9.2 Bulk storage of tires. Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of fires exceeds 20,000 cubic feet or 3,600 square feet shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
Section 903.2.9.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.9.3 Self-service storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
Section 903.2.10; delete exception and change section to read as follows: 
903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all S-2 occupancies where either of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The floor area exceeds 3,600 square feet of fire area, or 
2.  Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups. 
Section 903.2.10.1; change section to read as follows: 
903.2.10.1 Commercial parking garages. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings used for storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 3,600 square feet. 
Section 903.2.11.3; change to read as follows: 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 35 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings with a floor level, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 35 feet or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no occupancies above the subject garage. 
Section 903.2.11.7; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4,572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
Section 903.2.11.8; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
Section 903.2.11.9; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.2.11.9 Buildings Over 3,600 sq. ft. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all buildings with a building area 3,600 sq. ft. or greater and in all existing buildings that are enlarged to be 3,600 sq. ft. or greater. For the purpose of this provision, fire walls shall not define separate buildings. 
Exception: Open parking garages in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
Section 903.2.13; change to add a new section to read as follows: 
903.2.13 Historic District. An automatic sprinkler system conforming to Section 903.3.1.1 of this code shall be installed throughout all buildings in the Historic District, regardless of size, use, or occupancy classification. 
1.  For purposes of this section only, the Historic District shall include all lots or parcels which adjoin: (a) the north side of West Main Street between and including buildings currently addressed as 101 through 191 West Main Street; (b) the south side of West Main Street between and including buildings currently addressed as 102 through 170 West Main Street; and (c) North Poydras Street. 
2.  Buildings located in the Historic District on the date of passage of this ordinance shall have the required automatic fire sprinkler system installed by June 30 th , 2018 unless the owner of that building has entered into a written agreement with the city to participate in the city's Old Town Fire Suppression Program by that date, in which case the required automatic fire sprinkler system must be installed by the completion date of that program as declared by the City. 
Section 903.3.1.1.1; change to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance-rated construction or contains electrical equipment. In such locations, an alternative fire suppression or detection system may be required by the fire code official. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the fire code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoistways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
Section 903.3.1.2.1; change to read as follows: 
903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for exterior balconies, decks, and ground floor patios of dwelling units and sleeping units, provided there is a roof or deck above. Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall be permitted to be located such that their deflectors are within 1 inch to 6 inches below the structural members and a maximum distance of 14 inches below the deck of the exterior balconies and decks that are constructed of open wood joist construction. 
Section 903.3.1.2.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics, Exterior Storerooms, and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such buildings exterior storerooms, and attached garages. Attic automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed per NFPA 13. 
Section 903.3.1.3; change to read as follows: 
903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3, Group R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
Section 903.3.1.4; add section to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
Section 903.3.1.4.1: add section to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or head envelope such that insulation is provided and the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
Section 903.3.1.4.2; add section to read as follows: 
903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official for small sections of large diameter water-filled pipe. 
Section 903.3.5; change to read as follows: 
903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the International Plumbing Code. For connections to public waterworks systems, the water supply test used for design of fire protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as approved by the fire code official. 
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
Section 903.3.8; change to read as follows: 
903.3.8 Limited area sprinkler systems. When approved by the fire code official and not in conflict with Section 903.2(2), limited area sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the standards listed in Section 903.3.1 except as provided in Sections 903.3.8.1 through 903.3.8.5. 
Section 903.4; change to read as follows: 
903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms. All valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures and water-flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit. 
Exceptions: [All exceptions to remain unchanged] 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
Section 903.4.2; add second paragraph to read as follows: 
903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to each automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
Section 903.4.2.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.4.2.1 Multiple tenant buildings. A minimum of one horn/strobe notification appliance shall be installed in each tenant space of a multiple tenant building to notify occupants of an automatic fire sprinkler system water-flow condition. 
Section 903.6; change to read as follows: 
903.6 Where required in existing buildings and structures. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in existing buildings and structures where required in Chapter 11 and, when a change in Occupancy Classification is required for an existing building or tenant space, the building or tenant space shall comply with the provisions of the new Occupancy Classification as stated in Section 903.2. 
Section 903.7; add this new section to read as follows: 
903.7 Fire Control Rooms. A fire control room is required for all new automatic sprinkler system installations. The fire control room shall comply with the following: 
1.  Located on an exterior wall adjacent to a fire apparatus access lane. 
2.  Be a minimum size of 5-foot by 7-foot. 
3.  Shall house the system riser, fire alarm control panel, and spare sprinkler heads. 
4.  Have an exterior entry door that measures at a minimum 36-inch by 80-inch, and shall be identified as FIRE CONTROL ROOM, with a minimum of 4-inch characters, on the exterior of the door. 
5.  Be equipped with an exterior horn/strobe device indicating a water-flow alarm. Device shall be located above the FDC, 120-inches above finished floor 
6.  The riser shall be located a minimum of 12-inches from any wall. 
7.  A "Knox" key box shall be located on the exterior of the fire control room, adjacent to the exterior door, installed 5-feet above finished floor, and shall house a key to open the exterior door. 
8.  Room shall be kept free of any storage. 
Section 905.2; change to read as follows: 
905.2 Installation standard. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual dry standpipe systems shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum of 40 psig air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
Section 905.3.9; add this new section to read as follows: 
905.3.9 Buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and any portion of the building's interior is more than 200 feet of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided. 
Exception: 
1.  Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
2.  Manual dry standpipes systems are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
Section 905.4, change to read as follows: 
905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections. Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of the following locations: 
1.  In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provide for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
2.  {No change.} 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit stairway hose connection by a 30-foot hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of the building. 
4.  {No change.} 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of a stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
6.  {No change.} 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
Section 905.9; change to read as follows: 
905.9 Valve supervision. Valves controlling water supply shall be supervised in the open position so that the change in the normal position of the valve will generate a supervisory signal at the supervising station required by Section 903.4. Where a fire alarm system is provided, a signal shall also be transmitted to the control unit. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Valve to underground key or hub valves in roadway boxes provided by the municipality or public utility do not require supervision. 
2.  Valves locked in the normal position and inspected as provided in this code in buildings not equipped with a fire alarm system. 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
907.1.4; add new section to read as follows: 
907.1.4 Design standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Section 907.2.1; change to read as follows: 
907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Exception: Manual fire alarm boxes are not required where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the occupant notification appliances will activate throughout the notification zones upon sprinkler water flow. 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
Section 907.2.3; change to read as follows: 
907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Section 907.2.3, Exception No. 1; change to read as follows and add a new 1.1 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of less than 50. 
1.1.  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2-1/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) 
Section 907.2.13, Exception 3; change to read as follows: 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to, sky boxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas. 
Section 907.4.2.7; add this new section to read as follows: 
907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm initiating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
Section 907.6.1.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
Section 907.6.3; delete all exceptions. 
Section 907.6.6; change to read as follows: 
Section 907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the International Code shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72. See Section 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
Section 909.22; add new section to read as follows: 
909.22 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smokeproof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the fire department as per Section 105.7. 
[F] 909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the smokeproof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3. 
909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smokeproof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following: 
1.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and directly connected to the smokeproof enclosure or connected to the smokeproof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
2.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smokeproof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
3.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system. 
2.  Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete. 
3.  Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
909.21.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code. 
909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these requirements. 
Section 910.2.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as a Group H occupancy as follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Groups H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
Sections 910.3.4; add this new section to read as follows: 
910.3.4 Vent operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
Sections 910.3.4.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
910.3.4.1 Sprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 310.2. 
Sections 910.3.4.2; add this new section to read as follows: 
910.3.4.2 Nonsprinklered buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F and 220°F above ambient. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
Section 910.4.3.1; change to read as follows: 
910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1,829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
Section 910.4.4; change to read as follows: 
910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall also be provided. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
Section 912.2; add Section 912.2.3 to read as follows: 
912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
Section 912.3.1; add this new section to read as follows: 
912.3.1 Multiple inlet fire department connections. When more than two, 2-1/2-inch Siamese connections are required for a fire department connection, in addition to the required 2-1/2-inch Siamese connections, a 5-inch Storz fitting shall be installed at a 45-degree downward angle at the end of the fire department connection manifold. 
Section 913.2.1; change to read as follows: 
913.2.1 Protection of fire pump rooms. Rooms where fire pumps are located shall be separated from all other areas of the building in accordance with Section 913.2.1 of the International Building Code. 
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by Section 506.1. 
Section 914.3.1.2; change to read as follows: 
914.3.1.2 Water supply to required fire pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that the water supply will continue without interruption through no fewer than one of the connections. 
Chapter 10: Sections 1001 through 1031; replace all references to "fire code official" with "building official". 
Section 1004.1.2; change to delete exception and to read as follows: 
1004.1.2 Areas without fixed seating. The number of occupants shall be computed at the rate of one occupant per unit of area as prescribed in Table 1004.1.2. For areas without fixed seating, the occupant load shall not be less than that number determined by dividing the floor area under consideration by the occupant load factor assigned to the function of the space as set forth in Table 1004.1.2. Where an intended function is not listed in Table 1004.1.2, the building official shall establish a function based on a listed function that most nearly resembles the intended function. 
Section 1006.2.2.6; add a new Section 1006.2.2.6 as follows: 
1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Section 1009.1; add new exception 4 to read as follows: 
4.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009. 
Section 1010.1.9.4, Exceptions 3 and 4; changed to read as follows: 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Groups B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars, or similar operating hardware. 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Groups A, B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf provided such inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress width requirements and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
Section 1015.8 Window Openings; change number 1 to read as follows: 
1.  Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55 feet above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006. 
Section 1020.1 Construction; add Exception 6 to read as follows: 
6.  In group B occupancies, corridor walls and ceilings need not be of fire-resistive construction within a single tenant space when the space is equipped with approved automatic smoke-detection within the corridor. The actuation of any detector shall activate self-annunciating alarms audible in all areas within the corridor. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an approved automatic fire alarm system where such system is provided. 
Section 1031.2; change to read as follows: 
1031.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits andexit discharges shall be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exit orexit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress. 
Section 1103.3; change to read as follow: 
1103.3 Existing elevators. Existing elevators, escalators, and moving walks shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1103.3.1 and 1103.3.2 and provide emergency signage as required by Section 607.3. 
Section 1103.5.5; add this new section to read as follows: 
1103.5.5 Spray booths and rooms. New and existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2404. 
Section 1103.7; add Section 1103.7.8 and 1103.7.8.1 to read as follows: 
1103.7.8 Fire alarm system design standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke and/or heat detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel installation exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must comply within 18 months of permit application. 
1103.7.8.1 Communication requirements. Refer to Section 907.6.6 for applicable requirements. 
Section 2304.1; change to read as follows: 
2304.1 Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or 
2.  Under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or 
3.  An unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3. 
At any time the qualified attendant of item Number 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3. 
Section 2401.2; delete this section. 
Table 3206.2, footnote j; change to read as follows: 
j.  Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinkler systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m · s) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers, installed in accordance with NFPA 13. 
Section 3206.8; change to read as follows: 
3206.8 Fire department hose connections. Where exit passageways are required by the International Building code for egress, a Class I standpipe system shall be provided in accordance with Section 905. Whenever access doors are required by Section 3206.6.1, a Class I, automatic wet or automatic dry standpipe system shall be provided on the building's interior, adjacent to each access door. 
Section 3310.1; change to read as follows: 
3310.1 Required access. Approved vehicle access for firefighting shall be provided to all construction or demolition sites. Vehicle access shall be provided by either temporary or permanent roads, capable of supporting the imposed vehicle load of 80,000 GVW under all weather conditions. Surface shall be either concrete or asphalt. Vehicle access shall be maintained until permanent fire apparatus access roads are available. When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
Section 5601.1.3; change to read as follows: 
5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in Sections 5604 and 5608. 
2.  The use of fireworks for approved fireworks displays as allowed in Section 5608. 
Section 5703.6; change to read as follows: 
5703.6 Piping systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Sections 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
Section 5704.2.9.5; change to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.5 Above-ground tanks inside of buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall comply with Sections 5704.2.9.5.1 through 5704.2.9.5.3. 
Section 5704.2.9.5.3; add this new section to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible liquid storage tanks inside of buildings. The maximum aggregate allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons (11,356 L) of Class II or III combustible liquid for storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with Section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The entire 3,000 gallon (11,356 L) quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground tanks; 
2.  The 3,000 gallon (11,356 L) capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank or multiple smaller tanks; 
3.  The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.1; and 
4.  Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing an approved closed piping system. 
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be counted towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not be required to be located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories below grade. 
Section 5704.2.11.4; change to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4 Leak prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections 5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.4.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
Section 5704.2.11.4.2; change to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4.2 Leak detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in Section 5704.2.11.4.3. 
Section 5704.2.11.4.; add this new section to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4.3 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4 inches in diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required. 
Section 6103.2.1.8; add this new section to read as follows: 
6103.2.1.8 Jewelry Repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is not available, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20-pound water capacity. Aggregate capacity shall not exceed 60-pound water capacity. Each device shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet. 
Section 6104.2, Exception; add an exception 2 to read as follows: 
Exceptions: 
1.  {No change.} 
2.  Except as permitted in Sections 308 and 6104.3.2, LP-gas containers are not permitted in residential areas. 
Section 6104.3; add Section 6104.3.2 to read as follows: 
6104.3.2 Spas, Pool Heaters, and Other Listed Devices. Where natural gas service is not available, an LP-gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers. 
Exception: Lots where LP-gas can be off-loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located may install up to 500 gallon above ground or 1,000 gallon underground approved containers. 
Section 6107.4; change to read as follows: 
6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to proximity to alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in accordance with Section 312. 
Section 6106.13; delete exception and change to read as follows: 
6109.13 Protection of Containers. LP-gas containers shall be stored within a suitable enclosure or otherwise protected against tampering. Vehicle impact protection shall be provided as required by Section 6107.4. 
Table B105.1 (1); change chart to amend the following: 
For fire-flow calculation area of 3,601 and greater system or with automatic fire sprinkler system as required in Section 903.3.1.3 of the International Fire Code or Section P2904 of the International Residential Code, the minimum fire flow shall be 1,000 gallons per minute. 
Table B105.2; change footnote (a) to read as follows: 
a.  The reduced fire-flow shall not be less than 1,500 gallons per minute. 
Table B105.2: change chart to amend the following: 
The minimum fire-flow requirement for buildings with automatic sprinkler systems designed per Sections 903.3.1.1 and 903.3.1.2 shall be 50% of the value in Table B105.1(2) but in no case shall be less than 1,500 gallons per minute. 
Add Appendix N to read as follows: 
Appendix N: Commercial and Multi-Family Certificate of Inspection Permits 
Section N101 Scope. The fire code official and/or the building inspector is authorized to administer Certificate of Inspection Permits and Fees. The fire code official and/or the building inspector is authorized to enter and examine multi-family complexes, buildings and/or dwelling units, commercial and industrial occupancies in accordance with Section 104.3 for the purpose of enforcing this code. 
Section N102 Definitions. 
N102.1 Definitions. For the purpose of this appendix, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this subsection: 
Bedroom. Room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes and not as a kitchen, bathroom, living room, closet, hallway, utility space, entry way, garage, patio or breezeway. 
Building Inspector. Properly identified chief building official of the city or his designated representative. 
Certificate of inspection permit. Certificate of inspection permit issued by the fire code official and/or the building official pursuant to this appendix demonstrating compliance with this code issued on an annual basis. 
City. City of Lewisville. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Efficiency unit. Efficiency unit is defined as the equivalent of a one-bedroom unit. 
Family. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit in which not more than two individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage, or adoption when residing in a dwelling containing one or two bedrooms, or not more than three individuals unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption when residing in a dwelling unit containing three or more bedrooms. Foster children shall be considered as a related member of the family. 
Fire Inspector. Properly identified, certified fire marshal of the city or his designated representative. 
Multi-family complex. Any building or portion thereof which is rented, leased or let to be occupied for compensation as three or more dwelling units or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent dwelling units located in the city. 
Owner. A person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership, dominion or title of real property, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Holder of fee simple title; 
2.  Holder of life estate; 
3.  Holder of a leasehold estate for an initial term of five years or more; 
4.  The buyer in a contract for deed; 
5.  A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in control of real property; but including the holder of a leasehold estate or tenancy for an initial term of less than five years. 
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structure thereon, and furthermore, including a dwelling unit, appurtenances thereto, grounds and facilities held out for the use of tenants generally and any other area or facility whose use is promised to the tenant. 
Property manager. Means a person who for compensation has managing control of a multi-family complex for owner. 
Resident manager. Means a property manager or agent of a property manager who resides in the multi-family complex. 
Single location. Single location is defined as property held in common ownership that is compact and contiguous property separated only by public streets. 
Tenant. Means any person who occupies a dwelling unit for living or dwelling purposes with the landlord's consent. 
Section K103 Required Certificate of Inspection Permit-Commercial and Industrial Occupancies. 
N103.1 Inspection. Prior to the city's issuance of a certificate of inspection permit, duly authorized members of the city fire prevention bureau shall perform an inspection in accordance with Section 106 of this code. If no hazardous conditions or violations of the fire code are detected at the time of the inspection, or reinspection, the occupant of the inspected business or the owner or building manager of a building as provided above shall be issued a certificate of inspection permit and permit fee. The inspection permit shall include the name and address of each owner, the location and type of occupancy, and the owner, manager, or occupant's signature. 
N103.2 Reinspection. If at the time of inspection, the occupancy is found not to be in compliance with this code, a certificate of inspection permit will not be issued. After notification of the violations which were detected, the owner, manager, or occupant shall be required to remedy the conditions of violation, and a citation may be issued for each violation, at each inspection. The occupant, owner, or manager shall be notified of a time at which reinspection shall occur. The date for the first reinspection shall not be more than 30 days from the time of the original inspection. The date for any subsequent reinspection shall be not more than 10 days from the time of the last inspection. Once the commercial or industrial occupancy passes inspection, a certificate of inspection permit and fee will be issued, and the provision of K103.1 apply. 
Section N104 Certificate of Inspection Permit Fee. 
N104.1 Certificate of Inspection Permit Fees. Fees for permits associated with annual certificates of fire inspection permits shall be in accordance with the current adopted fee ordinance for the city. 
N104.2 Reinspection fee. A re-inspection fee for each re-inspection of each noted violation item shall be assessed for inspections that are required to verify that a violation has been repaired or corrected. Failure of a reinspection fee to be paid shall be considered a violation of this amendment and subject to penalties herein. 
N104.3 Permit Compliance. Each owner, manager, or occupant shall, within forty-five (45) days after such inspection, deliver to the city the permit fee. Failure by the owner, manager, or occupant to pay the certificate of inspection permit fee by reason of refusal or delay in tendering the fee within the prescribed time, shall, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day that such owner, manager or occupancy shall fail to obtain said permit shall constitute a separate offense. No commercial, industrial or multi-family occupancy may operate its business without a valid certificate of inspection permit. No certificate of inspection permit shall be valid until the permit fee has been paid. 
N104.4 Valid Certificate of Inspection Permit. A certificate of inspection permit fee will be charged not more than once per year for an inspection of any occupancy or building and issuance of a permit, except as provided for in Section 109 of this code. 
Exception: Should the City perform an annual inspection less than twelve (12) months after the previous annual inspection, a pro-rated annual permit fee shall be charged and the new inspection date will be annually from that new inspection date. 
N104.5 Revocation of Certificate of Inspection Permit. 
Any certificate of inspection permit issued under this code may be suspended or revoked when it is determined after a hearing by the community development director that: 
1.  It is used by a person other than the person to whom the certificate was issued; 
2.  It is used for a location other than that for which it was issued; 
3.  Any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the certificate has been violated; 
4.  The possessor of the certificate fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with any order or notice served upon him under the provisions of this code within the time period provided therein; or 
5.  There has been any false statement or misrepresentations as to a material fact in the plans, specifications, or documentation upon which the permit or application was based; or 
6.  Whenever a change in use or occupancy of a building occurs, existing certificate of inspection permit shall be automatically revoked and a new certificate of inspection permit shall be required. 
N105 Additional Requirements for Multi-Family Certificate of Inspection Permit. 
N105.1 Inspection. The owner, resident manager, and property manager, as a condition to the issuance of the permit required by this amendment, shall consent and agree to permit and allow the city's fire or building inspector to make inspections of the multi-family complex when and as needed to ensure compliance with this amendment. All city, International Building, Fire, Plumbing, Mechanical, Residential, Energy Codes, Texas Department of Health Code, zoning and other applicable codes and ordinances shall be complied with at all times and are part of the inspection set forth in Section K105. 
The multi-family inspector and the owner, resident manager, or property manager shall agree on a reasonable date and time between January 1 and December 31 of each year. One or more units may be inspected at random. If violations exist, the fire inspector has the option of inspecting more than one unit per building in order to determine if violations exist in more units. If no violations are apparent or violations are minor, only one unit per building will be inspected. 
N105.2 Reinspection. Shall meet the requirements of K104.2 
N105.3 Occupancy Load (Density). Continued maintenance and observance of the following standards contained in this section are conditions that shall be complied with in order to retain a permit and to obtain any renewal of a permit. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow more than one family to reside in any multi-family complex dwelling unit. 
2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of all other city ordinances, the maximum number of persons per dwelling unit density for dwelling units in a multi-family complex is as follows: 
THE LEWISVILLE CITY CODE IMPOSES THE FOLLOWING MAXIMUM DENSITY REQUIREMENTS: 
*  1-Bedroom or Efficiency Unit—No more than three (3) persons per unit. 
*  2-Bedroom—No more than five (5) persons per unit. 
*  3-Bedroom—No more than seven (7) persons per unit. 
Exception: The owner, resident manager, or property manager may have density requirements that are stricter than the standards set forth herein. 
3.  The owner, resident manager, or property manager shall keep records that reflect the following information available for review by the multi-family inspector or the building inspector: 
a.  Names of all tenants in each unit. 
b.  Head of household. 
4.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this amendment for an owner, property manager, or resident manager, to knowingly permit or allow a violation of any of the terms of this subsection. It shall be unlawful for a tenant to violate any of the terms of this subsection or to permit or allow any persons to reside in the unit in violation of this subsection. 
N105.4 Permit Compliance - Multi-family. In addition to the terms of K104.3, Any person owning, operating, managing or maintaining a multi-family complex at more than one location shall obtain a permit for each separate location. 
N105.5 Revocation of Certificate of Inspection Permit - Multi-family. Shall meet the requirements of K104.5. 
N105.6 - Right of Entry. In conjunction with the requirements of Section 104.3 of this code the owner, resident manager, or property manager shall grant access to all dwelling units in the multi-family complex and all portions of the premises and structures located on the premises that are not dwelling units. This includes all storage areas, community buildings, swimming pools, athletic facilities, club rooms, equipment rooms and all other portions of the facilities not constructed as dwelling units, upon reasonable advance notice being given to the owner, property or resident manager and all occupied dwelling units when, upon reliable information, the multi-family inspector or building inspector has reason to believe that violations of the ordinances of the city or state law exist that involve serious threats to life, safety, health and property. 
N105.7 Notice to Tenants/Residents. An owner or property manager shall require a multi-family lease contract to be executed between the multi-family complex and the tenant or tenants who will occupy a dwelling unit. The lease shall contain a provision which allows the owner or property manager to show the apartment or dwelling unit to city inspectors. If the multi-family complex's standard lease form does not contain the above stated provision, the owner or property manager shall require the tenant to sign, as a condition for occupancy of a dwelling unit, a document provided by the city which will allow the owner or property manager to show the apartment or dwelling unit to the multi-family inspector or building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 4040-12-2013 , § 4, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 4098-08-2014 , § 2, 8-4-14; Ord. No. 4273-05-2016 , § 3, 5-2-16; 0005-18-ORD , § 1, 1-8-18; 0202-20-ORD , §§ 1, 2, 4-6-20) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4040-12-2013 , § 4, adopted Dec. 16, 2013, enacted provisions intended for use as § 5-95. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as § 5-94.5.  
Sec. 5-95. - Fire prevention division. 
(a)  The fire code and standards adopted in this article shall be enforced by the fire prevention division in the community development department of the city, which division is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire marshal. 
(b)  The fire marshal in charge of the fire prevention division shall be appointed by the community development director on the basis of examination to determine his qualifications. 
(Code 1990, § 6-2-4; Ord. No. 1674-2-92, § I(4), 2-3-92)  
Sec. 5-96. - Appeals. 
Whenever the community development director disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or revokes a permit, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code do not apply, or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, or for any other reason, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the community development director to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1990, § 6-2-8; Ord. No. 1674-2-92, § I(8), 2-3-92)  
Secs. 5-97—5-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIREWORKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous offenses, ch. 8. 
State Law reference— Fireworks, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 5.43-4. 
 
Sec. 5-146. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the word "fireworks" shall mean and include any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or audible pyrotechnic display, and such term shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks, whether herein specially designated and defined or not. 
(Code 1990, § 6-3-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-147. - Application of article. 
This article shall also be applicable and in force within the area immediately adjacent and contiguous to the city limits and extending for a distance outside of the city limits for a total of 5,000 feet, and it shall be unlawful to do or perform any act in violation of this article within such area of 5,000 feet outside the city limits; provided, that this article shall not apply within any portion of such 5,000-foot area which is contained within the territory of any other municipal corporation. 
(Code 1990, § 6-3-7)  
Sec. 5-148. - Right of entry. 
The fire chief, fire marshal, fire prevention officer or police officer is hereby authorized to enter any building where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected in order to inspect the same for the presence of such fireworks but such authority does not include the right to enter a private dwelling or apartment. 
(Code 1990, § 6-3-8)  
Sec. 5-149. - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer for sale or have in his possession with intent to sell any fireworks in violation of this article. If the fireworks are separately wrapped or packaged, the doing or omitting to do any act prohibited by this article shall be a separate offense as to each separately wrapped or separately packaged fireworks. 
(Code 1990, § 6-3-10)  
Sec. 5-150. - General prohibition. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble, store, transport, receive, keep, sell, offer to have in his possession with intent to sell, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise set in action any fireworks of any description. 
(Code 1990, § 6-3-2)  
Sec. 5-151. - Permitted transportation. 
It shall be lawful to transport I.C.C. Class C common fireworks, as defined in Vernon's Annotated Texas Penal Code, by motor vehicles which meet the Interstate Commerce Commission requirement for transporting I.C.C. Class C common fireworks and equipped with at least one ten-pound fire extinguisher for extinguishing Type B fires, along, and upon state and federally numbered highways within the city. It shall further be lawful for bona fide fireworks dealers to transport I.C.C. Class C common fireworks, as defined in V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 5.43-4 along, and upon state and federally numbered highways within the city. 
(Code 1990, § 6-3-3)  
Sec. 5-152. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroads, which signal flares and torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any railroad for use in railroad operation; nor shall this article apply to any marine signal flare or rocket of the type and kind commonly carried by a vessel at sea for its own use and which signal flare or rocket is transported or received or stored for use only as ship's stores; nor shall this article apply to signal flares or rockets for military or police use, nor shall this article apply to starter's blanks and pistols used at athletic events. 
(b)  Toy paper pistol caps which contain less than 0.25 grains of explosive compounds shall not be affected by this article and the sale and use is permitted at all times. 
(Code 1990, §§ 6-3-4, 6-3-5) 
State Law reference— Exemptions, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 5.43-4, § 4.  
Sec. 5-153. - Declaration of nuisance; seizure and destruction. 
The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a common and public nuisance. The fire chief and fire marshal are directed and required to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found in violation of this article and any member of the fire prevention division of the community development department, the fire department, or any police officer of the city or any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks found being transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally until the fire chief and fire marshal can be notified in order that such fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section. Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city or the fire marshal, or both, for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, keeping or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city and to aid the fire marshal in the discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent any person from interfering with the seizure and destruction of such fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction. 
(Code 1990, § 6-3-6) 
Cross reference— Nuisances, ch. 9.  
Sec. 5-154. - When public displays permitted. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a public display of fireworks upon receipt of a permit for entertainment provided in section 7-146 et seq. 
(Code 1990, § 6-3-9)  
Secs. 5-155—5-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm system for summoning emergency medical services, § 4-386 et seq. 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 705.001 et seq.; local provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 774.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-171. - Scope. 
The ambulance service equipment held by the city shall be utilized as an ambulance service for persons requesting or utilizing such service, which shall be subject to the further provisions of this article, and such ambulance service shall be under the immediate supervision of the chief of the fire department and such equipment shall be maintained at a location under the direction of such chief of the fire department, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1990, § 7-7-1)  
Sec. 5-172. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency shall mean any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Such circumstances include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents, and acts of violence resulting in personal injury, and sudden illnesses. 
Emergency ambulance shall mean any motor vehicle especially designed, constructed, equipped and used for transporting the injured or sick in answer to an emergency call. 
Emergency run shall mean the emergency ambulance trip to the place where the emergency exists, or from the place of such emergency to a hospital, medical clinic or medical office, or other appropriate destination for the patient. 
Fire department shall mean the fire department of the city. 
(Code 1990, § 7-7-2)  
Sec. 5-173. - Provider of service. 
The fire department of the city shall be the sole provider of emergency ambulance service within the city, except for others requested by the fire department during times of multiple ambulance needs. 
(Code 1990, § 7-7-3(A))  
Sec. 5-174. - Service fee—Imposed. 
A base fee plus a mileage charge for certain types of transportation shall be charged to each person transported for services rendered, in accordance with the city fee ordinance (section 2-201). 
(Code 1990, § 7-7-3(B); Ord. No. 1646-10-91, § II, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 2430-4-99, § I, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 2435-4-1999, § 1A, 4-19-99)  
Sec. 5-175. - Same—Liability for payment. 
The person receiving emergency ambulance service and any person contracting for the service shall be responsible for payment of the fee. In the case of service received by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be responsible for payment of the fee. 
(Code 1990, § 7-7-3(C))  
Sec. 5-176. - Duty to transport. 
The fire department of the city shall transport the injured or sick to a medical facility of the person's choice provided the medical facility is equipped to handle that type of medical emergency (appropriate facility) and the person's choice is among the facilities listed below. It shall be the discretion of the paramedic to utilize other emergency medical transportation when appropriate for the situation (i.e., helicopter, private ambulance, etc.). No person shall be denied transport to a medical facility for medical care. Choice of facilities are as follows: 
Baylor Medical Center at Grapevine 
1650 W. College Street 
Grapevine, Texas 	Medical Center of Lewisville 
500 W. Main Street 
Lewisville, Texas 
Denton Community 
207 N. Bonnie Brae 
Denton, Texas 	RHD 
7 Medical Parkway 
Farmers Branch, Texas 
Denton Regional 
4405 N. IH-35 
Denton, Texas 
IH-35(address after relocation) 
Denton, Texas 	Trinity Medical Center 
4343 N. Josey Lane 
Carrollton, Texas 3535 
 
Note—The hospitals listed here represent most (if not all) HMO and PPO groups operating in the Metroplex. Addresses referenced from Ft. Worth and Dallas 1998 Mapsco Emergency Medical Facilities Listings. The hospitals listed here represent facilities that patients can be transported to in a reasonable time considering patient care, elapsed transport time, and access to the facility. 
Any person receiving emergency transport to a medical facility will incur a mileage charge per patient loaded mile to that facility (section 2-201). 
Any person wishing non-emergency transport to a medical facility may: 
(1)  Arrange for private transportation. 
(2)  Wait for a non-emergency transport ambulance. 
(3)  Go to a closer hospital and arrange for a transfer from that facility. 
(Code 1990, § 7-7-3(D); Ord. No. 2430-4-99, § I, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 2697-7-2001, § 1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. 3164-01-2005, § II, 1-24-05)  
Sec. 5-177. - Inspection of ambulances and equipment. 
(a)  An ambulance may be inspected at any hour by the chief of police or chief of the fire department, or their duly authorized agents, and they may require such ambulance to proceed to a specified location for such inspection. 
(b)  Any ambulance not meeting requirements, or any equipment not meeting the standards required for the use of such equipment, shall be tagged and shall not be used until the deficiencies are corrected. Use of such ambulance or such equipment while tagged shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1990, § 7-7-6; Ord. No. 1646-10-91, § IV, 10-7-91)  
Sec. 5-178. - Private emergency service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, other than a member of the fire department or an agency of the United States, or duly appointed representative of the city, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the operation of emergency ambulance service, upon the streets, alleys or any public way or place within the city, for the purpose of picking up patients within the city, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  It shall not be unlawful for a person operating a licensed transfer ambulance in the city, upon responding to a direct call for nonemergency transfer ambulance service, to operate such ambulance under emergency conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the fire alarm dispatcher when a determination is made by the transfer ambulance attendants that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all practical speed to a hospital. 
(2)  It shall not be unlawful for any person operating a licensed transfer ambulance in the city, who is performing the service of maintaining an ambulance at a particular location for a sporting or community activity event, to operate such ambulance under emergency conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the fire alarm dispatcher when a determination is made by the transfer ambulance attendant that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all practical speed to a hospital. 
(3)  It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate an emergency ambulance to a hospital within the city, if the place of emergency at which the sick or injured person was picked up by such ambulance is outside the corporate limits of the city, and the ambulance making the emergency run is licensed and operated in accordance with Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4590b, provided that the operator first notifies the fire alarm dispatcher of the route over which the emergency run will be made. 
(4)  It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate an emergency ambulance when a request for an emergency ambulance is made, outside the incorporated limits of the city, directly to a licensed ambulance company, provided that the operator first notifies the fire alarm dispatcher of the route over which the emergency run will be made. 
(5)  It shall not be unlawful for any person to operate a licensed transfer ambulance in the city on an emergency run when fire department ambulances are not available, and the fire alarm dispatcher requests the operator to furnish backup emergency ambulance service for the fire department. 
(b)  Any person operating a licensed transfer ambulance in the city who makes an emergency run under the provisions of subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section shall, if requested in writing by the fire department, within ten days of each such emergency run, submit to the chief of the fire department a report which shall describe the circumstances requiring the emergency run. 
(c)  In the event a patient dies while being transported from one place within the city to another place within or beyond its limits, the licensee of such ambulance shall: 
(1)  Immediately notify the police department of such death, by two-way radio or public telephone; and 
(2)  Within two hours, file a written report with the chief of police upon such forms as he may provide or prescribe, giving all information therein required and any other relevant information which the chief of police may require. 
(Code 1990, § 7-7-4; Ord. No. 1646-10-91, § III, 10-7-91) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 7.  
Chapter 5.5 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, adopted Mar. 21, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 5.5, §§ 5.5-1—5.5-19, and enacted a new Ch. 5.5 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.5 pertained to flood damage prevention and derived from Ord. No. 1912-4-94, § I(Art. 1, §§ A—C, Art. 2, Art. 3, §§ A—G, Art. 4, §§ A—D, Art. 5, §§ A—D), 4-18-94; Ord. No. 2205-3-97, § 1, 3-17-97; Ord. No. 2700-7-2001, § 1, 7-16-01. 
 
Sec. 5.5-1. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-2. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-3. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-4. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See Regulatory floodway. 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or; 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See Area of special flood hazard. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which were not caused by a qualifying substantial damage event and have been identified by the local code enforcement official prior to such event and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-6. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Denton County, Texas and Incorporated Areas, dated April 18, 2011, with Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated April 18, 2011" and "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Dallas County, Texas and Incorporated Areas, dated July 7, 2014, with Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated July 7, 2014", any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11; Ord. No. 4066-05-2014 , § 1, 5-5-14)  
Sec. 5.5-7. - Establishment of development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-8. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-10. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-11. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-12. - Floodplain administrator—Appointed. 
The city manager or designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-13. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 5.5-6 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 5.5-16—5.5-21 of this chapter. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-14. - Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
c.  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 5.5-17(2) of this chapter; 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
e.  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection 5.5-13(1) of this chapter; 
(2)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-15. - Variance procedures. 
(1)  The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of ½ acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in [subsection 5.5-14(2) of this chapter] have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the ½ acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (section 5.5-2). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
a.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.  Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria outlined in subsections (1)—(9) of this section are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-16. - Flood hazard reduction—General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-17. - Same—Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 5.5-6 of this chapter, subsection 5.5-13(8) of this chapter, or subsection 5.5-18(3) of this chapter, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in subsection 5.5-14(1)a of this chapter, is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at two feet above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of subsection 5.5-14(1) of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-18. - Same—Subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 5.5-1—5.5-3 of this chapter. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 5.5-7; section 5.5-14; and the provisions of sections 5.5-16—5.5-21 of this chapter. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 5.5-6 or subsection 5.5-13(8) of this chapter. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data, with the establishment of a floodway, shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all zone A areas, within 100 feet of the boundary lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the community's FIRM. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(6)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-19. - Same—Areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in [section 5.5-6 of this chapter], are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures; 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 5.5-14 of this chapter are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-20. - Same—Floodways. 
Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 5.5-6 of this chapter, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 5.5-16 through 5.5-21 of this chapter. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulation, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 5.5-21. - Violation. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, locate, extend, convert, or alter a structure or land without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 3845-03-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Chapter 5.7 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 5.7-1—5.7-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2688-6-2001, § 1, adopted June 4, 2001, repealed article II, sections 5.7-31—5.7-36, in its entirety. Former article II pertained to the Old Town historical committee and derived from; Ord. No. 2016-4-95, §§ I—VI, adopted April 17, 1995. 
 
Secs. 5.7-31—5.7-36. - Reserved.  
Chapter 6 - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, adopted May 19, 2003, repealed chapter 6, sections 6-1, 6-21—6-32, 6-51—6-58, 6-71—6-76, 6-91—6-102, 6-121—6-125, 6-141—6-149, 6-161—6-168, 6-181, 6-182 and replaced it with a new chapter 6, sections 6-1, 6-21—6-31, 6-51—6-58, 6-71—6-76, 6-91—6-102, 6-121—6-125, 6-141—6-149, 6-161—6-168, 6-181, 6-182, apps. 1—5. Former chapter 6 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 2494-9-1999, § 1, adopted Sept. 27, 1999; Ord. No. 2517-11-1999, §§ 2, 3, adopted Nov. 15, 1999; Ord. No. 2591-8-2000, § 1, adopted Aug. 7, 2000; Ord. No. 2662-3-2001, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 19, 2001; Ord. No. 2769-01-2002, §§ 1—13, adopted Dec. 10, 2001; Ord. No. 2772-01-2002, §§ 1—5, adopted Jan. 28, 2002; Ord. No. 2793-04-2002, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 1, 2002; Ord. No. 2829-07-2002, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 15, 2002; Ord. No. 2854-09-2002, § 1, adopted Sept. 16, 2002; Ord. No. 2890-12-2002, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 16, 2002. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
Amended final plat. A plat of a subdivision correcting the scrivener errors of a previously approved plat in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the Texas Local Government Code, and a copy of which has been filed for record with the county clerk of Dallas or Denton County, Texas. 
Brick veneer. That form of construction composed of individual kiln fired brick units, stone, split face block, glass block or combination of these materials laid up unit by unit, set in mortar and installed per the adopted building code. (To utilize tilt wall and/or pre-cast concrete construction types, see section 6-181). 
Building. A structure (anything constructed or erected), designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage, or shelter. 
Building area. A portion of a lot on which single-family buildings are allowed to be placed. 
Building lot. A single tract of land located within a single block which, (at time of filing for a building permit) is designed by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. It shall front upon a street or approved place. Therefore, a "building lot" may not coincide with a lot of record. A building lot may be subsequently subdivided into two or more building lots, and a number of building lots may be cumulated into one building lot, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
Building pad. A portion of a lot on which commercial building footprints, driveways and mutual accesses are designed and shown on the approved engineering site plan. 
City. The City of Lewisville, Texas, and all its governing and operating bodies. 
City staff. All city employees designated by the city and by properly constituted authority to recommend and enforce the regulations contained in this chapter. 
Clear vision area. A part of a lot (generally corner lot) which may not be utilized for plantings, walls, fences, parking, vending machines, or other obstructions which would cause danger, as determined by the city, to traffic by obstructing the view. 
Commercial development. Any non-single-family residential development requiring an engineering site plan in accordance with this chapter. 
Control of access line. Lines along sections of the street and alley rights-of-way which delineate areas where no driveway access will be permitted, these lines shall be shown within the limits which the city determines to be potentially unsafe for driveway access. 
Corner clip. A triangular area of additional right-of-way at street and alley intersections. 
Council. The city council of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Easement. The right granted for the purpose of limited public use across, over, or under private land. 
Engineer. The city engineer of the City of Lewisville, or any state-licensed civil engineer. 
Engineering site plan. The development plan for one or more lots upon which is shown all information required by this chapter sealed by a state-licensed civil engineer. There are specific requirements for engineering site plans. An architectural site plan shall not be substituted for an engineering site plan. 
Final plat. A plat of a subdivision which has been approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and a copy of which has been filed for record with the county clerk of Dallas or Denton County, Texas. 
Fire lane. A fire apparatus access road that is a minimum of 24 feet in width and constructed of either asphalt or reinforced concrete, sufficiently designed to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus, and provides a surface capable of being striped in accordance with current city specifications. Fire apparatus access roads will be required and maintained in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
Lot of record. A lot which is created by an approved subdivision, the plat of which has been duly recorded in the office of the appropriate county clerk. 
Masonry veneer. That form of construction composed of individual kiln fired brick units, concrete tilt-wall, stone, cement plaster (stucco), concrete block, concrete, exposed aggregate, and glass block when installed in accordance with the adopted building code. (Tilt-wall and/or pre-cast concrete construction type shall provide architectural features including reveals; articulations, chamfered edges, etc. so that areas bordered by said features do not exceed 100 square feet in size. A minimum of two colors must be used on each elevation. 80 percent of each elevation must utilize natural and/or earth tone colors. In addition, each elevation may have 20 percent of another type of color if opted.) 
Master plan. The various plans for the city and its adjoining areas, as adopted by the council, and as it may subsequently be amended, and which indicates the existing and recommended general locations of various land uses, streets, parks, and other public and private developments and improvements. 
Mining. Shall mean the use of a facility or area for the extraction, removal, or stockpiling of sub-earth materials, including sand, gravel, oil, gas or other materials found under the earth. The following are not considered mining: 
(1)  The excavation, extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth materials for ponds or lakes, or incidental to an approved plat, or incidental to construction with a building permit, or for governmental or utility construction projects such as streets, alleys, gas, electrical, water, telephone facilities and similar projects. 
(2)  The extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth materials incidental to construction of landscaping, retaining walls, screening devices and similar activities consistent with the land use allowed at the site of removal. 
(3)  Grading and filling outside the scope of an approved plat or engineering site plan when done in conjunction with an approved grading and fill permit properly issued by the city. 
Minor plat. A plat of a subdivision that involves four or fewer lots which front on an existing street and do not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities and has been approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and a copy of which has been filed for record with the county clerk of Dallas or Denton County, Texas. 
Modified site plan. A city council approved site plan which does not meet all the provisions/requirements of an engineering site plan as required by this article and serves the purpose of and/or modifies an engineering site plan. 
Non-single-family. As specified in the engineering site plan requirements shall include all uses in all zoning districts that are not single-family or two-family residential in nature. For purposes of this definition, multi-family residential and mobile home parks shall be considered as non-single-family residential and will be required to comply with the engineering site plan process. 
Old Town development plan. The development plan of one or more lots in the Old Town center business district, as established by the city zoning ordinance, upon which is shown all information required by this chapter. 
Opaque. As specified in the screening requirements shall mean a fence that you can not see through. A chain link fence with slats or a fabric fence is not acceptable. 
Ordinances, standards, and codes. The official maps, master plans, ordinances, and specifications of the city. 
Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Plat. A complete and exact plan, map, or drawing, on which a subdivider's plan of a subdivision is presented and is submitted for approval, and a copy of which has been or will be filed in the office of the appropriate county clerk. 
Preliminary plat. A preliminary plan or drawing that represents a subdivider's plan of the subdivision, showing all boundaries and location of individual properties and streets. Preliminary plats must be approved by either the planning and zoning commission or city council, as applicable. 
Protected tree. Trees that are defined by a protected tree list, by species and meeting ordinance-mandated minimum caliper size. 
Replat. The subdivision of any part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition or lot. 
Screening fence. A solid opaque screening fence used to screen outside storage in accordance with the screening section of this chapter. 
Screening wall. A solid screening wall made of brick, stone or decorative concrete block to be erected at designated areas in accordance with the screening section of this chapter. 
Setback line. A line which a building must be set back from the property line, the street right-of-way line or easement line. 
Site improvements. All necessary site related improvements required by this chapter. 
Off-site public improvements. All public improvements constructed on public property. 
On-site public improvements. All public improvements constructed on private property in public easements. 
Public improvements. All infrastructure necessary for development as required by this chapter which include surface improvements (curbs, gutters, driveway approaches, sidewalks, paved streets, alleys, bridges, culverts, street lights, and etc.) and utilities (water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm drains, fire hydrants, and etc). 
Semi-public improvements. All improvements required by this chapter installed on private property, other than easements, and privately maintained. (e.g. fire lanes, fire lines, on site private fire hydrants, screening devices, on site drainage, meters, and backflow devices). 
Street. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, boulevard, or however otherwise designated. 
Alleys. Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Alleys, interior. Internal alleys within a subdivision not parallel to a city street. 
Alleys, perimeter. Alleys adjacent to and parallel to a city street requiring a screening wall between the rights-of-ways. 
Arterial streets. Major streets in the city's street system that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic onto, out, or around the city and carry high volume of traffic, designated on the thoroughfare plan as P6D, P4D. 
Collector streets. Streets whose principal function is to carry traffic between residential streets and the arterial streets, but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development, designated on the thoroughfare plan as C2U, and C4U. 
Controlled access streets. Streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Culs-de-sac. Short minor streets having only one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Dead end streets. Streets other than a cul-de-sac with only one outlet. 
Residential streets. Streets which are intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and which is used for access to abutting properties. 
Subdivision. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots, or building sites for purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) including one lot subdivision and all divisions of land involving dedication of streets, alleys, and easements, or change in existing streets. The term also includes re-subdivision, and the term subdivider or developer are synonymous and interchangeable, and include any person, partnership, association, firm, trustee, or agent who participate in subdivision of land within the intent, scope, and purview of this chapter. Divisions of land for agricultural purposes in parcels of five acres or more shall not be included within this definition, unless any such division of five acres or more include the planning or development of a new street or access easement. 
Tract. An unplatted parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by a recorded deed and which is recognized as a separate parcel for purpose of transfer of title. 
Tree survey. A drawing showing protected trees located outside of the building area on single-family lots and outside of the building pad for commercial lots. 
Truck lay. The route fire department apparatus travels from a fire hydrant to all points of a structure or combustible storage area. Actual distance is measured along a paved street and/or fire lane as the apparatus would travel. 
Utility company. Companies, corporations and other entities who undertake transmission and distribution of electricity, telecommunications, radio or television communications. 
Utility lines. Poles, structures, wire, aerial cables and related facilities used in transmission and distribution of electricity, telecommunications, radio or television communications. 
Utility lines, existing. Poles, wires, aerial cables and other related facilities that are in place and in operation at the time of the effective date of this chapter. 
Utility lines, new. Poles, wires, aerial cables and other related facilities that are not in place and in operation at the time of the effective date of this chapter. 
Utility lines, 60KV. An electric line used for electrical distribution having a voltage rating of 60,000 volts. 
Variance. A grant of permission by the council that authorizes a specific suspension or waiver of the rules and regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3779-06-2010 , § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 4093-07-2014 , § 1, 7-7-14)  
Secs. 6-2—6-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 6-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development within the city, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-22. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-23. - Jurisdiction. 
Provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city limits, and any applicable extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-24. - Extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ). 
This chapter, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, is hereby extended to all areas lying within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the city, and the rules and regulations within this chapter governing plats and subdivision of land shall be applicable to such area within the extra-territorial jurisdiction from and after the date of final passage of this chapter. No person shall subdivide or plat any tract of land within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the city, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-25. - Special districts. 
Special districts, such as utility districts, road districts, etc., will be allowed only after approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-26. - Submittal procedure. 
The submittal of plats, either preliminary or final, engineering site plans, and building permit applications shall be directed to the department of community development, central permitting section, of the city. Such submittals will be processed in accordance with procedures as outlined within this chapter and policies adopted in conjunction therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-27. - Title opinion. 
To provide evidence that the owner has adequate title and authority to convey dedication, a title opinion must be submitted for all plats or actions which include dedication of land or easements to the city. Said title opinion must be deemed to be satisfactory by the city attorney and will be at the sole expense of the owner. In the event there is one or more lien holder(s), written approval by the lien holder(s) must be provided to show agreement of the plat or dedication. Dedication along state routes shall be by warranty deed. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-28. - Tax certificate. 
An original tax certificate must be submitted as required with all plats, engineering site plans, requests for permits for construction of public or semi-public improvements, or requests for permits for construction of private buildings. All taxes due to the city must be current at the time of approval of plats or site plans and at the time of issuance of said construction permits. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-29. - Design standards. 
Standards for design of public improvements and of private improvements which directly interface with public improvements shall be as outlined in the city standard specifications and Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction of the North Central Texas Council of Governments as adopted by the city, except as otherwise noted. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-30. - Plat required. 
(a)  In accordance with the Local Government Code, section 212.004, the owner of a tract of land, located within the limits or in the extra-territorial jurisdiction of a municipality, who divides the tract in two or more parts for the purpose of sale, or to lay out a subdivision or building lots or any lots, or streets, alleys, parks or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots, shall cause a final plat to be made in accordance with this chapter and with the Local Government Code. 
(b)  Every structure hereafter erected or altered shall be located on a lot of record as identified on a final plat for the property. This provision shall not apply when a new building or addition is no more than ten percent of the size of the existing building or buildings on the tract, provided there are one or more buildings already located on the tract. This provision shall apply up to a maximum addition or new building of 5,000 square feet in size when there are no significant impacts to the property as determined by a current survey. If there are changes in drainage, city utilities or required parking a plat will still be required. 
(c)  For all unplatted tracts, a master development plan, called a preliminary plat in this chapter, may be required prior to preparation of any final plat. For the purpose of subdividing a large tract which includes an extensive amount of public improvements, a preliminary plat shall be submitted identifying lots, blocks and phases to be final platted in time, as development occurs, and on the condition that all building lots and phases can stand alone in terms of public and semi-public improvements. 
(d)  In further subdividing a final platted lot, the lot of record must be replatted in its entirety. In addition, all replats of commercially zoned land and all replats of single and two family residential zoned land of more than six lots must be considered in a public hearing in accordance with the Local Government Code. 
(e)  No plat or replat shall create a nonconforming use and/or condition for parking, signs or other such city regulations. If a lot or tract is being subdivided, an engineering site plan may be required if determined by staff to insure that the subdivision of property is not creating a nonconforming use and/or condition according to this chapter and other city regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3598-09-2008, § 1, 9-8-08)  
Sec. 6-31. - Variances and exceptions. 
(a)  Where the city council finds that hardship or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and/or the purpose of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve exceptions to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. In approving exceptions, the city council may require such conditions and stipulations that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
A petition for any such exception shall be submitted in writing by the owner/agent, four weeks prior to any council meeting, to the community development department. The request shall state fully the grounds for the application and all facts relied upon by the applicant. All supporting exhibits, fees and documents must be included with the application. Incomplete applications will not be processed until all necessary documents are received by staff. 
(b)  Variances requested on the face of a plat or engineering site plan, will be scheduled for the appropriate board after staff's review. Variances requested on engineering site plans will be placed on the city council agenda and variances on preliminary and final plats will go before the planning and zoning commission first with a recommendation to the city council. 
(c)  An administrative fee for processing variance requests is applicable for all requests. 
   

Figure 1—City Organizational Chart 
 

Figure 2—Community Development Organizational Chart 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
DIVISION 2. - PARK FEE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— 0043-18-ORD , § II, adopted July 2, 2018, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 6-32—6-43 was entitled "Park Development Fee," and derived from Ord. No. 3426-03-2007, § 2, adopted Mar. 19, 2007. 
 
Sec. 6-32. - Purpose and imposition. 
(a)  A park fee is hereby imposed on residential development to assure that park facilities, including trails, are available and adequate to meet the needs created by such development while maintaining current and proposed park and recreation standards pursuant to the Park Master Plan and Trails Master Plan. The park fee consists of a parkland dedication requirement and a park development fee. The park fee shall be imposed by the city on all residential development, and all funds collected shall be used solely and exclusively for the purpose of acquisition and development of park facilities necessitated by and serving such development. 
(b)  If a park fee (including parkland dedication or cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication) has been paid prior to the adoption of this division, that park fee (including parkland dedication or cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication) shall be controlled by the provisions of the ordinance in effect at the time such obligation arose. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-33. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this division only, the terms that follow shall have the meanings set forth herein. Terms not herein defined shall have those meanings given them by other provisions of the Lewisville City Code: 
Applicant shall mean the property owner or duly designated agent of the property owner of land for which approval of a final plat for residential development has been requested. 
Building shall mean any enclosed residential structure designed or intended for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons. 
Director shall mean the director of the parks and recreation department or her authorized representative. 
Dwelling shall mean any building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential occupancy and containing one or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling unit shall mean one or more rooms arranged, designed or used as separate living quarters for an individual family, which contains kitchen facilities (only one per dwelling unit permitted), including at least a stove or cooking device and permanently installed sink, plus bathroom facilities. 
Park facilities shall mean land and/or improvements used or to be used as a park, including trails, regardless of location, including both the acquisition of such land, the construction of improvements thereon and the expenditure of funds incidental thereto, including but not necessarily limited to, planning, engineering and design of the park, including trails, and improvements, utility relocation, provision of improvements, provision of pedestrian and vehicular access thereto and purchase of equipment, the need for which are attributable to new residential development. 
Park Master Plan shall mean the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies those park facilities for a period of at least five years, which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of park fees pursuant to this division. 
Property shall mean the legally described parcel of land capable of development pursuant to applicable city ordinances and regulations. 
Property owner(s) shall mean any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any other entity having a proprietary interest in the land on which approval of a final plat for residential development has been requested. 
Residential development shall mean the development of any property for a dwelling or dwellings, other than motels, hotels, shelter used temporarily for transients or other similar uses. 
Trails Master Plan shall mean the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies trails, which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of park fees pursuant to this division. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-34. - Applicability. 
(a)  This division shall be uniformly applicable to residential development of property in the city which is or will be served by park facilities. This division does not apply to activities involving the replacement, reconstruction, remodeling, rehabilitation or other improvements to an existing building, or to the rebuilding of a damaged building, or to permits required for accessory uses, unless such activity results in an additional dwelling unit. 
(b)  For purposes of this division, property is "served by" park facilities when funds collected for such facilities have been spent for facilities identified in the Park Master Plan or Trails Master Plan within ten years from the date of collection. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-35. - Authority. 
(a)  This division is enacted pursuant to the city's police powers existing under the city's charter and consistent with the Texas Constitution, article XI, section 5, and applies to all property within the city's boundaries. 
(b)  The city shall adopt a Park Master Plan and a Trails Master Plan for the entire city, which identifies the park facilities which are to be acquired through parkland dedication requirements or financed in whole or in part through the imposition of park fees. Park fees may only be spent for park facilities identified in such plans. The plans shall be reviewed and updated at least every five years by the city council. 
(c)  Imposition of a park fee does not alter, negate, supersede or otherwise affect any other requirements of city, county, state or federal legislation or regulations that may be applicable to a development, including city zoning and/or subdivision regulations. 
(d)  The provisions of this division shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized under state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this division. Guidelines may be developed by resolution or ordinance to implement and administer this division. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-36. - Park fee. 
(a)  Parkland dedication requirement. 
(1)  For developments where all lots are for residential development, the parkland dedication requirement shall be determined by a ratio of three acres for each 100 dwelling units. For calculation of developments with less than 100 dwelling units, each dwelling unit shall equal .03 acres. (Example: 25 dwelling unit development will require .75 acres). 
a.  Jurisdictional wetlands and property in established floodplains may be used to satisfy up to one-half of the parkland dedication requirement. 
b.  A preliminary plat shall show the area proposed to be dedicated under this section. The property must be reviewed and accepted by the director. If the area proposed for dedication is not consistent with the goals established in the Parks Master Plan or the Trails Master Plan, the city may require a cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication. 
(2)  Cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication. 
a.  The city may require cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication. Such payment in lieu of land shall be made prior to final plat approval. The payment shall be proportional to the amount of land required to be dedicated and shall use the fair market value of the land at the time of construction of the development. 
b.  The amount of the cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication shall be based on the following formula: (A x V) = M 
A = the area of land required for dedication as determined in subsection 6-36(a). 
V = the fair market value (per acre) of the property as established by a land appraisal conducted by a third party. 
M = the number of dollars to be paid in lieu of the parkland dedication requirement. 
c.  The director shall be responsible for verifying the amount due. 
d.  A combination of parkland dedication and cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication can be utilized to meet the parkland dedication requirement. 
(b)  Park development fee. The amount of the park development fee shall be based on the following formula: (R x DU) = F 
R = the park development fee rate found in section 2-201, Fee schedule, of the Lewisville City Code. 
DU = the total number of dwelling units in the residential development. 
F = the number of dollars to be paid. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-37. - Processing and collection. 
Applicants for a residential development must submit a plat for review and approval pursuant to the land development regulations. 
(1)  The parkland dedication requirement (or cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication) and park development fee shall be imposed on all residential development in the city at the time of filing a final plat pursuant to the land development regulations, and all amounts due shall be paid prior to final plat approval. 
(2)  The parkland dedication requirement for each residential development shall contain a clear, fee simple dedication of an area of land within the development to the city for park facilities. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a preliminary plat or final plat whichever comes first, the city shall calculate the amount of the park development fee and the amount of cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication (when applicable) due pursuant to section 6-36. 
(4)  If fewer dwelling units are constructed than planned by the final plat, the property owner may apply for a refund for the difference in the number of dwelling units pursuant to section 6-39. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-38. - Use of funds. 
(a)  Cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication and park development fees collected pursuant to this division must be used solely for one of the following purposes: 
(1)  To acquire and develop park facilities, in accordance with the Park Master Plan and Trails Master Plan, subject to the provisions herein; 
(2)  To reimburse the city for prior acquisition and development of such park facilities, which will benefit the new residential development inhabitants; or 
(3)  To make refunds pursuant to section 6-39. 
(b)  Cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication and park development fees collected shall not be used to maintain or operate the existing park system or to finance park and recreational activities other than park facilities. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall prevent the city from issuing and utilizing general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, revenue certificates or other certificates of indebtedness as are within the authority of the city in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law in furtherance of the financing and provision of park facilities as set forth in the Park Master Plan. Cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication and park development fees paid pursuant to this division, however, shall be used for park facilities acquisition and development. 
(d)  Interest earned on cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication and park development fees shall be used solely for the purposes specified herein. 
(e)  The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication and park development fees disbursed are utilized solely for the purposes and intent of this division; provided, however, that such funds shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed ten years from the date the funds are collected. 
(f)  The city shall maintain and keep financial records for the cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication and park development fees which shall show the source and disbursement of all funds collected. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-39. - Refunds. 
(a)  The current owner of property on which a cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication payment and park development fee has been paid may apply for a refund of such funds if: 
(1)  The property on which the funds have been paid has not been served by park facilities, as provided in section 6-34; or 
(2)  Fewer dwelling units are constructed than planned by the final plat. 
(b)  Only the current owner of the property may petition for a refund. A petition for refund shall be filed within one year of the event giving rise to the right to claim a refund, or the refund will not be granted. 
(c)  The petition for refund must be submitted to the director on a form provided by the city for such purpose. The petition must contain the following: a certified copy of the latest recorded deed for the property; a current legal description; and a statement of the reasons for which a refund is sought. 
(d)  A refund shall be due under subsection 6-39(a)(1) only if the director determines that the total funds collected for which a refund is being sought exceeds the total expenditures for park facility purposes allowed by this division for the same period ("excess amount"). The refund amount shall be the development's pro rata share of the excess of funds collected over expenditures, together with interest earned on such amount for the period. The city may periodically compute the difference between expenditures and funds collected for purposes of reviewing refund requests under this subsection. The city council may, after notice by publication in the section of a local newspaper reserved for legal notices, and after a public hearing, vote to apply any unclaimed excess amounts to the remaining park facilities. When the city council votes to apply the excess amounts, the right to refund of the applied excess amounts shall be extinguished. 
(e)  Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the director must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request. The decision must include the reasons for the decision. If a refund is due to the petitioner, the director shall notify the city's finance department and request that a refund payment be made to petitioner. 
(f)  The petitioner may appeal the determination of the director to the city council, and its decision shall be final. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-40. - Procedures for updating the park fee. 
(a)  At least every five years, the director shall prepare a report to the city council on the park fee. In the preparation of such report, the following information shall be reviewed: 
(1)  A statement summarizing the parkland dedication requirements and the cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication requirements and park development fees collected and disbursed since the previous report; 
(2)  A statement summarizing park facilities acquisition and development and the status thereof since the previous report; 
(3)  A statement summarizing the administration and enforcement of park fees; and 
(4)  A statement and recommendation from the park board on all aspects of the park fee and city park needs. 
(b)  The report shall make recommendations, if appropriate, on amendments to this division, changes in the administration or enforcement of this division, changes in the parkland dedication requirements, cash-in-lieu of parkland dedication and park development fee rates, and changes in the Park Master Plan and the Trails Master Plan. 
(c)  Based upon the report and such other factors as the city council deems relevant and applicable, the city council may amend the park fee. If the city council fails to take action, the park fee then in effect shall remain in effect. Nothing herein precludes the city council or limits its discretion to amend the park fee at such other times as may be deemed necessary. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-41. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant may appeal the following decisions of the director to the city council: 
(1)  The applicability of the park fee; 
(2)  The amount of the park fee due; or 
(3)  The amount of refund due, if any. 
The burden of proof is on the property owner or applicant to demonstrate that the amount or applicability of the fee or refund, was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of fees or the guidelines established for determining such amounts. The property owner or applicant must file a notice of appeal with the city secretary within 30 days following the determination by the director. The filing of an appeal shall stay the matter until final determination by the city council. 
(b)  The city council may grant a variance from any requirements of this division, upon written request by a property owner or applicant, only upon a finding that a strict application of such requirement would result in a substantial hardship which is not common to similarly situated property owners. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Sec. 6-42. - Park fee as additional and supplemental requirement. 
The park fee is additional and supplemental to and not in substitution of any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of the land. It is intended to be consistent with and to further the objectives and policies of the Park Master Plan, the Trails Master Plan and the comprehensive plan and to be coordinated with other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate park facilities in conjunction with the development of land. In no event shall a property owner be obligated to dedicate land or pay for park facilities in an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this division; but provided that a property owner may be required, pursuant to city zoning and subdivision regulations, to provide open lands, setbacks, buffers and other nonbuildable area on-site in addition to meeting the park fee requirements. 
( 0043-18-ORD , § II, 7-2-18)  
Secs. 6-43—6-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLAN SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 6-51. - General provisions. 
(a)  The city has established a central location for submitting plans for development and construction once property is properly zoned. All plats, site plans and plans for building construction shall be submitted directly to the building inspection division of the community development department. Persons wishing to discuss specific questions in the development process should contact the appropriate division, but all formal submittals should be made to this "one stop" location to provide a coordinated review. Copies of the city's development and construction regulations are available at the building inspection division and on-line at www.cityoflewisville.com. 
(b)  Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, final plat or engineering site plan, the developer/owner shall consult with the appropriate city staff review committee concerning the proposal. Staff will assist in determining whether the proposed development is generally consistent with city standards, plans and policies. 
(c)  The city review staff will be available on a regular weekly basis for a joint meeting with any person wishing to discuss projects in review or proposed for submittal. The project engineer is encouraged to attend the review meeting in order to directly receive pertinent information regarding the proposed project. This meeting will not provide a full review of any particular project, but will provide the opportunity for a developer or engineer to schedule a regular meeting to assist in expediting the city review process. Persons wishing to schedule a time for the regular review meeting should contact the community development department. 
(d)  Twelve copies, 22" × 34", of preliminary plats, final plats and engineering site plans shall be included with all formal submittals. Plats and engineering site plans will be reviewed by applicable community development divisions. The parks and leisure services department will review plats and site plans involving residential development and right-of-way landscaping and irrigation. Copies of the submittals are also furnished to the electric, telephone, gas, cable, and solid waste disposal utility companies for review and comment. The initial review period will be a maximum of 15 working days, with subsequent re-submittal reviews to be a maximum of ten working days. On larger sets of plans staff may require additional time for review. The building inspection division will coordinate all submittals and returns of marked-up copies, including payment of review fees, as well as acceptance of tax certificates, file copies and other required materials. 
(e)  All preliminary plats, final plats and engineering site plans submitted for review will be on the city's active list for a period of three months from the date of each submittal. After the three-month period, a project will be considered abandoned and will be removed from the files. Substantial developer-initiated changes in the project from one submittal to the next that need additional review, will require payment of one-half of the original review fee. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-52. - Requirements for submittal of final file copies. 
Following completion of the review process, plats and replats must be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for final approval. In the event a variance is requested, all preliminary and final plats must have final approval by the city council after a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. Engineering site plan approval can be granted by city staff if the site plan conforms with all applicable requirements of the city. If a variance is requested, the engineering site plan shall be forwarded directly to the city council upon completion of staff review. 
(1)  Preliminary plats. Following the completion of the review process and 12 days prior to the scheduled planning and zoning commission meeting, the applicant must submit final file copies. This will include one mylar and two blueline prints of 22" × 34" sheet size and 20 copies of 11" × 17" sheet size reductions. If development and/or construction variances are being requested, the number of 11" × 17" sheet size reductions to be submitted shall be 40 to allow for the additional submission to the city council. 
(2)  Final plats. Following the completion of the review process and 12 days prior to the scheduled planning and zoning commission meeting, the applicant must submit final file copies, all with seals and notarized signatures shall be original. This will include one mylar and one blueline print of 22" × 34" sheet size, one mylar and three blueline prints of 18" × 24" sheet size, and 20 copies of 11" × 17" sheet size reductions. If development and/or construction variances are being requested, the number of 11" × 17" sheet size reductions to be submitted shall be 40 to allow for the additional submission to the city council. At such time when all final file copies have been submitted, as outlined in this chapter, to the planning and community services division, the plat will be considered filed with the city to be heard by the planning and zoning commission, in accordance with Local Government Code, section 212.009. 
(3)  Minor plats. Following the completion of the review process, the applicant must submit final file copies, all with seals and notarized signatures shall be original. This will include one mylar and one blueline print of 22" × 34" sheet size, one mylar and three blueline prints of 18" × 24" sheet size and three 11" × 17" sheet size reductions. 
(4)  Engineering site plans. Following completion of the review process, the applicant must submit one original 22" × 34" sheet size mylar, signed and sealed by a state-licensed civil engineer, to be signed by city staff members and utility companies. After all signatures are collected, 12 blueline copies 22" × 34" sheet size must be submitted prior to a pre-construction conference. Engineering site plan construction may begin prior to final plat acceptance by the planning and zoning commission if staff review is complete and no variances are requested. If development and/or construction variances are requested, 20 11" × 17" reductions must be submitted four weeks in advance of the city council meeting at which the variance request will be presented. 
(5)  Denton County filing fees. For all documents to be filed at the Denton County clerk's office, including all plats, deeds, easements, abandonments, and corrections, a separate check in the exact amount of the county filing fee shall be submitted with the document(s) to be filed. The check shall be made payable to "Denton County Clerk." 
(6)  External agency permit submittals. Submittals for floodplain development to F.E.M.A., and the U.S. Corps of Engineers (C.D.C. applications), can be processed concurrently with city staff approval. Submittals for TXDOT permits will be processed through city initiation (per TXDOT policy) only upon completion of city staff review. Permits are granted only to the city by TXDOT and not private developers. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-53. - Park and other public use dedication requirements. 
Park dedication for residential development shall be in accordance with the city park dedication ordinance. All rights-of-way and land proposed for public use dedication associated with a current or future development shall be dedicated with a final plat. Requirement of fees in lieu of land for park dedication purposes shall be met prior to the approval of the final plat for the project. Land for park dedication purposes may be deeded to the city in advance, but will have to be included on the plat as development occurs. Rights-of-way acquisition for public improvement projects will not be affected by this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-54. - When an engineering site plan is required. 
(a)  Engineering site plan approval is required for all non-single-family construction involving new buildings. Non-single-family residential engineering site plans may proceed through staff review and approval so long as a final plat has been approved or is in the process of being reviewed and approved with no variances. The land must be platted before an engineering site plan can be approved. Once the engineering site plan is approved, a temporary, 30-day construction permit for public and semi-public improvements may be issued prior to acceptance of a fully compliant final plat, as long as the final plat is scheduled for a planning and zoning meeting with no variances. In the event that the plat is denied, all temporary permits will be revoked. Engineering site plans must also be submitted for approval when any of the following apply to a non-single-family site: 
(1)  Change in the square footage of any existing enclosed building or parking area. This provision shall not apply when a new building or addition is no more than ten percent of the size of the existing building or buildings on the tract, provided there are one or more buildings already located on the tract. This provision shall apply up to a maximum addition or new building of 5,000 square feet in size when there are no significant impacts to the property as determined by a current survey. If there are changes in drainage, city utilities or required parking an engineering site plan will still be required. 
(2)  Any change requiring additional parking and/or fire protection to the site. 
Exception: New water connections associated with underground fire sprinkler mains shall not, by itself, require an engineering site plan. However, construction plans for the underground sprinkler mains shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. 
(3)  Change in the fire lane configuration or location. 
(4)  Addition, deletion, alteration or relocation of an existing driveway. 
(5)  Change in grading or drainage. 
(6)  Addition of new water or sanitary sewer services to the site. 
(7)  As otherwise expressly required in chapter 6, chapter 17, or chapter 17.5 of the Lewisville City Code. 
(b)  Existing legal nonconforming structures may maintain a legal nonconforming status unless one of the items listed above is triggered or unless the use or operation of the structure or property ceases or becomes vacant for a period of 12 months or more, in which case, the start up of any use of the structure or property will require compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, including platting and submission of an engineering site plan. 
(c)  Engineering site plans for any non-single-family residential development for new construction or for alteration(s) to a site must be reviewed by all applicable departments. Any minor changes on the site which would otherwise trigger an engineering site plan will require submission of a copy of the approved engineering site plan, prepared in accordance with this chapter, with the proposed change(s) drawn in. More significant changes may require full submission of a new engineering site plan in accordance with this chapter. Engineering site plans are not required for single-family residential building permits. 
(d)  No plat or replat shall create a nonconforming use and/or condition for parking, signs or other such city regulations. If a lot or tract is being subdivided, an engineering site plan may be required if determined by staff to insure that the subdivision of property is not creating a nonconforming use and/or condition according to this chapter and other city regulations. 
(e)  When approved by city council, a modified site plan may be accepted as an engineering site plan. The modified site plan shall serve with the same effect and force as an engineering site plan. If a site has a previously approved engineering site plan, the modified site plan shall alter the provisions of the original engineering site plan as approved in the modified site plan, and portions of the original engineering site plan unaffected by the modified site plan shall stay in force. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3234-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05; Ord. No. 3598-09-2008, § 2, 9-8-08; Ord. No. 3779-06-2010 , § 2, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 4093-07-2014 , § 2, 7-7-14; Ord. No. 4167-03-2015 , § 1, 3-16-15; 0032-18-ORD , § 2, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 6-55. - Accelerated review for engineering site plans. 
An accelerated review may be utilized for the review process in limited situations. Engineering site plans submitted in accordance with this section will be reviewed within seven working days; each subsequent submittal will be reviewed within five working days. The following is a list of minimum requirements for invoking the special review process. Review fees are those of a regular submittal. 
(1)  The property must be platted as one platted lot or building lot. 
(2)  No city council action is required. 
(3)  No public improvements other than driveways and sidewalks are required. 
(4)  No right-of-way or easement dedication is required. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-56. - Requirements for phasing a development. 
Development may be phased on a plat or engineering site plan by establishing phase lines and/or lot lines. The phasing on an engineering site plan for a lot with existing developments shall not be allowed. The engineering site plan for lots with existing developments shall fully comply with the requirements of this chapter. Each phase shall be capable of standing alone, as development occurs, and shall not be dependant on future construction associated with separate phases to meet city standards or requirements. All required public, semi-public and private improvements, as defined by this chapter, (roads, turn lanes, deceleration lanes, RR crossings, traffic control devices, sidewalks, screening walls, etc.), shall be designed and constructed with each phase in conformance with all applicable city standards. 
The pro-rated cost of public improvements which are deferred for the construction of future phases shall be deposited with the city prior to the scheduling of the final plat for consideration by the planning and zoning commission. The pro-rated cost will be established based on the percentage of the area being developed out of the total property area and excluding all right-of-way (R.O.W.) dedications. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-57. - Procedures for issuance of building permit. 
(a)  No building permit, including but not limited to permits for electrical, mechanical, plumbing, signs, fire protection, etc. (with the exception of temporary power permits associated with construction), will be issued for any residential or commercial building in the city until all public improvements associated with the subdivision are completed and accepted by the city. These public improvements constitute the basic infrastructure required to serve the subdivision and include construction of streets, drainage, water and sanitary sewer facilities as outlined in section 6-73 (improvements on undeveloped land). Simultaneous construction of public and private improvements will require city council action. In addition, gas and electrical service shall be available to each lot prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Commercial buildings have to follow additional requirements prior to obtaining a building permit. These requirements include submitting an engineering site plan for staff approval, construction and acceptance of all required public and semi-public improvements (fire lanes, fire lines, fire hydrants and other appurtenances, sidewalks, driveway approaches, right turn lanes, drainage facilities, water and sanitary sewer service connections, etc.) as shown on the approved engineering site plan. 
(c)  A foundation permit may be issued, on a case by case basis, based on the approved engineering site plan which adequately addresses the location and elevations of water and sanitary sewer services in relation to the proposed finish floor elevation of the building. 
(d)  No building construction above the slab may be commenced prior to the construction and approval of all fire lanes, fire lines, fire hydrants and other waterline appurtenances. 
(e)  Some items of public and semi-public improvements i.e. sidewalks, driveway approaches, right turn lanes (if applicable), grading and drainage improvements, water and sanitary sewer service connections may be constructed simultaneously with the building provided a cash escrow is deposited with the city to cover 100 percent of the cost of the improvements. A non-refundable fee of $250.00 will be charged for escrow handling. On cash escrows where the developer satisfactorily completes all public and semi-public improvements, the city will return the entire amount escrowed plus interest earned on that escrow. If the developer fails to complete the project, and the city is to complete the project at a later date, then the amount escrowed plus the interest will be retained by the city. 
(f)  Three-party contracts may be considered on case-by-case basis and are subject to approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-58. - Grading and filling regulations. 
(a)  Prior to commencement of any grading or filling operation, the owner, developer or contractor shall secure a "grading and fill" permit properly issued by the city. Said permit will be issued only after the requirements of this section and related requirements have been met. The permit will be valid for a period of 180 days from the date of issuance. The permit may be extended in increments of 180 days, if approved, and will be valid for a maximum period of up to 18 months from the date of initial approval. 
In order to apply for a permit, the applicant shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Submittal of a grading and/or fill plan. The plan shall comply with the applicable provisions of an grading and filling plan requirements (section 6-73(f), submittal of review fees and tax certificates). 
(2)  In addition to the requirements of an engineering site plan, the grading and fill plan must indicate the specifics of the proposed work, including areas to be excavated or filled, erosion control measures, means of ingress and egress, restoration plans, hauling routes with traffic control, and any other items deemed appropriate by city staff to fully define the work. 
(3)  A grading and fill permit will not be issued if the work is deemed to adversely affect drainage on adjacent or other properties, create a traffic safety problem, or be considered a mining operation. Specific use district zoning is required for mining, including such mining as sand and gravel removal. 
(4)  Any grading or filling operation in the floodway or floodplain will trigger additional requirements contained elsewhere within this general development ordinance. 
(5)  Any grading or filling operation involving the removal of trees is prohibited prior to the approval of an engineering site plan for commercial developments. 
Any grading or filling operation involving the removal of trees is permissible with an approved preliminary plat when accompanied by a grading plan, tree survey and tree mitigation plan. Tree mitigation fees must be paid before grading permits will be issued. 
(6)  A grading and fill permit is not required for the addition of top soil or similar material used to spread over grassed areas in average depths of less than two inches. 
(7)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
 

Figure 3—Preliminary Plat Approval Process Flowchart 
 

Figure 4—Final Plat Approval Process Flowchart 
 

Figure 5—Engineering Site Plan Process Flowchart 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3234-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05)  
Secs. 6-59—6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Improvements on land served by public improvements which meet current standards. 
(a)  General provisions. This section deals with non-single-family construction on entire lots which are properly zoned and platted, and on which all of the public improvements for water, sanitary sewer, streets and drainage are constructed to current city development standards and have been accepted by the city. 
(b)  Engineering site plan criteria. An engineering site plan, signed and sealed by a state-licensed professional civil engineer, must be submitted in accordance with city regulations and policies. Information on specific city regulations, policies and standards is contained elsewhere in this development ordinance package. Construction must be underway within 180 days from the date of formal approval and the building substantially completed within 18 months from the date of formal approval. That portion which is not substantially complete within 18 months, may be resubmitted in accordance with the most current city standards and regulations. 
All site plan review fees and tax certificates are due at time of initial submittal. 
The following is a check list for items which shall be included, as applicable, on each engineering site plan submitted for review. The engineering site plan shall include a cover sheet, a copy of the final plat and applicable construction drawings. An overall site layout shall be included showing general information such as building location, zoning, setbacks, etc. for reference purposes. 
(1)  A title block located at the bottom right hand side of the page to include project's name, addition's name, lot, block and phase designations, total acreage, zoning classification and address if available (see appendix for title block). 
(2)  A summary table for building square footage and total number of parking spaces required for each proposed classification and R.O.W. square footage or acreage (if applicable). 
(3)  Staff and utility companies signature block (see appendix). 
(4)  Tax certificate showing all tax payments to the city are current. Taxes must be current as of the date of formal city approval of the site plan. 
(5)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(6)  Location map 1" = 1,000' (Must use city base map). 
(7)  Sheet size of 22" ×34". 
(8)  Scale of 1" = 20' maximum for lots up to three acres, and 1" = 40' maximum for lots exceeding three acres. For site plans requiring extensive grading, drainage, other site related improvements, or unusual lot configuration the office of the city engineer shall be consulted for designating scale. 
(9)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(10)  Distances and bearings of the lot including total land area, subdivision lot and block designation and phase lines. The entire platted lot shall be shown on the engineering site plan. 
(11)  Iron rods shall be set or found and shown on site plan. 
(12)  Contours with intervals of two feet or less, referred to sea level datum, including city benchmark. Information can be obtained from the city engineer's office. 
(13)  Building setback lines including required setback from all water, sanitary sewer and drainage easements. 
(14)  Zoning of subject lot and adjoining property. 
(15)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(16)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. Refer to figure 6 (control of access limitations), figure 7 (clear vision area), and table 1 (street design criteria). 
(17)  Traffic control signals, devices, striping and traffic control plan in conformance with the latest edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(18)  Median openings, traffic islands, turning lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes. Refer to section 6-92(m). 
(19)  Streets, alleys and easements adjacent to the site showing right-of-way and limits of paving. 
(20)  Driveways, sidewalks, water and sanitary sewer services, grading and drainage. 
(21)  Parking layout, including maneuvering as well as loading and unloading service areas and required truck berths. 
(22)  Screening devices. 
(23)  Landscaping plan, including a summary table showing number, size and type of trees and percentage of landscaping for parking areas. Irrigation plans illustrating connection to main water line through a separate irrigation meter or off of main water meter. Irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent off-site drainage nuisance. 
(24)  Construction details for all site improvements as defined in definitions section and as applicable. 
(25)  Fire protection including fire hydrants, fire lanes, fire lines and related devices. 
(26)  Dumpster location. 
(27)  Other utilities. 
(28)  Finished floor elevation. The builder is responsible for furnishing an engineering certification of the foundation elevation and building setbacks prior to construction of a foundation. 
(29)  Variances from this chapter which may be requested shall be listed on the face of the site plan. 
(30)  Tree survey and mitigation plans 
(31)  Note stating required exterior finish 
(32)  Copy of the approved final plat. 
(33)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
(34)  Traffic control plan, shall be submitted for all proposed construction within a street right-of-way. The traffic control plan shall incorporate all applicable state department of transportation traffic control plan sheets. 
(35)  Show location of all proposed free standing signage. Refer to the city sign ordinance for requirements and limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-72. - Improvements on unplatted land served by public improvements which meet current standards. 
(a)  General provisions. This section deals with all construction on lots which are properly zoned and all of the public improvements for water, sanitary sewer, streets and drainage are constructed to current city development standards and have been accepted by the city. 
All review fees and tax certificates are due at time of initial submittal. 
(b)  Minor plat. The final approval of minor plats is delegated to the city manager, or designee. Minor plats are those that involve four or fewer lots which front on an existing street, do not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities and is not a replat. The city manager or designee may, for any reason, elect to present the plat to the planning and zoning commission for approval. The city manager or designee shall not disapprove a plat and shall be required to refer any plat which is not approved to the planning and zoning commission. 
The following is a check list for items which shall be included, as applicable, on each minor plat submitted for review: 
(1)  Title block—Same as final plat (see appendix). 
(2)  For all residential subdivisions, a plan summary table, to include total acreage per phase, total number of lots and number of lots per phase and zoning classification, minimum lot size, minimum dwelling size and density per acre. A summary table of each lot area (sq. ft.) and a tree schedule in accordance with the landscaping section shall also be included. 
(3)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(5)  Sheet size of 22" × 34" for review copies. 
(6)  Location map 1" = 1,000' (Must use city base map). 
(7)  Maximum scale of 1" = 100', (maximum scale of 1" = 200', one sheet for addressing purposes). 
(8)  Boundary line, accurate in scale and with exact distances and bearings, of the subject tract and each lot within the subdivision including exact acreage per lot for all non-single-family developments. Location of corner pins and monuments, including description and whether found or set. 
(9)  Metes and bounds description of the subdivision, with exact acreage, in reference to the deed records of the county, including the volume and page of the deed for the land being platted. 
(10)  Lot number and block letter designations. Building setback lines shall be shown or noted including setback lines from all water, sanitary sewer and drainage easements. 
(11)  Zoning of subject lot and adjacent property. 
(12)  The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(13)  Lines or limits designating boundaries of municipalities, counties and special districts such as municipal utility districts, road utility districts, levee districts, etc. 
(14)  Existing streets, alleys and access easements including street names, with all curve data and widths of rights-of-way. 
(15)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(16)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. Refer to figure 6 (control of access limitations), figure 7 (clear vision area), and table 1 (street design criteria). 
(17)  For all residential development, the park dedication agreement shall be finalized at the time of approval of the final plat including all dedications and/or fees to be paid at this time. The agreement, including the approval date, must be noted on the face of the plat. 
(18)  All land proposed for public use dedication or to be reserved for the common use of all property owners, together with conditions or limitations of such use. Such reservations and dedications must be identified with a lot and block designation except street and alley rights-of-way. 
(19)  The 100-year floodplain per current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), if applicable, shall be delineated. If the floodplain is not mapped, the developer is responsible for making this determination using a FEMA approved method. 
(20)  Flowage easements, if any, pertaining to drainage including a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
(21)  Other features which impact the subject property including, but not limited to, buildings, cemeteries, parks, landfills and monuments. 
(22)  Right-of-way and public property to be abandoned should be identified on the plat, but information is to be provided separately as required for creation of an abandonment ordinance. 
(23)  Certification by a licensed land surveyor, registered in the state, to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him or under his direct supervision and that all the monuments and corner pins shown exist and are correctly described. 
(24)  A certification of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks, easements and other public ways, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner, trustee(s) or person(s) duly authorized to sign the plat. This will include any lienholder(s) on the property (see appendix). 
(25)  City signature block (See appendix). 
(26)  Tree survey and mitigation plans. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-73. - Improvements on undeveloped land. 
(a)  General provisions. This section deals with both single-family and non-single-family construction on lots which are properly zoned but which have not been platted, and on which the public improvements for water, sanitary sewer, paving and drainage are not in place. 
All review fees, and tax certificates when applicable, are due at time of initial submittal. 
A preliminary plat and final plat may not be submitted for simultaneous review. Substantial changes in a subdivision may require submission and formal approval of a revised preliminary plat. 
(b)  Preliminary plat. A preliminary plat will be required on all unplatted tracts which do not conform with tract dimensions shown in current central appraisal district records, or which involve dedication or construction of city streets, drainage ways or utilities. The approval of the preliminary plat by the city shall be effective for a period of 180 days after the date of formal approval and a final plat may be submitted consistent with the approved preliminary plat. Following the 180 day period the preliminary plat will be valid for a period up to 18 months from preliminary plat approval date if it complies with all updated city standards and regulations. Following an 18-month period after the approval of a preliminary plat, the plat or any portion of the plat which has not had final plat approval by the planning and zoning commission, will be considered invalid and removed from the files. 
For tracts over 100 acres, prior to the expiration of the 18-month period, a request for one year extension may be submitted for approval to the city council if there are no changes to the preliminary plat and/or city standards and regulations. 
The following is a check list for items which shall be included, as applicable, on each preliminary plat submitted for review: 
(1)  Title block (see appendix). 
(2)  For all residential subdivisions, a plan summary table, to include total acreage per phase, total number of lots and number of lots per phase and zoning classification, minimum lot size, minimum dwelling size and density per acre. 
(3)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(5)  Sheet size shall be 22" × 34". 
(6)  Location map 1" = 1,000' (Must use city base map). 
(7)  The maximum scale on preliminary plats shall be 1" = 100', except that non-residential tracts over 100 acres may be drawn to a maximum scale of 1" = 200'. 
(8)  Abstract(s) and survey(s) of subject tract. 
(9)  Abstract and survey lines. 
(10)  Boundary line, accurate in scale, of the subject tract. 
(11)  The layout, building setback lines including setbacks from water, sanitary sewer and drainage easements and approximate dimensions of proposed lots, blocks, etc. 
(12)  Lot number, block letter designations and acreage of each lot. 
(13)  Zoning of subject lot and adjoining property. 
(14)  Contours with intervals of two feet or less, referred to sea level datum, including benchmark. 
(15)  The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unplatted land. 
(16)  Lines or limits designating boundaries of municipalities, counties, and special districts such as municipal utility districts, road utility districts, levee districts, etc. 
(17)  Existing and proposed sanitary sewer and water system shown for a distance which impacts the subject property. 
(18)  Other utility systems, proposed and existing, including private transmission lines. 
(19)  A drainage plan of the proposed and existing drainage systems shall be submitted for review and comment. The drainage plan shall include: all drainage areas (on-site and off-site) that affect the area being platted. Both in its natural state and in the ultimate development, location of lines, inlets, existing and proposed easements, proposed drainage rights-of-way, all required drainage calculations in accordance with the city drainage criteria manual. In addition, the 100-year floodplain, if applicable, shall be delineated. 
(20)  Existing and proposed streets and alleys, including widths of right-of-way and pavement. Street names shall provide continuity with existing streets. Where a development abuts or contains a street shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, the preliminary plat shall include a proposed dedication of right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the thoroughfare plan. 
(21)  Cross-section of proposed streets and alleys showing the width of pavement, type of pavement and location and width of sidewalks. 
(22)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(23)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. Refer to figure 6 (control of access limitations), figure 7 (clear vision area), and table 1 (street design criteria). 
(24)  Traffic control signals, devices and striping. 
(25)  Median openings, turning lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
(26)  For residential developments, park dedication provisions are to be addressed by the park board prior to approval of the preliminary plat. The park dedication agreement shall be noted on the face of the plat with the approval date. 
(27)  All land proposed for public use dedication or to be reserved for the common use of all property owners, together with conditions or limitations of such use, and must be identified with a lot and block designation except street and alley rights-of-way. 
(28)  Other features which impact the subject property including, but not limited to, buildings, cemeteries, parks, landfills and monuments. 
(29)  Phase lines must be clearly delineated, with improvements capable of standing alone as development occurs and not depending on future construction to meet city standards or requirements. See section 6-56 for phasing requirements. 
(30)  Requested variances from this chapter shall be listed on the face of the plat. 
(31)  City signature block. (See appendix.) 
(32)  Tree survey and mitigation plan (single-family). 
(c)  Final plat. A final plat will be required upon final city approval of a preliminary plat. Final plats shall substantially conform with approved preliminary plats, or a revised preliminary plat must be submitted for formal approval. On a tract which conforms with tract dimensions shown in current central appraisal district records but which has not been formally platted, a final plat will be required prior to or at the time of submission of an engineering site plan. 
All review fees and tax certificates are due at time of initial submittal. 
Review copies of the final plat, plus final construction plans for construction of public improvements associated with the plat, shall be submitted simultaneously in accordance with this chapter and policies of the city. The construction plans are an integral part of the final plat. A tree survey shall be required to accompany a final plat if construction plans are required to be submitted. 
The following is a check list for items which shall be included, as applicable, on each final plat submitted for review: 
(1)  Title block (see appendix). 
(2)  For all residential subdivisions, a plan summary table, to include total acreage per phase, total number of lots and number of lots per phase and zoning classification, minimum lot size, minimum dwelling size and density per acre. A summary table of each lot area (sq. ft.) and a tree schedule in accordance with the landscaping section shall also be included. 
(3)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(5)  Sheet size of 22" × 34" for review copies. 
(6)  Location map 1" = 1,000' (Must use city base map). 
(7)  Maximum scale of 1" = 100', (maximum scale of 1" = 200', one sheet for addressing purposes). 
(8)  Boundary line, accurate in scale and with exact distances and bearings, of the subject tract and each lot within the subdivision including exact acreage per lot for all non-single-family developments. Location of corner pins and monuments, including description and whether found or set. 
(9)  Metes and bounds description of the subdivision, with exact acreage, in reference to the deed records of the county, including the volume and page of the deed for the land being platted. 
(10)  Lot number and block letter designations. Building setback lines shall be shown or noted including setback lines from all water, sanitary sewer, and drainage easements. 
(11)  Zoning of subject lot and adjacent property. 
(12)  The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(13)  Lines or limits designating boundaries of municipalities, counties, and special districts such as municipal utility districts, road utility districts, levee districts, etc. 
(14)  Existing and proposed streets, alleys and access easements, including street names, with all curve data and widths of rights-of-way. Street names shall provide continuity with existing streets. Where a development abuts or contains a street shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, the final plat shall include the dedication of right-of-way and construction of said streets in accordance with the requirements of the thoroughfare plan. Where it is determined by city staff to be impractical to construct one-half of the street, the developer shall escrow the full monetary value of these improvements prior to the approval of the final plat/replat. 
(15)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(16)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. Refer to figure 6 (control of access limitations), figure 7 (clear vision area), and table 1 (street design criteria). 
(17)  For all residential development, the park dedication agreement shall be finalized at the time of approval of the final plat including all dedications and/or fees to be paid at this time. The agreement, including the approval date, must be noted on the face of the plat. 
(18)  All land proposed for public use dedication or to be reserved for the common use of all property owners, together with conditions or limitations of such use. Such reservations and dedications must be identified with a lot and block designation except street and alley rights-of-way. R.O.W. dedication square footage and acreage must be listed on the plan. 
(19)  The 100-year floodplain per current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), if applicable, shall be delineated. If the floodplain is not mapped, the developer is responsible for making this determination using a FEMA approved method. 
(20)  Flowage easements, if any, pertaining to drainage including a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
(21)  Other features which impact the subject property including, but not limited to, buildings, cemeteries, parks, landfills and monuments. 
(22)  Right-of-way and public property to be abandoned should be identified on the plat with additional information being provided separately as required for the creation of an abandonment ordinance. 
(23)  Certification by a licensed land surveyor, registered in the state, to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him or under his direct supervision and that all the monuments and corner pins shown exist and are correctly described. 
(24)  A certification of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks, easements and other public ways, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner, trustee(s) or person(s) duly authorized to sign the plat. This will include any lienholder(s) on the property (see appendix). 
(25)  City signature block (See appendix). 
(26)  Variances from this chapter shall be listed on the face of the plat. 
(27)  Tree survey (single-family). (Construction plans are also required to be submitted.) 
(d)  Construction plans. Three sets of construction plans shall accompany submittal of any final plat. The construction plans shall be considered as an integral part of the final plat and will be reviewed accordingly. Plans shall contain engineering data for the construction of all public improvements (water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and paving) consistent with current city development standards and master plans. Construction must be underway within 180 days from the date of formal approval and substantially completed within 18 months from the date of formal approval. That portion which is not substantially complete within 18 months, must be resubmitted in accordance with the most current city standards and regulations. 
(1)  Plans and profiles shall be drawn on sheets measuring 22" × 34" overall dimensions. 
(2)  Maximum scale for all construction plans shall be 1" = 40' horizontal and 1" = 5' vertical. (e.g. 1" = 50' horizontal and 6' vertical are not acceptable) Construction plans for street reconstruction shall be drawn to a 1" = 20' scale. 
(3)  North point arrow oriented to top or right of the sheet. 
(4)  Date: (Dates of revisions to be added with each modified set of plans). 
(5)  Bench mark description to sea level datum (to be obtained from city engineer's office). In the event a bench mark is not available near the project site, a temporary bench mark shall be established based on the city's bench mark. 
(6)  Typical cross-sections of proposed streets and alleys drawn to a maximum scale of 1" = 10' horizontal and 1" = 2' vertical, and drawn from beyond right-of-way to beyond right-of-way. 
(7)  Proposed street and alley pavement sections shall include: thickness of pavement, base course, subgrade, pavement cross-slope, parkway cross-slope, location and width of sidewalks, typical location of underground utilities. 
(8)  Plan and profile of each street and alley with top of curb grades for streets and center lines for alleys . The plan view shall show all existing features and the profile view shall include the existing ground. The profile gradelines and cross-sections of intersecting streets should be adjusted to provide a smooth junction and proper drainage. 
(9)  A drainage area map to a maximum scale 1" = 200', (1" = 1000' if over 500 acres) of all areas contributing storm water runoff or drainage within and surrounding the proposed subdivision. The drainage area map shall include size of areas, storm frequency, duration data, amounts of runoff, points of concentration and any additional data necessary for the proper design of drainage facilities. 
(10)  A plan and profile of proposed storm sewer showing hydraulic gradient and hydraulic data, pipe grades and sizes, manholes, inlets, pipe connections, culverts, outfall structures, bridges, ditches. 
(11)  A plan and profile of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes, location of valves, fire hydrants, fittings and other appurtenances, including installation and backfill details. 
(12)  A plan and profile of the proposed sanitary sewer system with pipe grades and sizes, manholes, cleanouts and other appurtenances, including installation and backfill details. 
(13)  All profiles shall include the elevation of other utility crossings. 
(14)  Each plan and profile sheet shall be signed and sealed by a state-licensed professional civil engineer. 
(15)  Trench safety plan, prepared by a state-licensed professional engineer, and soil analysis shall be provided with all construction plans when required by state or federal law. 
(16)  The city reserves the right to require corrections to plans based on actual field conditions which are found to be contrary to the information shown on the plans. 
(17)  The engineer certifying the plans is responsible for the accuracy and completeness of plans submitted for review and construction. 
(18)  Finished floor elevation, proposed grading and drainage for all single-family lots. The builder is responsible for furnishing a certification of the foundation elevation and building setbacks prior to construction of a foundation. 
(19)  Tree survey and mitigation plans. 
(20)  Traffic control plan, shall be submitted for all proposed construction within a street right-of-way. The traffic control plan shall incorporate all applicable state department of transportation traffic control plan sheets. 
(21)  The developer is responsible for submitting a street lighting plan in accordance with this chapter. The city will coordinate the installation of the street lighting system with the electrical service provider. 
(22)  External agency permit submittals. Submittals for floodplain development to F.E.M.A., and the U.S. Corps of Engineers (C.D.C. applications), can be processed concurrently with city staff approval. Submittals for TXDOT permits will be processed through city initiation (per TXDOT policy) only upon completion of city staff review. Permits are granted only to the city by TXDOT and not to private developers. 
(23)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
(e)  Engineering site plan criteria. An engineering site plan, signed and sealed by a state-licensed professional civil engineer, must be submitted in accordance with city regulations and policies. Information on specific city regulations, policies and standards is contained elsewhere in this development ordinance package. Construction must be underway within 180 days from the date of formal approval and the building substantially completed within 18 months from the date of formal approval. That portion which is not substantially complete within 18 months, may be resubmitted in accordance with the most current city standards and regulations. 
All site plan review fees and tax certificates are due at time of initial submittal. 
The following is a checklist for items which shall be included, as applicable, on each engineering site plan submitted for review. The engineering site plan shall include a cover sheet, a copy of the final plat and applicable construction drawings. An overall site layout shall be included showing general information such as building location, zoning, setbacks, etc. for reference purposes. 
(1)  A title block located at the bottom right hand side of the page to include project's name, addition's name, lot, block and phase designations, total acreage, zoning classification and address if available (see appendix for title block). 
(2)  A summary table for building square footage and total number of parking spaces required for each proposed classification and R.O.W. square footage and acreage being dedicated (if applicable). 
(3)  Staff and utility companies signature block (see appendix). 
(4)  Tax certificate showing all tax payments to the city are current. Taxes must be current as of the date of formal city approval of the site plan. 
(5)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(6)  Location map 1" = 1,000' (Must use city base map). 
(7)  Sheet size of 22" × 34". 
(8)  Scale of 1" = 20' maximum for lots up to three acres, and 1" = 40' maximum for lots exceeding three acres. For site plans requiring extensive grading, drainage, other site related improvements, or unusual lot configuration the office of the city engineer shall be consulted for designating scale. 
(9)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(10)  Distances and bearings of the lot including total land area, subdivision lot and block designation and phase lines. The entire platted lot shall be shown on the engineering site plan. 
(11)  Iron rods shall be set or found and shown on site plan. 
(12)  Contours with intervals of two feet or less, referred to sea level datum, including city benchmark. Information can be obtained from the city engineer's office. 
(13)  Building setback lines including required setback from all water, sanitary sewer and drainage easements. 
(14)  Zoning of subject lot and adjoining property. 
(15)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(16)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. Refer to figure 6 (control of access limitations), figure 7 (clear vision area), and table 1 (street design criteria). 
(17)  Traffic control signals, devices, striping and traffic control plan in conformance with the latest edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(18)  Median openings, traffic islands, turning lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes. Refer to section 6-92(m). 
(19)  Streets, alleys and easements adjacent to the site showing right-of-way and limits of paving. 
(20)  Driveways, sidewalks, water and sewer services, grading and drainage. 
(21)  Parking layout, including maneuvering as well as loading and unloading service areas and required truck berths. 
(22)  Screening devices. 
(23)  Landscaping plan, including a summary table showing number, size and type of trees and percentage of landscaping for parking areas. Irrigation plans illustrating connection to main water line through a separate irrigation meter or off of main water meter. Irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent off-site drainage nuisance. 
(24)  Construction details for all site improvements as defined in definitions section and as applicable. 
(25)  Fire protection including fire hydrants, fire lanes, fire lines and related devices. 
(26)  Dumpster location. 
(27)  Other utilities. 
(28)  Finished floor elevation. The builder is responsible for furnishing an engineering certification of the foundation elevation and building setbacks prior to construction of a foundation. 
(29)  Variances from this chapter which may be requested shall be listed on the face of the site plan. 
(30)  Tree survey and mitigation plans. 
(31)  Note stating required exterior finish. 
(32)  Copy of the approved final plat. 
(33)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
(34)  Traffic control plan, shall be submitted for all proposed construction within a street right-of-way. The traffic control plan shall incorporate all applicable state department of transportation traffic control plan sheets. 
(35)  Show location of all proposed free standing signs. Refer to the city sign ordinance for requirements and limitations. 
(f)  Grading and filling plan requirements. This section covers the requirements and procedures prerequisite to obtaining a grading permit. Grading or on-site preparations for grading are prohibited prior to the issuance by the city of a grading permit. Grading permits that involve tree removal will only be issued when accompanied by an approved final plat with construction plans and/or an approved engineering site plan. All activities associated with this plan shall be completed within 18 months of the date of formal approval. A six-month extension may be granted on a case by case basis when requested in writing. 
All review fees and tax certificates are due at time of initial submittal. 
Construction plans are required to be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a grading permit. The following is a list of items and requirements which shall be addressed and complied with on the construction plans. 
(1)  A title block located on the bottom right hand corner of the sheet, to include project name; lot, block and subdivision if appropriate; zoning classification and physical address, if available. 
(2)  Construction plans shall be furnished on 22" × 34" mylar sheets. Review plans shall be submitted on 22" × 34" prints. 
(3)  The plan layout shall be orientated with the north arrow up or to the right on the sheet. 
(4)  Location map drawn to 1" = 1000'. The city base map shall be used. 
(5)  The plan scale shall be suitable to show clearly the proposed grading. In no case shall the plans be drawn smaller than 1" = 100'. 
(6)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner, developer and engineer. The engineer shall also stamp, sign and date the drawings. The engineer must be a state-licensed professional civil engineer. 
(7)  Contours, with intervals of two feet or less, of the existing site. The city's topographic information may be used for this purpose. 
(8)  Streets, alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements, utilities, and drainage on or near the site. Excessive fill or cut on existing or proposed utilities will not be allowed. 
(9)  A detailed erosion control plan, for both during construction and post construction. 
(10)  A detailed traffic control plan, where applicable. The traffic control plan shall conform to TMUTCD and shall include truck routes. 
(11)  All trees shall be shown. 
(12)  Construction entrance details including locations, materials and cross section, along with specifications for maintaining clean streets. 
(13)  Fences and other physical features. 
(14)  Grading plan including finished contours and/or grades. 
(15)  Any other items stipulated by city staff which may be considered site specific and needed to fully review the proposed construction and protect surrounding properties and the traveling public. 
(16)  Any other appropriate items cited in this chapter. 
(17)  Hauling/trucking from or to the site will not be allowed during rainy conditions or when muddy conditions exist. Grading, loading and unloading will not be allowed during windy conditions such that dust could cause a problem to anyone. 
(18)  Prior to commencement of work, the contractor shall attend a preconstruction meeting with city staff at a time and place approved by city staff. 
(19)  A grading permit will not be issued for mining operations. 
(20)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-74. - Improvements on land which is served by substandard public improvements. 
(a)  General provisions. This section deals with lots or tracts which are served by one or more existing substandard public improvements including water, sanitary sewer, streets or storm drainage. Such developments must meet these required minimum standards in order to obtain a building permit for a new building or if an addition is being made to an existing building. In reviewing the required engineering site plan, the city staff will note areas which fail to meet minimum standards. If in the opinion of the city staff, on a case-by-case basis, these minimums are not adequate, more extensive improvements may be required as necessary. Additionally, each of the lots or tracts must follow all city master plans for streets, utilities, parks and other public improvements. Where it is determined by city staff to be impractical to construct one-half of the street, the developer shall escrow the full monetary value of these improvements prior to the approval of the final plat/replat. 
(b)  Paving. Minimum street right-of-way of 50 feet shall be required. Other street related items which must meet current standards as outlined in this development ordinance package include: corner clips, clear vision areas, control of access lines, traffic signals and controls, driveways and sidewalks. 
(c)  Water lines. If development is to occur on land which is currently served by sub-standard water utilities, the owner, developer or applicant may be required to improve the existing system to current requirements. The standard for improvement shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Existing line sizes vs. current required line sizes. 
(2)  Existing materials vs. current required materials. 
(3)  The ability to service both potable and fire protection needs. 
All projects will be considered on a case by case basis. 
(d)  Fire protection. Inadequate or substandard water line size may require additional fire hydrants or other measures in order to provide adequate fire protection on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)  Sanitary sewers. If improvement is to occur on land which is served by a sub-standard sanitary sewer utilities, the owner, developer, or applicant may be required to improve the existing system to current requirements. The standard for improvement shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Existing line vs. current line sizes requirements. 
(2)  Existing materials vs. current material requirements. 
(3)  The ability to service the sanitary sewer requirements of the development and existing service areas. Inflow and infiltration studies may be required for the area as determined by the city. 
All projects will be considered on a case by case basis. 
(f)  Septic systems. Application for construction of a septic system must be submitted to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). Application, fees, tests, design and on-site inspections must be submitted and coordinated with the TCEQ. The tract of land must consist of one acre or more. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the city, the city must be in receipt of: 
(1)  Approved septic system permit by the TCEQ; 
(2)  Approved design by the TCEQ; and 
(3)  Approved final inspection by the TCEQ. 
Septic systems will not be permitted within the city limits where any part of the platted lot or tract is within 100 feet of an existing city sanitary sewer line. The requirements to connect to the city's sewer system shall be enforced even if the improvements must include a lift station, force main or both. This requirement will not be enforced in instances where city staff determines that the connection is impractical. 
(g)  Drainage. Development(s) adjacent to an existing ditch, within street right-of-way, shall provide for an enclosed storm sewer system on-site and discharge into the ditch by means of a pipe system. If an adequate outfall condition is unavailable (whether a ditch or storm sewer system) developments may be allowed to discharge into street rights-of-way; runoff not to exceed the original amount. Drainage easements shall be provided by plat or by separate instrument for all storm drainage facilities up to an adequate outfall condition (if on-site), capable of containing the 100-year flood event. 
(h)  Open space requirements. Standards for parks and open space must be provided in accordance with the city park dedication ordinance and other applicable ordinances or policies. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-75. - Certificate of corrections. 
When an amending plat is proposed for the correction of a plat which has been filed of record, and when the sole purpose of the amending plat is for one or more of the following, then a certificate of correction may be filed of record (see appendix). This section shall apply only if the sole purpose of the amending plat is: 
(1)  To correct an error in any course or distance shown on the prior plat. 
(2)  To add any course or distance that was omitted on the prior plat. 
(3)  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the prior plat. 
(4)  To indicate monuments set after death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments. 
(5)  To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character or which originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character on the prior plat. 
(6)  To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission as previously approved by the city planning and zoning commission or the city council; such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats. 
(7)  To relocate one or more lot lines or to correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between one or more adjacent lots where the owner or owners thereof join in the application for plat amendment and where the number of lots remains unchanged and provided that such amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a material adverse affect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-76. - Abandonment of real property. 
(a)  General provisions. Except as otherwise provided, an abandonment ordinance is required for abandonment of any public right-of-way. If a right-of-way is dedicated only by plat and remains unimproved, it can also be abandoned by plat so long as the plat notes expressly state that the city intends to abandon, a certificate of abandonment (see appendix) is signed by the city, and all procedural requirements in this Section and in the city's platting regulations are met. Any easement may be abandoned with a certificate of abandonment (see appendix) in accordance with paragraph (c) below. Requests for abandonment shall be made in writing to the community development department. The city will file with the county all documents that are required to record the transaction. An application fee, as set forth in section 2-201, must accompany all requests, and the Denton County filing fee shall be submitted with a separate check. If applicable, fair market value will be established by the city paid in advance by the applicant. Should appraisals be required, the cost shall be paid in advance by the applicant. Any relocation, adjustment or other construction shall be the financial responsibility of the applicant. 
The following information must be attached: 
(1)  Metes and bounds description of the property to be abandoned. 
(2)  Exhibit showing the subject abandonment. 
(3)  Letters of release from utility companies, if applicable. 
(4)  Application fee made payable to the City of Lewisville. 
(5)  Filing fee made payable to Denton County Clerk. 
(b)  Additional requirements for certain abandonments. 
(1)  Abandonment of an improved street or alley: 
a.  Fair market value of the real property and the improvements which are to be removed or converted to private use. 
b.  Dedication of easements for any facilities which are to remain. 
(2)  Abandonment of street or alley right-of-way (unimproved): 
a.  Fair market value of the real property. 
b.  Dedication of easements for any facilities which are to remain. 
c.  Compensation for detriment to the remainder. 
(3)  Abandonment of a part of an occupied easement where the reduction in easement will adversely affect the operation and maintenance of the facility: 
a.  Fair market value of the released area. 
b.  Compensation for detriment to the remainder. 
(4)  Abandonment of an occupied easement in exchange for another easement at the request of the property owner: 
a.  Fair market value of the difference in value if the abandoned easement is greater than that received. 
b.  Reserved. 
(c)  To abandon an easement(s) in exchange for an equivalent easement(s) or when it is determined that an easement(s) is no longer necessary and an adequate easement(s) is provided to serve the property, a certificate of abandonment (see appendix), or such other documents as may be legally required, will be filed of record. This certificate will be filed after all information for abandonment of an easement on real property has been submitted and a final determination for abandonment has been made by the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 4093-07-2014 , § 3, 7-7-14)  
Sec. 6-77. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— 0032-18-ORD , § 3, adopted June 4, 2018, deleted § 6-77 entitled "Properties impacted by the Interstate I-35 widening," which derived from Ord. No. 4167-03-2015 , § 6, adopted Mar. 16, 2015.  
Secs. 6-78—6-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 6-91. - Construction standards. 
(a)  General provisions. All improvements shall be in conformance with the city's construction standards and specifications except as may be otherwise provided. The city's specifications includes standard as well as special specifications. The city's construction standards consists of those various drawings identified as city construction standards and issued by the city. Public improvements, semi-public improvements, and private improvements constructed in public rights-of-way and easements shall be constructed in conformity with this chapter. The requirements of this chapter are considered minimum requirements and are not intended to replace good engineering judgment or practices. 
(b)  Standard specifications. Standard specifications of the city are the "Public Works Construction Standards - 2004 Edition" as published under the authority of the North Central Texas Council of Governments. This publication, along with the amendments and special provisions to the document, approved or issued by the city, shall comprise the standard specifications. 
(c)  Construction specifications. Construction specifications are those construction specifications which are not covered by the standard specifications. Special specifications shall be required for all projects having items of construction not adequately covered by the standard specification. All special specifications shall be subject to review and approval by the city. 
(d)  Construction standards. Construction standards are those drawings identified as city construction standards and issued by the city. Detailed construction plans shall be required for all items of construction not covered by the city's construction standards. In the event of conflict the standard specifications shall be superseded by the provisions and requirements of this document. Only the item or items of conflict shall be affected. All other provisions and requirements shall stand. 
(e)  Pre-construction meeting. The contractor for each project, or for any phase, shall notify the city of the intent to commence work. Sufficient notice shall be given so that a pre-construction conference may be held. No work shall commence except as specifically authorized at the pre-construction meeting. 
(f)  Construction permit. The city will issue a permit for all public works construction to be constructed within rights-of-way and easements. The permit will be issued based on approved engineering plans. No work requiring a permit shall be started until a permit is duly issued. 
(g)  Construction inspection fee. Prior to the issuance of any public works construction permit, the city will collect all applicable fees in accordance with the city fee ordinance. 
(h)  Exception for utility companies. Utility companies are not required to secure a permit for repairs and day to day maintenance operations but shall notify the city. Utility companies will be required, by this chapter, to get a permit without fee for new developments and for all relocations. 
(i)  Traffic control plan. Each set of construction plans submitted to the city for review and approval shall include a traffic control plan. The plan shall provide for the safe handling of traffic through and in the area of construction. Construction, signing, barricades, etc., shall be in conformance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices where applicable. 
(j)  Construction methods. All utility lines installed under paving shall be installed by a method other than open cut, except as specifically approved by the city. City staff may approve, on case-by-case basis, open cuts under any one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The main to be connected onto is under paving. In this case, the open cut shall be limited to the area of the main, the remaining installation to be by other than open cut. 
(2)  A boring machine cannot be used because of space limitations. 
(3)  The size of the utility line is too large to be economically feasible to be installed by methods other than open cut. 
(4)  Conditions are such that it would be impossible or impractical to install the utility line by means other than open cut. 
In the event the open cut method is approved, the pavement shall be removed in complete panels and replaced with early yield high strength concrete in accordance with the approved plans. The traffic control plan shall adequately address the safe handling of traffic through the area of the open cut. 
(k)  Material testing. The developer is responsible for providing all material testing services required for the proposed development. The required testing shall be performed by a geotechnical testing laboratory company under the supervision of a licensed professional engineer. The procedures and criteria for testing are generally outlined in North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) standard specifications. A copy of the test results shall be furnished to the city. 
(l)  Final acceptance. Final acceptance is the formal approval by the city. It will be made in writing based on the finding that the improvements have been satisfactorily installed and that all administrative requirements have been satisfied. 
(m)  Partial acceptance. The city will not accept any part of any development prior to the completion and acceptance of the entire development. 
(n)  Conditional acceptance. The city may issue a letter of conditional acceptance upon the determination by the city that unusual conditions warrant such acceptance and that the city will not be adversely affected. 
(o)  Record drawings. In order to receive final acceptance, the design engineer must submit a final set of record drawings including revisions made during construction. 
(1)  The record drawings shall comply with the Texas Engineering Practice Act and Rules Concerning the Practice of Engineering and Professional Engineering Licensure and the Policy Advisory Opinions issued by the Texas Board of Engineers. 
(2)  Record drawings final set must include a digital submittal of record drawings in the form of a CD labeled with the name of the subdivision or construction project name and the name of the entity that prepared and submitted data. 
(3)  The CD of the record drawings must contain the following: 
a.  Separate TIF file for each individual plan sheet of the record drawings (DO NOT combine sheets in one TIF file). 
1.  TIF file resolution should be 300 DPI or best resolution for legibility, black and white scan with no color or gray scale scan and file size cannot exceed three MB. 
2.  Label each TIF file according to the title of the plan sheet, including corresponding sheet numbers, i.e., C1-Paving Plan, C2-Water Plan, C3-Grading Plan, etc. 
3.  The order of the TIF files should match the same order on the cover page of the record drawings. 
4.  The cover page of the engineering site plan shall have the staff signatures. 
b.  One CAD drawing with public infrastructure and plat information within the same drawing in DGN or DWG format. 
1.  For purposes of this section: 
(i)  Public infrastructure shall include the following: fire hydrants, water mains, water valves, water meters, water annotation: pipe sizes, material types, sewer mains, manholes, cleanouts, sewer annotation: pipe sizes, material types, storm mains, inlets, headwalls, outfalls, other drainage structures (valley gutters, etc.), storm annotation: pipe sizes, material types, buildings, paving: edge of pavement, parking area, striping. 
(ii)  Plat information shall include the following: subdivision boundary, parcel lot lines, street centerlines, ROW lines, easements, street labels and easement types and sizes. 
2.  Requirements for CAD submittal of record drawings. The following requirements for submittal of CAD data have been prepared for the purpose of incorporating the digital submittal information into the city's geographic information system (GIS) base mapping, so that accurate data may become available to emergency responders, construction inspectors, city planners, engineers, and the larger development community. 
(i)  The CAD file must contain public infrastructure and plat information within a single drawing in DGN or DWG format. Files in DXF or DWF format are not acceptable. Drawing must be "stand-alone" without the necessity of attaching reference or XREF files, or modifying levels and layers. 
(ii)  The CAD data is not meant to be printed. As such, it should not be all inclusive of the information displayed on the plan sheets. Objects normally set up in the layout tab ("paper space") for the purposes of plotting plan sheets, such as title blocks, page borders, legends, vicinity maps, and north arrows, should NOT be included in the CAD file. Callout detail boxes also should not be included. 
(iii)  CAD data must be drawn at full scale (1:1) and oriented to true north. 
(iv)  The data must be tied to city monumentation data, in real world coordinates, and spatially referenced to the city's GIS projected coordinate system: North American Datum 1983 (NAD83), Texas State Plane, North Central FIPS 4202; Units: US Feet. 
(v)  All polygons must close without overlaps. All lines must be snapped at their endpoints and free of gaps or dangles. Annotation text that breaks the continuity of lines should be shifted out of the way of the line. 
(vi)  Public infrastructure and plat information must be organized into separate layers according to feature type, and drawn as polylines (except for annotation). All layers must be turned on and visible/unfrozen. IMPORTANT: Layer names should be intuitive and descriptive of the objects on that layer. Features must be cleanly segregated into their appropriate layer, and not appear on other unrelated layers. Remnants of lines or points used in the development of the drawing but not representative of actual real-world features (trim lines, transit points, etc.) should be removed from the drawing. Existing infrastructure should be on separate layers from proposed infrastructure and should be differentiated as such in layer names (i.e., "EXIST_WATER_MAIN" versus "PROP_WATER_MAIN"). Any additional features not listed are optional and must also be on separate layers with clear, understandable layer names. 
(p)  Maintenance bonds. Prior to final acceptance, the developer shall furnish the city an acceptable 100 percent, two-year maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall cover all items of construction dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3443-05-2007, § 1, 5-7-07; 0006-18-ORD , § 1, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 6-92. - Paving. 
(a)  General provisions. The paving of streets, alleys, turning lanes, driveways and sidewalks shall be in accordance with this section and the construction standards of the city. Temporary asphalt streets, connections and driveways will be considered on an individual basis and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. All street construction shall be in accordance with the criteria and design standards shown on street design criteria, table 1. See figures 34—39 for typical sections. 
(b)  Streets. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all proposed streets shall conform to the master thoroughfare plan of the city. Design of such streets shall take into consideration existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience, safety and the relationship of uses which will be served by the streets. The developer is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way and construction of all street(s) within the development and one-half of the street(s) which abuts the development. Where it is determined by city staff to be impractical to construct one-half of the street, the developer shall escrow with the city the full monetary value of these improvements prior to the approval of the final plat/replat. Any off-site street required, by the platting process, to provide adequate access to the development shall be the entire responsibility of the developer. These provisions shall apply in all cases including where there is an existing sub-standard street. 
When not shown in the city's master thoroughfare plan, all proposed streets shall: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets. 
(2)  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the city to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuation of, or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
(3)  Be laid out so that street right-of-way lines intersect at 90 degrees and so that no street curvature is closer to the point of intersection of right-of-way lines than 35 feet on residential streets and 50 feet on collector and arterial streets. 
(4)  Make use of existing median openings in the thoroughfares without any alterations to them and provide necessary minimum left-turn lane storage lanes for entry into subdivisions along both traveled ways, as necessary. 
No residential and collector (two-lane) street intersection with arterial streets shall be allowed within 350 feet of a major arterial street intersection (four-lane undivided and above) and/or within proposed right turn lane limits. 
Residential streets shall be laid out in a manner to discourage use by through traffic. Jogs and offsets at intersections measuring less than 150 feet in residential streets and 200 feet in undivided collector streets, measured between centerlines, are prohibited. This provision shall not apply if the intersecting street is a divided street and a median opening is not provided for either street. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the city's master thoroughfare plan. In no case shall a street right-of-way be less than 50 feet. 
Half streets shall be prohibited, except where necessary to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformance with the other requirements of these regulations and where the city finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided or platted. When a half street has already been provided, the remaining portion of the street shall be platted within such subdivision. Where part of a residential or collector street is being dedicated along a common property line, the first dedication shall be one-half of the proposed street right-of-way plus five feet, with a minimum of 20 feet of pavement width to be constructed. 
Dead end streets shall not be longer than 600 feet in length, measured from the intersecting centerline to the radius point of the cul-de-sac turnaround. All dead end streets shall terminate with an approved cul-de-sac having an outside minimum radius of 60 feet from the right-of-way line. 
At the intersection of street right-of-way lines a triangular area per the street design standard table shall be dedicated for right-of-way. In the event the streets intersect at other than 90 degrees, as approved by the granting of a variance, the required dimensions may be increased as determined by the city. At the intersection of a street right-of-way line and an alley right-of-way line, a 15-foot triangular area (measured along each projected right-of-way) shall be dedicated for right-of-way. In the event the street right-of-way and the alley right-of-way intersect at other than 90 degrees, as approved by a granting of a variance, the 15-foot dimension shall be increased as determined by the city. 
The reservation in private strips of land at the end of, or adjacent to, proposed or existing streets and intended for the purpose of controlling access to property, shall be prohibited. 
Street grades shall be set at a minimum of 0.60 percent and a maximum of six percent for all streets other than residential streets, which may be set at a maximum of seven percent. The minimum street grade will not apply to non-curbed streets. Streets cross slope shall be three percent. 
Control of access lines, at street intersections, for driveway locations, to be shown on all plats and engineering site plans, shall be in accordance with the guidelines shown on the following table. All dimensions are measured to the near radius or flare point(s) of the driveways. See figures 6A and 6B for commercial and residential control of access limitations. 
MINIMUM DISTANCES FROM INTERSECTION OF R.O.W. LINES FOR COMMERCIAL PROPERTY 
Street Classification 	Approaching Intersection 	Leaving Intersection 
Residential 	 50 feet 	 50 feet 
Collector (C2U) 	 75 feet 	 50 feet 
Collector (C4U) 	100 feet 	 75 feet 
Principal arterial (P6D, P4D) 	150 feet 	100 feet 
 
MINIMUM DISTANCES FROM INTERSECTION OF R.O.W. LINES FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY 
Street Classification 	Approaching Intersection 	Leaving Intersection 
Residential 	 20 feet 	 20 feet 
Residential 	 50 feet 	 50 feet 
 
  
* When residential lot sides on a collector or arterial—See figure 6B and section 6-94(e). 
Proposed streets intersecting existing streets shall be designed and constructed so as to eliminate dips and humps. This may require removal and replacement of a section of the existing street to the extent required to provide uniform pavement profiles that will accommodate emergency vehicles entering the intersection. It must be assumed that emergency vehicles will not come to a stop before entering the intersection, even though the intersection may be controlled by stop signs. Where future intersections are known, the initial construction shall take into account the requirements of this section so that the cross street may be constructed without the necessity to reconstruct the street initially constructed. 
(c)  Concrete strength requirements. The minimum compressive strength shall be 3,500 PSI at 28 days except that in intersections and in areas where hand finishing is required the minimum compressive strength shall be 3,750 PSI. The minimum cement ratio shall be 5.5 sacks per cubic yard, except in intersections and in areas where hand finishing is required the minimum cement ratio shall be six sacks per cubic yard. The use of fly ash shall not be permitted. Early yield high strength concrete shall have a compressive strength of 4,200 psi at three days for panel replacements. The minimum current ratio for early yield high strength concrete shall be eight sacks per cubic yard. 
(d)  Paving thickness requirements. Commercial streets that are classified as Principal Arterial 6 Lane Divided (P6D), Principal Arterial 4 Lane Divided (P4D), One Way Arterial or Major Traffic Carriers as defined by the latest city thoroughfare plan shall be a minimum of ten inches in thickness. All other commercial streets and commercial alleys shall be a minimum eight inches in thickness. Residential streets and residential alleys shall be a minimum of six inches in thickness. Streets and alleys serving both residential and commercial shall be a minimum of eight inches in thickness. All alleys shall be considered commercial except those serving only single-family and two family zoning classifications and uses. 
Where right turn, left turn or deceleration lanes are added to existing streets, the minimum pavement thickness shall be ten inches. Subgrade preparation in this circumstance will not require lime or cement treatment but must include scarifying and compacting existing subgrade. 
Where over five percent of a street's traffic is expected to be comprised of vehicles with a single axle load of 18,000 pounds or greater or a tandem axle load of 34,000 pounds or greater, a pavement design performed by a geotechnical engineer may be required at the city's discretion. The final required pavement section will be determined by the city. 
(e)  Base course. All street and alley paving shall be placed on a base course compacted to a minimum of 95 percent of standard proctor. The base course thickness shall be a minimum of six inches and shall consist of lime or cement stabilization as recommended in the geotechnical report. In small areas where stabilization is not practical, the base course shall consist of six inches of compacted flexible base (95 percent standard proctor) or four inches of asphalt base as directed by the city. Where the geotechnical report identifies area having high sulfates, the base course shall consist of four inches of asphalt. All base courses shall be on compacted subgrades. Added pavement thickness may not be substituted for base course. 
(f)  Pavement width requirements. The minimum pavement width for residential streets shall be 31 feet measured back to back of curbs. The use of rollover curbs are only allowed for front entry residential uses. This use requires a variance approved by the city council. When rollover curbs are approved, the minimum standard width shall be 33 feet measured back to back of curbs. 
Commercial streets shall be a minimum of 37 feet measured back to back of curbs. Wider street paving shall be constructed to provide the number of through lanes, left turn lanes, right turn lanes, acceleration, and deceleration lanes as required and shown as part of the city's master thoroughfare plan. 
Additional visitor parking for residential subdivisions may be provided through the use of head-in on-street parking (90-degree angle parking). These spaces must be a minimum nine feet wide and 18 feet long. Provisions shall be made to prevent vehicles from overhanging the sidewalk. The city will maintain these parking areas if provided in a dedicated right-of-way. If these parking areas are provided in a parking easement, then a homeowners association (H.O.A.) is required. No more than six parking spaces in a row will be allowed without a break. A break shall consist of a minimum nine feet by 18 feet curbed island. 
(g)  Curbs. 
(1)  Monolithic curbs. All streets shall be constructed with a monolithic curb continuous on each side of the street pavement. Monolithic curbs shall be six inches in height and six inches wide, in accordance with the appropriate construction standard. 
(2)  Rollover/mountable curbs. The use of rollover curbs are only allowed for front entry residential uses. This use requires a variance approved by the city council. When rollover curbs are approved, the minimum standard width shall be 33 feet measured back to back of curbs. See figure 35 for rollover curb detail. 
(h)  Sidewalks. A four-foot sidewalk shall be constructed along both sides of all streets in accordance with Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS). All sidewalks shall incorporate a five foot wide by five foot long passing area at a minimum of every 200 feet along all streets. Sidewalks shall be included on construction plans and on engineering site plans. 
Sidewalks shall be located one foot from the right-of-way line where possible, but in no instance closer than three feet from the back of curb. Developers of tracts of land served by sidewalks not meeting the requirements of this chapter, or not structurally sound, shall be responsible for removing the existing sidewalks and constructing new sidewalks to meet current requirements. The dedication of additional right-of-way or easement may be required to provide adequate space for the construction of sidewalks. Along state routes, a right-of-way or sidewalk easement shall be dedicated to the city and the sidewalk shall be constructed within this right-of-way or easement. 
Sidewalks adjacent to screening walls, or any other feature, shall be five feet in width and shall be constructed as an integral part of the screening wall or feature. In areas of high pedestrian traffic (such as at schools and churches), or as designated by the city, a six foot wide sidewalk shall be provided. Sidewalks across bridges shall be continuous and approved safety features shall be incorporated into the design to adequately protect pedestrian traffic. 
Sidewalks shall be constructed as part of the infrastructure improvements associated with the developments. Sections of sidewalk construction, at locations approved by the city, may be delayed until development of adjacent lots. Instances in which sidewalk construction may be delayed include the front and side yards of residential and commercial properties where subsequent building construction would likely damage the sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be constructed at street intersections, areas of existing high pedestrian traffic and drainage locations which would not be subject to destruction during later development of the adjacent lot. In areas where sidewalk construction is delayed, grading shall be in full conformance with the typical section. 
Off-site sidewalks to a maximum distance of 1,000 feet shall be constructed as part of the residential (including apartments) infrastructure where required to provide pedestrian access to existing sidewalk networks. If the distances exceed 1,000 feet, the city will construct the length of sidewalk in excess of 1,000 feet. Off-site sidewalks may be constructed of asphalt in accordance with the city's standard details in areas where further development is imminent or as directed by the city engineer. Asphalt sidewalks shall be required and replaced with concrete sidewalks as part of the engineering site plan process. 
(i)  Driveways. All driveways in the city shall be constructed by city permit only. A permit will be granted only after due consideration of safety, traffic flow, and conflicts with existing and proposed facilities. In addition to the above, access to state controlled highways shall require state and city permits. The design or location of driveways shall be in accordance with control of access guidelines at street intersections. The contractor shall construct the proposed driveway within five days of the sawcut and removal of the existing pavement. 
(1)  Residential driveway approaches shall follow these guidelines: 
a.  Driveways will not be permitted onto any streets except residential streets. 
b.  All driveways must access onto alleys where alleys are constructed or will be constructed. 
c.  Width shall be 12 feet (minimum) and 24 feet (maximum), plus a five-foot flare for single-family detached; or a 1.5-foot flare for single-family attached (three units or more attached). 
d.  The radius or flare point at the street or alley of any driveway shall not extend beyond the property line(s). 
e.  All driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard driveway construction details. 
f.  Maximum slope of a residential driveway shall not exceed eight percent within the right-of-way and 14 percent beyond the right-of-way line. 
Refer to figures 13, 14 and 15 for options for front entry residential driveways over sewer service. 
(2)  Commercial driveway approaches shall follow these guidelines: 
a.  Required widths: 
1.  One-way: 15 feet plus 20-foot radii. 
2.  Two-way: 30 feet maximum plus 20-foot radii. 
A maximum width of 35 feet plus 25-foot radii will be allowed for commercial and industrial sites where significant truck traffic is projected and at designated truck entrances, in accordance with figure 8. 
b.  Maximum slope of a commercial driveway shall not exceed eight percent within the right-of-way and ten percent beyond the right-of-way. The minimum spacing (measured to the near radius points of the driveways) between driveways along: 
1.  Principal and Collector (P6D, P4D, C4U) streets shall be 75 feet on the same platted lot, and 50 feet between adjacent lots. 
2.  Collector (C2U) streets shall be 50 feet. 
c.  All two-way driveways shall intersect streets at 90 degrees. 
d.  Adequate site distances and on-site maneuvering shall be available from every driveway. The parking lot and driveways shall be so designed to allow vehicles to exit the street in a forward manner; park, load and unload totally within the site, and shall enter onto the street in a forward manner. In no instance shall vehicles back into the street right-of-way. 
e.  All driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard driveway construction details. 
f.  Driveways on state maintained highways shall meet the state department of transportation minimum requirements and must be approved by the city based on the finding that the driveway will not create a traffic safety hazard or jeopardize quality of traffic handling. Such factors as vehicular speed, existing traffic patterns, existing and proposed driveway and ramp locations, and existing and future street intersections, shall be considered. 
g.  Concrete driveways shall be poured with a three-day cure design mix (4,200 psi at three days). Under special circumstances, a longer cure time may be specified by the city. 
(3)  Driveway permit application. Application for a driveway permit can be made as part of the engineering site plan request or as a separate request. Driveway permit applications shall contain sufficient information to allow the city to fully assess the adequacy of the proposed driveway design. A commercial or multi-family driveway permit application for arterial and collector streets shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Drawn to the maximum scale of 1" = 40'. 
b.  The dimensions, locations and design of the driveway(s) being requested. 
c.  The location of any building or structure, either existing or proposed. 
d.  List uses on commercial lots (such as office, retail store, gas station, etc.). 
e.  The parking lot layout with the proposed internal circulation pattern. There shall be a minimum of 40 feet between the street and the internal traffic lane at driveway locations. 
f.  All existing or proposed driveways, gutters, storm sewers, manholes, fire hydrants, utility poles, service fixtures, etc., which may affect driveway operations. 
g.  Any existing driveways or curb cuts located on adjacent lots or lots across the street. 
h.  All of the geometric design features of the roadway itself, including the presence of a median, the number and width of travel lanes, the presence of a shoulder or a parking lane, etc. 
i.  The distances to intersecting streets. 
(j)  Turning lanes. Left turn lanes shall be provided on all approaches to intersections when four- or six-lane streets cross (as shown on the city's current thoroughfare plan). Left turn lanes shall also be provided along all divided streets where median openings provide access to streets, alleys or driveways. 
Right turn/deceleration lanes shall be provided on all approaches to intersections of four- or six-lane streets, and to approaches where a two-lane collector street intersects a four- or six-lane street (as shown on the city's current thoroughfare plan). Right turn/deceleration lanes shall also be provided at driveways to all commercial developments of five acres or more. When multiple entries from different streets are proposed for a commercial development of five acres or more, and based on the projected traffic patterns of the site, staff may waive this requirement at one or more driveways. 
(1)  Existing platted lots with at least 225 feet of street frontage and located mid-block and away from street intersections will provide a modified deceleration lane measuring 170 feet. Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this chapter. In the event a developer elects to have more than one driveway, a continuous deceleration lane will be required and where no provision to add a deceleration lane exists, the driveway will be subjected to an exit only condition. 
(2)  Existing platted lots with 225 feet or less street frontage and no provision to acquire additional street frontage will be exempt from the deceleration lane requirements except that a minimum turn-in radius of 40 feet will be required. Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this chapter. 
The street frontages, as outlined above, are defined as frontages usable for access which are free of physical barriers such as bridges, culverts, guardrails, etc. 
The minimum length of left turn lanes, right turn lanes and deceleration lanes shall be 100 feet except at locations specifically identified by the city as needing less than 100 feet. All left turn lanes along divided streets at approaches to four or six lane streets shall be a minimum of 200 feet in length. 
The developer shall be responsible for the dedication of all rights-of-way for the construction of all turning lanes. The city will be responsible for the construction of right and left turn lanes at intersections where the property is developed. The developer shall be responsible for all other construction of turning lanes at intersections where the property is undeveloped. 
(k)  Alleys. Alleys are required in all detached and attached single-family residential zoning districts. Alleys may be provided in other zoning districts, but are not required in such zoning districts provided other definite and assured provisions are made for off-street maneuvering, loading, unloading and parking. Off-street maneuvering in commercial areas means that all vehicles shall exit the street in a forward manner; shall park, load, and unload totally within the site; and shall enter onto the street in a forward manner. In no instance shall vehicles back into the street right-of-way. 
All interior alleys shall be a minimum of 18 feet width of right-of-way and a minimum of 12 feet in width of paving; paving to be centered within the right-of-way. 
All perimeter alleys to be a minimum of twenty (20) feet width right-of-way and a minimum of 12 feet in width of paving. 
Alleys shall be laid out so that they intersect street at 90 degrees, and be designed so that no alley curvature shall be closer than 20 feet to the point of intersection of street and alley right-of-way lines. In the event the alley and street right-of-way intersect at other than 90 degrees, as approved by granting of a variance, the required dimensions may be increased as determined by the city. 
Alley turn-outs shall have paving radii of a minimum of ten feet to the back of curb. The alley invert shall be no more than four inches except at points of sidewalk intersection, where the maximum invert shall be three inches. 
Alley intersections and sudden changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, lot corners shall be cut off at least 15 feet on each tangent to permit safe vehicular movement. 
All residential alley cuts shall be made onto residential streets. All commercial alley cuts shall conform to the minimum control of access distances as shown in section 6-92(b). 
Dead-end alleys may be allowed in phased residential developments with adequate turn-around facilities, as determined by the city. All alleys shall be paved and the paving shall conform to "improvements" section of this chapter. 
Fences constructed on any lot, specifically corner lots, will be subject to, and shall conform to the visibility range requirements contained in the fence ordinance. Additional clear zone may be required by the city engineer. 
The design of all alley T-intersections shall be in accordance with figure 10. 
Where residential alleys abut screening walls along a major thoroughfare, alleys shall be constructed in accordance with figure 9. 
(l)  Major traffic carriers. In addition to the various other requirements, thoroughfares classified as major traffic carriers on the city thoroughfare plan shall also meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Traffic signals: 
a.  Minimum spacing of one-quarter mile except where approved by the city, based on an engineering study. 
b.  Preference will be given to street intersections over private development driveways. 
c.  Turn lanes and geometrics shall be designed for maximum safety and efficiency of the intersection. 
(2)  Median openings: 
a.  Full median openings shall be at minimum spacings of one-quarter mile except where approved by the city based on an engineering study. 
b.  Mid-block median openings shall be designed to restrict cross-access. (This allows for left turns along the thoroughfare, but not from the cross street/driveway.) 
(3)  Driveways: 
a.  A deceleration lane is required on all driveways. No access will be allowed within the stacking/transition segments of a deceleration/right-turn lane. Multiple driveways, where approved, shall be served with a weaving/auxiliary lane. 
b.  The radius for entering traffic (onto the thoroughfare) shall be 40-foot minimum and the radius for traffic from the thoroughfare shall be 20-foot minimum. 
(4)  Intersections: Right-turn lanes and traffic islands at intersections shall be provided and designed to allow traffic turning right to enter the cross street after yielding. (A yield sign would be installed and the turning traffic would not go through the traffic signal.) 
(5)  Modifications to deceleration lanes: Driveway connections proposed on major traffic carriers shall be subject to the following: 
a.  All unplatted tracts of land along major traffic carriers, during the platting process, will create no lot with less than 300 feet of street frontage to provide a full deceleration lane measuring 210 feet, or all access to these properties shall be by mutual access easements which provide a full deceleration lane. Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this chapter. In the event a developer elects to have more than one driveway, a continuous deceleration lane will be required and where no provision to add a deceleration lane exists, the driveway will be subjected to an exit only condition. 
b.  Existing platted lots with at least 225 feet of street frontage and located mid-block and away from street intersections will provide a modified deceleration lane measuring 170 feet. Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this chapter. In the event a developer elects to have more than one driveway, a continuous deceleration lane will be required and where no provision to add a deceleration lane exists, the driveway will be subjected to an exit only condition. 
c.  Existing platted lots with 225 feet or less street frontage and no provision to acquire additional street frontage will be exempt from the deceleration lane requirements except that a minimum turn-in radius of 40 feet will be required. Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this chapter. 
The street frontages, as outlined above, are defined as frontages usable for access which are free of physical barriers such as bridges, culverts, guardrails, etc. 
(m)  Stamped concrete. At locations where median and island pavement is required, a stamped (imprinted concrete paving) and patterned surface with coloring shall be installed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements of the standard specifications, median and island pavement installation shall be performed in accordance with either Patterned Concrete Industries, Inc. or Bominite Corporation standard installation specifications. This includes requirements for expansion joints, joint fillerboard, welded wire fabric and concrete mix. Color hardeners and release agents as recommended by the tooling manufacturer shall be used. 
(2)  Median and island pavement shall be stamped in a pattern and colored in accordance with one of the following: 
a.  Per Patterned Concrete Industries, Inc. 
Pattern: Running Bond Cobble 
Color: Dark Red 
b.  Per Bominite Corporation 
Pattern: Running Bond Cobblestone 
Color: Colonial Red 
Other patterns and colors will be considered on a case by case basis. 
(3)  The contractor performing the work must provide a letter from one of the above tooling manufacturers to the city engineer stating that the installer is trained and licensed to install the specified work prior to being issued a construction permit. 
(4)  Street pavement shall meet all the above specifications for stamped-patterned concrete. 
(5)  Median pavement which is installed in different phases as required by a total development shall utilize the same pattern, color and installation technique as other phases within the project. 
(n)  Lane closures. In instances where the proposed construction necessitates the closure of an existing travel lane, the construction plans shall include specifications for traffic control and a work sequence to minimize the effect on existing traffic. As a minimum, early strength concrete shall be specified along with a work sequence whereby lane closures are of minimal duration. Specific details will be reviewed by city staff and approval will be based on the finding that every step has been taken to accomplish the purpose of this section. Depending on conditions associated with the particular site, city staff may alter those requirements where it is determined that existing traffic will not be significantly effected. On major thoroughfares, a cash bond may be required as a guarantee by the contractor that the specifications will be complied with to the fullest. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3234-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05; Ord. No. 4093-07-2014 , § 4, 7-7-14)  
Sec. 6-93. - Blocks. 
(a)  The length, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined regarding provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use proposed as well as needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of traffic. In residential subdivisions, street design shall follow a combination of several design features to include shorter streets, curvilinear streets, a maze-like street network to discourage cut-through traffic in the neighborhood. Direct connectors between thoroughfares will not be allowed. Size, shape and topographic conditions of the development may be reviewed by staff in a conceptual manner to identify the best possible design features prior to the preliminary plat stage. 
(b)  Where no existing subdivision controls block lengths, Arterial blocks shall be a minimum of 660 feet and a maximum of 2,600 feet in length. Blocks in multi-family, commercial and industrial zoned developments shall be a minimum distance of 500 feet and a maximum distance of 1,800 feet. 
(c)  Blocks in single-family and two-family zoned developments shall not contain more than 18 platted lots on either side between intersections and shall not exceed a maximum distance of 1,800 feet. When conditions prevent the installation of streets to address block lengths, a fire control easement of 40 feet may be allowed to define the appropriate block length. One fire control easement may be used per block. No structures may be allowed within such easement. 
(d)  In the event a property owner is platting only major street rights-of-way for dedication and construction, the requirements stated herein shall be met with final platting of the property into lots and blocks. 
(e)  All distances specified shall be measured along the center line of the street right-of-way between the center point of street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-94. - Lots. 
(a)  All lots shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and the city's zoning ordinance. Double frontage lots in residential areas shall have a front building line on both streets. Each single-family, town-house or duplex lot shall adjoin a public street. Single-family or duplex lots shall not face arterial streets or designated two and four-lane collector streets, and no required parking shall be allowed within the required front yard, except for front entry structures. All other lots shall adjoin a public street or may be served by an access easement or private street. Such access easement or private street shall meet the same minimum standards as required for a fire lane, although the easement or private street itself may not be a required fire lane. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines, except for single-family attached townhouse developments (three units or more attached). 
(b)  In subdivisions where buildings are to be served by septic tanks, the size of lots shall be sufficiently large to accommodate adequate drainage fields and to meet the standards set forth by the state department of health and the city. 
(c)  No lot existing at the time of the passage of this chapter shall be reduced in area or depth below the minimum requirements set forth herein except when such a lot is platted for a planned unit development. 
(d)  A lot which had construction thereon or had been platted prior to the adoption of this chapter, which is reduced in size to less than herein required by reason of the widening of an abutting street by the city or other governmental agency, may be used for dwelling purposes. In such instance, the minimum lot area or depth requirements shall be computed on the basis of the original lot size prior to the street widening. 
(e)  Corner lots for single-family front entry developments (if approved by a variance from city council), shall have a 40-foot minimum width with a 20-foot control of access requirement on streets designated residential. Where a residential street intersects with a collector street or arterial street, a 75-foot lot width with a 50-foot control of access shall apply. In no instance shall this section supercede minimum lot width requirements for the applicable zoning district. See figure 6B. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3234-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05)  
Sec. 6-95. - Easements/R.O.W.s. 
(a)  General provisions. Easements and/or R.O.W.s shall be provided for all city owned public facilities (water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage) and shown on subdivision plats. Easements and/or R.O.W.s for utilities shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width, except as otherwise provided. Where a subdivision is bounded by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm sewer easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse or of such width to provide for any future construction plus 15 feet on each side, except for open channels having a capacity of less than 500 CFS. 
In situations where a city owned utility lies within its own prescribed minimum easement and a privately owned utility (electric, gas, telephone, cable) is located, underground or overhead, adjacent to and outside the city easement, it would be agreeable to the city that such easements may be mutually shared for ingress-egress and for temporary storage of equipment or materials. 
In situations where two city utility systems are to be installed separately in parallel easements, the maximum width of the easements may be reduced by a combined total of five feet. 
In residential subdivisions, separate easements of at least seven and one-half feet for all other utilities, such as electric, telephone, natural gas and cable t.v. shall be provided as required and where necessary. 
In single-family residential subdivisions, city owned utilities shall be located within a prescribed right-of-way and shall not be located within easements. If an existing city owned utility is located within a dedicated easement prior to the development of a single-family subdivision, the developer shall convert the easement into a right-of-way or relocate the utility into a street right-of-way. 
(b)  Water and sanitary sewer line easements. (Not applicable to single-family residential subdivisions) Refer to table 2 (waterline easements) or table 3 (sanitary sewer easements) for proper easement widths for different pipe sizes at different depths of cover. 
A ten-foot building setback is required from all pressured utility line easements. A five-foot building setback is required from all non-pressured utility line easements. Lots platted prior to November 20, 1989 will be reviewed by city staff on case by case basis. The setback requirements may be reduced to the extent determined practical by staff after consideration of line size, location, depth and proposed use of the subject lot. 
(c)  Storm drainage easements. (Not applicable to single-family residential subdivisions). Refer to table 4 (drainage easements) for determining proper widths. 
A five-foot building setback is required from all storm drainage easements, except a 20-foot building setback applies to drainage easements containing an open channel. Lots platted prior to November 20, 1989 will be reviewed by city staff on case by case basis. The above requirements may be reduced to the extent determined practical by staff after consideration of line size, location, depth and proposed use of the subject lot. 
Additional widths may be required depending upon the engineering design, size, depth, soil conditions and other criteria as determined by the city engineer or his representative. 
(1)  Storm drainage easements, open channels, less than 500 CFS. Storm drainage easements for open channels shall be designed to the widths required to convey the 100-year design frequency flows plus an additional 15-foot width beyond the top of bank on one side to provide for maintenance equipment access. All widths shall be determined and substantiated by drainage calculations in accordance with the city Drainage Criteria Manual. Rights-of-way shall be dedicated in residential subdivisions and drainage easements will not be accepted. 
(2)  Storm drainage easements, open channel, over 500 CFS. Not applicable (right-of-way required). 
(d)  Access easements. In lieu of street frontage, non-residential lots may be accessed by means of an access and utility easement. Such easement must be dedicated by a plat and filed with the county clerk. Such easement must be maintained by the owners and shall in no way be the responsibility of the city. Such easements shall be in good repair and shall be maintained by all responsible property owners. The width of such easements shall be sufficient to accommodate a minimum 24 feet of paving. The need for such easements shall be determined by following the usual platting process established in this chapter. 
(e)  Slope easements. Slope easements or extension of parkway cross slopes (2 percent) shall be required in areas of new development, where significant earth (cut or fill) slopes extend into private property beyond street right-of-way lines. These slopes are required for the stability of the roadway sections, effective erosion control, drainage, and maintenance. At developer's option, either of the following alternates shall be followed: 
(1)  The slope easement width will be determined as follows: 
Height of Fill or Cut (feet) 	Maximum Slope Rate 	Slope Easement Required 
0—3.0 	3H:1V 	None 
3.1—10.0 	3H:1V 	From R.O.W. line to limit of slope 
10.1—15.0 	4H:1V 	From R.O.W. line to limit of slope 
Over 15.0 feet to be determined by city from right-of-way line to the limit of slope. 
 
(2)  Other maintenance-free slope protection methods (e.g. Concrete rip-rap, retaining walls, etc.) may be utilized for slopes steeper than 3:1. 
(f)  Parkway cross slope extension. The parkway cross slope (two percent) shall be extended an additional ten feet beyond the right-of-way line to the hingepoint of the slope for cut or fill slopes in excess of three feet in height. No easements or additional right-of-way will be required. The additional parkway and cut or fill slope shall be landscaped as required to equal the adjacent public parkway in accordance with the landscaping requirement of this chapter. 
(g)  Fire hydrant and water meter easements. A blanket easement of five-foot radius from the center point of all fire hydrants and a five-foot radius from the center point of all other appurtenances (fire hydrant valves, water meters, meter boxes) shall be granted to the city, for each platted lot in the city. This blanket easement shall be noted on the final plat and will be used for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting and maintaining the above named appurtenances. 
(h)  Construction easements. The developer, at his own cost, shall be responsible for obtaining appropriate temporary construction easements or letters of agreement from adjacent property owners for the proper construction of streets, drainage, water and sewer facilities and provide such documentation to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-96. - Drainage. 
(a)  General provisions. The design, size, type and location of all storm drainage facilities in the city shall be in accordance with the city Drainage Criteria Manual requirements. The developer and his engineer shall bear total responsibility for the adequacy of design. The approval of a given drainage facility in no way relieves the developer of his responsibility. All storm drainage structures and improvements shall be designed for the case of ultimate watershed development. Prior to any channel improvement or storm water detention design, the office of the city engineer shall be consulted regarding preferred flood control strategies for the watershed of interest. 
Drainageways and/or floodways for all open channels and creeks where the accumulated storm run-off is more than 500 CFS shall be dedicated to the city, except in non-residential areas where the property owner is to maintain the channel unless as otherwise approved by the city. The width of the drainage right-of-way will be determined by the city on a case-by-case basis. Right(s)-of-way shall encompass all areas having a ground elevation one foot above the water surface elevation based upon the design flood or the top of the high bank or channel edge whichever is greater. The right-of-way shall also include at least a 15-foot wide maintenance strip along both sides of the channel or, if the community development department so allows, at least a 20-foot wide maintenance strip along one side of the channel. Streets, alleys, bike paths, etc., alongside the channel can serve as all or part of the maintenance right-of-way provided they are unobstructed. 
All drainage outfalls into the city-maintained drainage rights-of-way/creeks shall be designed to discharge at the flow lines of creeks. The design shall include proper erosion control measures and velocity controls. No discharges will be permitted near the tops of creek banks. Only pipe outfalls (no flumes) will be allowed in the city-maintained drainage rights-of-way. Creek banks disturbed during the construction of storm sewer outfalls shall be properly restored, compacted, seeded and/or sodded to the satisfaction of the city's P.A.L.S. department. It is recommended that the owners/developers conduct a field meeting with parks department staff during preliminary plat/preliminary engineering stage to identify the locations for proposed drainage outfalls. It shall be the owner's/developer's responsibility to remove trash, debris, fallen trees, etc., and to restore and repair creek banks prior to the dedication of drainage rights-of-way and acceptance of the subdivision. 
All drainage structures or improvements in the city shall be designed to properly accommodate the runoff from a storm event of 100-year frequency. 
If a site discharges more than two CFS of storm water over the right-of-way at each drive approach, an onsite storm drainage system shall be required for connection to an existing public storm sewer system, if public storm sewer is available near the site and has the capacity to handle the 100-year future discharge. 
A storm drainage system will be required to connect into a public storm sewer system near the site which is capable of handling the 100-year future discharge. 
If the public storm sewer system has inadequate capacity for 100-year storm discharges, the developers have the following design option: 
(1)  Option A: To upgrade the public storm sewer system to accommodate the 100-year storm discharges from their site as well as any offsite future 100-year discharges upstream of their property, at their own expense. The city may participate in these costs subject to availability of funds (up to a maximum of 50 percent). 
(2)  Option B: To design their onsite storm sewer system for a total runoff to include: 
a.  100-year onsite developed runoff; 
b.  100-year offsite drainage coming into the property under existing (undeveloped) conditions. 
The resulting excess discharges (above the capacity of public system) shall be retained or detained onsite, to reduce peak runoff so the existing public drainage system will not be overloaded. Article 5.4.3. of the city's Comprehensive Drainage Study lists several alternatives on how to provide retention or detention system. 
Downstream development(s) that have exercised option B will be protected from upstream development(s) by the city (within their own jurisdiction) by enforcing the same option on them to provide retention or detention for their discharges in excess of pre-development conditions. 
Drainage improvements in residential developments shall be located within rights-of-way. Street and alley layouts shall be arranged such that the drainage can be provided within the rights-of-way. In the event drainage improvements must be located outside street and alley rights-of-way, a drainage right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
If a variance for front entry is granted for single-family attached (three units or more attached), then lot-to-lot drainage shall be allowed provided there are deed restrictions and a homeowner's association (H.O.A.) put into place to address maintenance of the approved drainage plans. In addition, a private drainage easement shall be shown on the final plat and a note shall be placed on the plat indicating that the approved drainage pattern must be maintained and preserved and listing any restrictions within the private drainage easement necessary to maintain and preserve the approved drainage pattern. Drainage must be routed to the nearest available street at breaks in between buildings. In no case shall more than ten units drain out to the street from the same break between buildings. 
(b)  Drainage design of storm sewer systems based on discharge. The drainage system design shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  An enclosed storm sewer shall be provided in all areas where the quantity of the accumulated storm run-off does not exceed 200 CFS. 
(2)  In drainage courses where the accumulated storm run-off is more than 200 CFS and less than 500 CFS either an enclosed storm sewer system or a concrete line channel shall be constructed. 
(3)  In drainage courses where the accumulated storm run-off is more than 500 CFS, the drainage improvements may be either an enclosed storm sewer system, a concrete line channel or a composite channel. The composite channel design shall consist of a concrete channel bottom of a minimum 12-foot width and concrete slope paving along both sides of the channel to the limits of a ten-year design frequency. This provision does not apply when no improvements to the drainage course is proposed and the channel is left in its natural state. 
(4)  All streets shall be protected from flooding in accordance with this chapter and the city's drainage criteria manual. Inlets shall be provided along all streets at maximum spacings of 600 feet. The maximum gutter flow from a high point on any street to the first inlet shall be 600 feet. 
(c)  Criteria for filling in a floodplain. An area of special flood hazard is defined as the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area has been identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on its Flood Insurance Rate Map, Community No. 480195, found on the most current dated map. On water courses not covered by the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the special flood hazard area shall be determined by an appropriate floodplain analysis. The results of such an analysis must be reviewed and accepted by the office of the city engineer prior to design. 
All construction or construction-related activity which is proposed to take place in a special flood hazard area shall be subject to the conditions of this chapter and any amendments thereto, of the city. A development permit is required to ensure conformance with the provisions of these ordinances. In addition, the following specifications shall also be observed: 
(1)  There shall be no increase in the 100-year water surface elevation on any property upstream, downstream, or on the opposite bank (unless developer owns both banks) from the proposed site caused by construction activity in the floodplain. The floodplain may be altered only to the extent permitted by equal conveyance reduction on both sides of channel. The property owner/developer shall be required to provide technically acceptable proof (such as a backwater analysis) that this restriction has not been violated. 
(2)  Any increase in mean stream flow velocity shall be limited so as not to exceed the open channel velocity limitations delineated in section 7 of the Drainage Criteria Manual. In addition, there shall be no increase in erosion activity on any property upstream, downstream, or on the opposite bank from the proposed sites caused by construction activity in the floodplain. The owner or developer shall be required to provide technically acceptable proof (such as backwater analysis) that this restriction has not been violated. 
(3)  The toe of any fill slope shall parallel the direction of flow. 
(4)  Maximum unreinforced fill slope shall be 3:1 unless approval for a steeper grade is received from the office of the city engineer. Vertical walls, terracing, and other slope treatments will be acceptable subject to approval of construction plans by the office of the city engineer. 
(d)  Required technical information to be submitted for city review. The engineer shall be required to submit for city review appropriate hydraulic and hydrologic design calculations and technical information. This includes at a minimum: 
Drainage Structure Type 	Required Submittal 
Open channels 	All information delineated in section 7 of the design manual. 
Culverts 	All information delineated in section 8 of the design manual. 
Storm sewers (including inlets) 	All information delineated in sections 5 and 6 of the design manual. 
Storm water storage facilities 	All information delineated in section 9 of the design manual. 
Construction in a flood hazard zone 	Hydraulic calculations and/or computer runs providing no increase of flood elevation or erosional activity on neighboring property. 
Landscaping plan specifying plans for erosion control on cut and fill slopes and restoration of excavated areas. 
Information required under the current ordinance (flood damage prevention ordinance) relating to the issuance of a development permit. 
 
The office of the city engineer may require additional technical backup information. 
(e)  Requirements for drainageway/floodway as part of city park system. Where the city has designated a floodway or floodplain as a dedicated drainageway or part of the city park system, the following shall be provided: 
(1)  Parallel streets fronting along the park or dedicated drainageway; 
(2)  Culs-de-sac which provide public access fronting on the park; and, 
(3)  Loop streets which provide public access fronting on the park. 
In the above cases, the parks and recreation board shall have the right to review and approve the proposed street alignment fronting on city parks and shall in cases where the alignment is unsatisfactory, negotiate a satisfactory alignment with the developer and the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3234-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05)  
Sec. 6-97. - Water lines. 
(a)  General provisions. This section deals with general requirements for water line construction in the city. All water lines shall be sized and designed in accordance with the city water distribution system master plan. All construction shall be in accordance with city standard specifications and construction standards. Other pertinent requirements for water connections, oversizing, main extensions, backflow and cross connections, water restrictions, conservation, impact fee and other water related fees are included in the water and sewer regulations ordinance. The state department of health, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), and the Environmental Protection Agency must be consulted for their regulations and specifications, where required. 
(b)  Water main categories. Water lines in the city are categorized as: 
(1)  Distribution lines—Sizes six inches through 14 inches (nominal diameter). 
(2)  Transmission lines—Sizes 16 inches through 48 inches or over (nominal diameter). 
Distribution lines shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate water for potable and fire protection needs. Transmission line sizes are as shown on the city water distribution system master plan. 
The city water distribution system master plan may be periodically revised to meet the current demands as well as future needs as development occurs. 
(c)  Water line requirements. The waterline requirements table of this section provides the basic water line requirements. These requirements are considered minimum. 
The owner/developer shall be required to install at his own expense, all water lines up to 12-inch size, including all engineering costs. It shall be the developer's responsibility to determine the demand of the subject development. All off-site water mains required to connect service to the subdivision shall be installed at the expense of the developer up to 12 inches. The owner shall also be responsible for obtaining easements, when required, from other property owners for off-site water main connections. 
All water lines shall be designed to complete a looped system to avoid dead-end lines. Valves shall be placed at or near the ends of mains in such a manner that a shut down can be made for a future main extension without causing a loss of service on the existing main. 
Valve and fire hydrant spacing as shown on the waterline requirements table is considered minimum. Additional valves and fire hydrants may be required as determined by the city. 
The following shall apply to the installation of all water lines: 
(1)  All water lines shall be installed within a city street right-of-way or when necessary, within an easement that is contiguous to the right-of-way. 
(2)  Water lines shall not be installed within a TXDOT right-of-way. A water line easement that is contiguous to the TXDOT right-of-way shall be provided. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to consider alternate alignments on a case-by-case basis when field conditions warrant. 
Water lines within residential developments shall be installed within rights-of-way. All water lines shall be shown on plan and profile sheets to the same scales as required for paving improvements. Should a water line exist in an easement prior to rezoning of the property for residential use or prior to development of the property for residential use, then the existing line shall be either relocated to rights-of-way at the developer's cost or the existing easement shall be dedicated to the city as right-of-way. 
Waterline crossings at all street intersections designated C4U or larger (except service connections) shall be encased in a steel encasement pipe (class, length and size as determined by the city). Valves may be required at both ends at street crossings, if the crossing is utilized for both domestic service and fire protection needs. 
Waterline crossings at existing streets in an established neighborhood would be required to be dry-bored with encasement requirements at street intersections and none at mid-block or between intersections. 
All service lines shall be installed for each lot, with a suitable marker placed at the point of stub-out for reference in advance of street paving, sidewalk construction or any other item of street construction. Service lines shall be provided with a corporation at the main and an angle meter stop at the property line. A suitable reference marked "W" (minimum letter height of two inches) shall be chiseled or some other city approved method on the face of the curb, or on pavement where there is no curb. 
Service connections will not be permitted on transmission mains or fire hydrant leads unless authorized by the city. 
Meter boxes shall be located within a five-foot radius blanket easement on private property. 
(d)  Water line materials. All water line materials (pipes and fittings) shall conform with AWWA standards. New water line construction shall not consist of ten- or 14-inch pipes. 
(1)  Water lines of 12 inches (nominal) or less in diameter shall be one of the following: 
a.  Ductile iron pipe, cement lined, bituminous coated, class 50 with polyethylene encasement. 
b.  P.V.C. AWWA standard C900 class 150 (D.R. 18). 
(2)  Water lines larger than 12 inches (nominal) diameter shall be one of the following: (Note: Concrete pipe manufacturers shall make all proposed pipe connections.) 
a.  Ductile iron pipe, cement lined, bituminous coated class 50, with polyethylene encasement. 
b.  Reinforced concrete pressure pipe, steel cylinder pipe (RCCP) AWWA standards C303. 
c.  Pre-stressed concrete pressure pipe, AWWA standard C301. 
d.  PVC AWWA standard C905 class 235 (D.R. 18). 
(3)  Fittings shall be either gray or ductile cast iron and shall be cement lined inside and bituminous coated on the outside. Fittings for reinforced concrete cylinder pipe shall be specially manufactured in accordance with AWWA standards. 
(e)  Backflow devices. Approved double check detector check valves must be installed on all privately maintained fire lines. Such valves shall be installed in an underground vault located on private property at the boundary of the public/private property line. 
Requirements for backflow devices other than fire lines are governed by the backflow prevention ordinance and the water and sewer regulations ordinance of the city. 
Exception: When the fire line serves only the automatic fire sprinkler system, and with prior written permission from the city which shall be given at its sole discretion, the double check detector check valve may be located on the interior of the building in the fire control room. The length of the fire line as measured from the nearest edge of right of way or utility easement to the interior double check detector check valve shall not exceed 50 feet, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
(f)  Booster pump stations. The city will operate and maintain only those booster pump stations and force mains which serve the public. Booster pump stations and force mains serving private developments shall be privately maintained. 
(g)  Oversizing and extensions. The city may elect to oversize certain mains as required or as depicted in the current water distribution system master plan. The city may participate on lines greater than 12 inches if the demand of the project is less than or equal to a 12-inch line capacity, and the line is depicted on the water distribution system master plan. 
If a development requires lines exceeding 12 inches to service the area, the city may participate in the oversizing above the size needed to supply the development. 
If a project requires the city participation, and if city funds are available, the developer, owner, builder, or applicant shall design the project and submit the approved plans for bidding by the city. If city funds are not available, the developer may design and construct the project subject to an agreement for connection and reimbursement. See water and sewer regulations ordinance. 
Water extensions outside the city will not be granted to private entities. Water extensions outside the city may be granted to neighboring municipalities or governmental entities as approved by the city council. 
(h)  Meter requirements. Each connection to service individual or multiple spaces or structures shall be metered by an approved device with radio read meter capabilities. Meters from three-fourths inches up to and including two inches shall be purchased through the city (see fee ordinance). Meters greater than two inches shall be approved by the city and purchased by the developer, builder, owner, or applicant and dedicated to the city. 
Individuals installing water meters shall pay administration fees, meter costs, meter deposits and capital recovery fees. Meters installed for city owned buildings or street medians are exempt from capital recovery fees. Capital recovery fees shall not be required for fire protection water lines. 
All meters shall be dedicated to the city except devices classified as private and utilized for sub-metering. 
All required meters, backflow device boxes, and valves shall be approved by the city. 
Temporary water service for all water requirements shall be metered by a city temporary meter, excluding the water necessary for flushing and disinfecting purposes. Procedures for obtaining a temporary meter is addressed in the Water and sewer regulations ordinance. 
(i)  Utility location plan. Water lines shall be installed in accordance with the utility location plan except as otherwise approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 4093-07-2014 , § 5, 7-7-14)  
Sec. 6-98. - Fire protection. 
(a)  General provisions. The fire marshal will review all plans and specifications of all proposed developments and will ensure adequate fire protection is provided. 
If, in the opinion of the fire marshal, adequate fire protection requires additional fire hydrants and water lines to serve proposed developments, he will direct the owner of the property, in writing, to locate at pre-designated positions on the property a fire hydrant or hydrants and adequate water lines to provide adequate fire protection at the owner's own expense. The location and number of fire hydrants and water lines shall be situated as to afford adequate fire protection to all buildings located or proposed to be located on the property. Such installation to be completed in such reasonable period of time as the fire marshal may direct. 
(b)  Fire hydrant specifications and coverage requirements. 
(1)  Commercial or industrial areas. 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be located as per appendix C of the currently adopted International Fire Code. 
b.  Fire hydrants located on the opposite side of a street, designated as four-lane or larger on the current city thoroughfare plan, shall not be considered acceptable for meeting hydrant coverage requirements. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be positioned to allow trucklays to follow normal traffic flow patterns to the site either by street or fire lane. 
(2)  Residential areas. 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be located as per appendix B and C of the currently adopted International Fire Code. 
b.  Fire hydrants located on the opposite side of a street, designated as four-lane or larger on the current City Thoroughfare Plan, shall not be considered acceptable for meeting hydrant coverage requirements. 
c.  Fire hydrants shall be positioned to allow trucklays to follow normal traffic access to the site. 
(c)  Fire hydrant specifications. All fire hydrants must meet required city standard fire hydrant specifications. 
(1)  All fire hydrants shall have one 4.5-inch pumper nozzle and two 2.5-inch hose nozzles with the city's standard threads; shall have a main barrel valve opening of not less than 5.25 inches; and shall be placed on mains of not less than six inches in diameter. Six-inch gate valves shall be placed on all fire hydrant leads. All fire hydrants shall have a valve at the main with flange to flange fittings. 
(2)  All fire hydrants shall be of a "break-away" design in accordance with city standard fire hydrant specifications. 
(3)  Each hydrant shall have a minimum of two primer coats. The final coat of paint on the body of all publically owned and maintained hydrants shall be a silver color of approved aluminum paint. For privately owned and maintained hydrants, the final coat of paint shall be reflective white. 
(d)  Fire protection distribution systems. Water distribution systems shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate water for fire protection to the development and shall conform to the city's water distribution system master plan. Maintenance of private water lines and fire hydrants is the responsibility of the property owner. 
(1)  Residential areas. 
a.  Sizes and allowable dead end lengths. In residential areas the minimum water line size shall be eight inches. Dead end lines over 600 feet in length will not be allowed. Dead end lines shall terminate at a fire hydrant which shall be installed for maintenance purposes and may not necessarily be considered for fire hydrant density as required. Flush hydrants may be installed in lieu of hydrants at terminating points of dead end lines for maintenance purposes only. 
b.  Valves. Additional isolation valves may be required to be installed depending upon the configuration of the system as determined by the city. 
c.  Construction standards. All water line construction shall conform to construction standards located elsewhere in this [chapter]. 
(2)  Commercial areas. 
a.  Sizes and allowable dead end lengths. In commercial areas the minimum water line size shall be eight inches. Dead end lines over 300 feet and up to 600 feet in length shall be 12 inches minimum. Dead end lines over 600 feet in length will not be allowed. Dead end lines shall terminate at a fire hydrant which shall be installed for maintenance purposes and may not necessarily be considered for fire hydrant density as required. Flush hydrants may be installed in lieu of hydrants at terminating points of dead end lines for maintenance purposes only. 
b.  Water line requirements for fire protection. The owner developer shall choose from a six option menu to provide either a public or private water line distribution system for fire protection. The menu is located at the end of this section. 
Perpendicular crossings of underground public water lines may be allowed under driveways and sidewalks to provide protection/domestic service to the site. All crossings shall meet construction standards applicable with all provisions of this [chapter]. 
c.  Valves. Additional isolation valves may be required to be installed depending upon the configuration of the system as determined by the city. 
d.  Construction standards. All water line construction shall conform to construction standards located elsewhere in this [chapter]. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3779-06-2010 , § 3, 6-7-10)  
Sec. 6-99. - Sanitary sewer lines. 
(a)  General provisions. The design, size, type, and location of all sanitary sewer lines shall be in accordance with the wastewater collection system master plan, city standard construction drawings, regulations, standards specifications, this chapter and good engineering practice. In addition, the design and construction methods shall meet or exceed Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and Environmental Protection Agency regulations. The water and sewer regulations ordinance of the city shall also be adhered to in regards to the design and construction of sanitary sewer lines. 
All sanitary sewer lines shall be installed within rights-of-way or sanitary sewer easements. Sanitary sewer lines may not be located in easements in the yard of any residential lot. Should a line exist in an easement prior to the rezoning of the property for residential use or prior to development of the property for residential use, then the existing line shall be either relocated to city right-of-way at developer expense, or the existing easement shall be dedicated to the city as right-of-way. 
(b)  Materials. Sanitary sewer lines 12 inches in diameter and less shall be PVC SDR-35 for depths less than ten feet. When PVC pipe is used for depths exceeding ten feet, the pipe material shall be PVC SDR-26. Lines larger than 12 inches diameter shall be as specified by the city. Manholes can either be poured-in-place or pre-cast. 
(c)  Manhole spacing. Manholes shall be provided at all points of directional change, including the P.C. and P.T. on horizontal curves. Manholes shall be provided at vertical points of intersection (vertical curves are generally not allowed). All sanitary sewer lines shall terminate at a manhole. See table 6 for spacing criteria. 
(d)  Manhole size criteria. Sanitary sewer manhole size criteria is established based on depth/diameter/maximum allowable pipe connection/pipe size relationship. The criteria is given in the sanitary sewer manhole size table 6. 
(e)  Minimum pipe size. The minimum size of sanitary sewer lines shall be eight inches in diameter for lines which are to be maintained by the city. 
(f)  Parallel sanitary sewer collection systems. Residential or commercial sanitary sewer collection lines shall be designed to not exceed maximum depths of 12 feet 0 inches measured from finished grade to the bottom of the pipe. Depths greater than 12 feet 0 inches will only be permitted when parallel sanitary sewer collection lines to serve properties on both sides of the street are provided. The city engineer shall be consulted to determine the location and design criteria of the parallel lines prior to final design. 
(g)  Oversizing and extensions. The city may elect to oversize certain mains as required or as depicted in the most recent waste water collection system master plan. The city may participate on lines greater than 12 inches if: 
(1)  The demand of the project is less than or equal to a twelve 12-inch line capacity; and 
(2)  Shown on the wastewater collection system master plan. 
If a project involves city participation and if city funds are available, the developer, owner, builder, or applicant shall design the project and submit the approved plans for bidding by the city. If city funds are not available, the developer may design and construct the project subject to an agreement for connection and reimbursement. SEE: Water and Sewer Regulations Ordinance. If a development requires lines exceeding 12 inches to serve the area, the city may participate in the oversizing above the size needed to supply the development. 
During the process of development, the owner(s) of the subject property shall extend sewer mains by constructing the necessary sewer line within proper easements, at their sole expense, to serve the adjacent property, when the adjacent property or any portion thereof, are considered to be in the same sewer basin. The construction of the lines shall extend along the frontage or through the property to the furthest point possible, where the adjacent property can readily tie into the system. 
Sanitary sewer extensions outside the city will not be granted to private entities. Sanitary sewer extensions outside the city may be granted to neighboring municipalities or governmental entities as approved by the city council. 
(h)  Clean-outs. A clean out, directed toward the main, shall be provided on all services at the property line or easement line. 
(i)  Utility location plan. Sanitary sewer lines shall be installed in accordance with the utility location plan except as otherwise approved by the city. 
(j)  Additional easements. Additional easements for sanitary sewer lines shall be dedicated along state controlled routes and along other routes when the right-of-way is not sufficient to adequately provide for the orderly construction and maintenance of the sanitary sewer improvements. 
(k)  Emergency maintenance. When conditions warrant, the city may perform maintenance operations during the warranty period. The cost of such maintenance shall be paid for by the developer/contractor. 
(l)  Television inspection. 
(1)  The developer or contractor shall, at its own expense, perform a television inspection of all sanitary sewer gravity lines prior to acceptance by the city. Repairs shall be made if required and the television inspection repeated as many times as needed until the line is deemed acceptable. Prior to final acceptance, the developer or its contractor shall escrow funds as specified in the city fee ordinance to cover the cost of a second television inspection. If the developer or its contractor performs the second television inspection in accordance with the terms stated hereinafter, the escrow shall be refunded less administrative costs. 
(2)  The developer or contractor shall use color video tape in all television inspections. 
(3)  The developer or contractor may employ a firm qualified in the type of work to make the television inspections, or if qualified and acceptable to the city, he may perform the inspection himself. 
(4)  The city inspector must be present during the television inspection, unless specifically otherwise authorized in writing. 
(5)  The visual inspection by photographic means of the sanitary sewer mains shall commence after the compaction of backfill, the air test, and the mandril test are completed. 
(6)  The jet ball technique may be used to remove all foreign debris and silt, prior to photographic inspection. 
(7)  The second visual inspection by the developer or contractor shall be made no sooner than the 20th month and no later than the 22nd month after the date of the letter of acceptance of the subdivision by the city. In the event the developer or contractor shall refuse or fail to complete the second inspection within time permitted, the city shall use the escrowed funds previously described to cause completion of the inspection. Such inspection shall be made no later than 23 months after acceptance of the subdivision. 
(8)  All television equipment used shall be approved by city staff resolution. 
(9)  All information gathered must be legible, clearly understandable, and of good picture quality. 
(10)  A run sheet shall be made, and it shall be compatible with the tape in noting deficiencies. 
(11)  By audio on the tape, the operator must note the date and time the recording is made, note the developer or contractor's name, project name, and contract number, note the name of company performing the inspection, if other than the developer or contractor, and the operator's name, note the location, line, designation, main size, and direction of run, identify every 50-foot station, identify the station of each manhole and identify deficiencies and include station number. 
(12)  The sewer mains must be televised from manhole to manhole in a downstream manner. 
(13)  All sanitary sewer mains must be laced with water. The television inspection must be done immediately following the lacing of the main with no water flow. 
(14)  One tape per visual photographic inspection shall be furnished to the city. 
(15)  Tapes must be VHS and shall be one-half-inch size. 
(16)  All tapes and run sheets shall be submitted to the city inspector for storage and inspection by the city. All tapes and run sheets shall become the property of the city. 
(m)  Criteria for repair. The developer shall make repairs if the city inspector notes problems, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Pulled or slipped joints. 
(2)  Water infiltration. 
(3)  Cracked or damaged pipe. 
(4)  If standing water is found in pipes of gradients equal to or greater than 0.7 percent. 
(5)  In pipes of gradients less than 0.7 percent, a maximum one-half inch of standing water will be allowed in eight inches through 12 inches diameter pipes; and a maximum ten percent of pipe size or three inches, whichever is less in pipes greater than 12 inches diameter. 
(6)  Structural damage to pipe. 
The city shall review the visual photographic tape and notify the developer or contractor of required repairs. 
If repairs are required, another television inspection of the repaired area shall be made after the repairs are complete, at the developer or contractor's expense. Repairs shall be made to the satisfaction of the city. 
(n)  Lift stations and force mains. The city will operate and maintain only those lift stations and force mains which serve the public. Lift stations and force mains serving private developments shall be privately maintained. 
(o)  Sanitary sewer services. No sanitary sewer service of less than four inches in diameter shall be connected to a city-maintained sanitary sewer main. Services of six inches in diameter or larger shall connect to sanitary sewer lines only at manholes. An "S" shall be or some other city approved method on the face of the curb or on pavement where there is no curb, to identify the exact location of the sanitary sewer service. A sanitary sewer service shall be stubbed out to all residential lots to a point, eight feet minimum, within the lot. The elevation of all services shall be shown on the plans and shall be established such that the lot will be adequately served. For connection fees, see the city's fee ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-100. - Erosion control. 
(a)  General provisions. Private property owners, developers, or builders shall be accountable for any erosion of their property or construction site which results in measurable accumulation of sedimentation in dedicated streets and alleys. Any accumulation deeper than one inch in dedicated streets, alleys, or offsite private property constitutes a violation of this policy. 
(1)  Maximum use shall be made of vegetation to minimize soil loss. 
(2)  Natural vegetation shall be retained wherever possible. 
(3)  Where inadequate natural vegetation exists, or where it becomes necessary to remove existing natural vegetation, temporary controls shall be installed promptly to minimize soil loss and insure that erosion and sedimentation does not occur. 
(4)  Erosion control plans shall be submitted to city engineer for approval prior to actual construction. 
(5)  Wastes or disposal areas and construction roads shall be located and constructed in a manner that will minimize the amount of sediment entering streams and city storm sewers. 
(6)  When work areas or material sources are located in or adjacent to live streams, such areas shall be separated from the stream by a dike or other barrier to keep sediment from entering a flowing stream. Care shall be taken during the construction and removal of such barriers to minimize the sediment transport into a stream. 
(7)  Should preventative measures fail to function effectively, the applicant shall act immediately to bring the erosion and/or siltation under control by whatever additional means are necessary. 
(8)  Runoff shall be diverted away from construction areas as much as possible. 
(9)  Developers, builders, or owners of property shall permanently stabilize all disturbed areas prior to final acceptance of the subdivision, project, and/or structure. Stabilization shall be accomplished through the use of perennial vegetative cover or other permanent means, such as channel lining, retaining wall, etc. 
(b)  Permanent erosion control. Permanent erosion controls are installed at or near end of the construction project when no further disturbance of the area will occur. The purpose of these controls is to permanently minimize soil loss. Methods used to achieve minimal soil loss include: restoring ground cover, building retaining walls for steep slopes, or reducing wave or water action by lining channels or shorelines with gabions, jute mats, vegetation, or similar materials. Examples of typical permanent measures are vegetation cover using perennial plants, headwalls, stilling basins, riprap, tree wells, gabions, matting along channels, retention lakes, terracing, and retaining walls. 
(c)  Temporary erosion control. Temporary erosion control methods are used to abate sediment runoff from construction sites. The application of control devices can yield significant water quality and drainage benefits at a minimal cost to the developer. The erosion control measures can be grouped as barriers, filter devices, or routing devices. 
(d)  Erosion control barriers. The erosion control methods that can be classified as barriers include: 
(1)  Straw bale sediment barrier; 
(2)  Sandbag sediment barrier; 
(3)  Check dam; and 
(4)  Sediment trap. 
These measures trap sediment and prevent high runoff velocities which cause erosion. Barrier devices are illustrated in the erosion control barriers figures 29 and 30. 
The straw bale and the sandbag sediment barriers can reduce sediment loads significantly. A sandbag barrier is more durable and should be used to withstand more intense storm events. Siltation berms and check dams are not as effective for sediment removal as the other types of barriers and operate best in storm events of limited intensity. 
(e)  Erosion control filters. Filtering methods can be used in place of barriers. Filter devices allow runoff to pass through but retain sediment by filtration. The types of filters available are: 
(1)  Filter berm; 
(2)  Filter fence; 
(3)  Filter inlet; and 
(4)  Vegetation filter strip. 
The erosion control filters figures 31 and 32 show some typical erosion control filters. 
Excellent sediment removal can be achieved using a filter berm, fence, or inlet. The filter berm is constructed of rock and therefore is capable of withstanding heavier storm events than the filter fence or filter inlet. In general, the vegetation filter strip will operate less effectively than the other devices. 
(f)  Routing devices. Only one method, the flexible downdrain, is classified strictly as a routing device. A schematic of a downdrain is shown in figure 33. The purpose of the device is to convey waters down steep slopes or across highly erodible soils. 
Some of the methods classified under erosion control barriers can be used as routing devices to protect erodible areas. Sandbag sediment barriers and straw bale sediment barriers are both suitable for this purpose. 
A routing device is an erosion prevention tool that can eliminate erosion problems on steep slopes and other critical areas. It is not designed to capture any solids already moving with the water. 
(g)  Performance. Erosion from construction sites can be a significant water quality problem. Developing areas are cleared of vegetation during construction leaving the soil exposed and susceptible to erosion. Runoff then transports eroded sediment from these areas and deposit it downstream. The accumulation of silt in streams and ponds is a form of water pollution that is unattractive and impedes drainage. 
Prevention is a key aspect of erosion control. Many of the control methods presented herein can be placed in a manner that will protect highly erodible areas such as steep slopes. The prevention of erosion requires prior planning to ascertain the placement of selected control methods. The rewards of this planning will be a significant reduction in soil loss. Not only can soil loss be prevented, but eroded soil can be recovered on the construction site and used for fill. 
The particulate material in construction site runoff is generally heavier and larger than particulates in urban runoff. These attributes facilitate the removal of the material whether the removal is by settling in a sediment trap or by filtration through a filter fence. Temporary sediment traps, filters, and routing devices can effectively control erosion for construction sites if properly applied. These methods are used in an effort to control temporary increases in sediment loads. 
A quantifiable assessment of performance is difficult because the nature of erosion control is more preventative than corrective. A rough assessment of performance can be conducted by comparing the soil loss from a site with controls to the loss from a comparable site without controls. 
(h)  Design considerations. Sediment traps and flexible drains are flow collection devices that will require hydraulic design. An estimate of the peak design flow rate and runoff volume is necessary for proper sizing of these management methods. Runoff volume and peak flow are calculated based on the design storm. Design storms for temporary erosion control structures shall be based on the ten-year return frequency. 
The design storm frequency for construction sites should consider several factors including: 
(1)  The length of time and size of construction activity; 
(2)  The severity of damage that could result to downstream waters if the design storm is exceeded; and, 
(3)  Local concerns toward environmental protection. 
(i)  Enforcement. Should proper erosion controls fail or become inoperative, the city shall notify the owner, builder, or developer of the violation in writing. The owner, builder, or developer has five days after being notified to begin correcting the problems. If no corrections are started, the city may revoke the development permit, building permit, or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-101. - Private utilities. 
(a)  General provisions. In the course of development the services of other private utility agencies may be required. In addition, gas and electrical service shall be available to each lot prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(1)  Telephone. 
(2)  Gas. 
(3)  Electric. 
(4)  Cable. 
(5)  Solid waste. 
(b)  Underground utilities. In areas where no overhead utility lines currently exist, all new utility lines of 60KV and below shall be placed underground. 
In areas where overhead utility lines exist, the utility companies may augment, upgrade, repair, replace and maintain as necessary. 
Relocations may take place based on no change in the character of service. Overhead lines may be relocated overhead and underground lines shall be relocated underground. 
The utility companies shall be responsible for developing administrative policies and cost reimbursement procedures for the installation and extension of underground facilities. These policies should permit the utility companies to recover the cost differential between the cost of extending and installing overhead and underground service, in the event the city or a developer requests such facilities from the utility companies. 
All utilities shall be constructed and installed in accordance with current standards of the city and the utility companies. No utility shall be constructed closer than two feet to any curb. 
Adequate easement shall be provided at the time of platting for all underground utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-102. - Miscellaneous construction. 
(a)  General provisions. The developer shall be responsible for the construction, or payment in lieu of construction, of all traffic control devices, railroad crossings and bridges within or adjacent to the development. 
(b)  Traffic control devices. Traffic control devices include traffic signage, street name signs, pavement markings, school beacons, traffic signals, and all related items. All traffic control devices as shown on plans and approved by the city shall be installed by the developer(s) at their sole cost, unless otherwise directed. Any developer or property owner requesting the installation of a traffic signal shall pay 100 percent cost for the design and construction. The city, upon evaluation of the needs and justified warrants of the proposed signal shall help coordinate the approval process on its own thoroughfares, as well as the TXDOT routes. Any developer whose development necessitates the modification of an existing traffic signal shall pay for 100 percent of the total cost of the design and construction of the modifications to the traffic signal, roadway approaches, signage and all related items. 
(c)  Street lighting. The standard city streetlight shall be a 100-watt high pressure sodium fixture mounted on an ornamental pole for residential areas, and a 200-watt high-pressure sodium fixture mounted on an ornamental pole for all major roadways. The developer shall submit a proposed street lighting plan as part of the construction plans for public improvements. The street lighting plan shall be approved by the Public Works Department prior to the commencement of construction. Streetlights are required to be installed at 600 foot intervals along all streets. Additionally, streetlights are required to be installed at street intersections, culs-de-sac, bridges, railroad crossings and other selected points when the city determines that a streetlight is needed for traffic safety. 
Streetlights will typically be located in easements adjacent to rights-of-way on residential and undivided streets. On divided streets, streetlights with dual mast arms and fixtures will be located within the median. 
Once the proposed street lighting plan is approved, the public works department will arrange for the installation of all street lighting with the appropriate electrical utility company. The developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of the proposed street lighting system. The city will pay the monthly charges for all required streetlights. 
Any streetlights that exceed the standards listed above must be located on private property and on a separately metered service. Installation cost, maintenance, and the monthly electrical charges will be the responsibility of the property owner. 
The above requirements do not apply to signalized intersections where the streetlights are an integral part of the traffic signal, or to streetlights located within state department of transportation rights-of-way. 
(d)  Railroad crossings. The developer shall bear 100 percent of the total cost of all proposed railroad crossing design and construction triggered by new development(s). The developer who first develops any quadrant of a street/railroad crossing shall pay 100 percent of the total cost of the construction and shall be eligible for reimbursements from the other three quadrant developer(s)/owner(s) in the amount of 25 percent of the total cost of construction, at the time of their development. The reimbursement process will remain in effect for ten years from the time of completion and acceptance of the railroad crossing improvements. 
(e)  Bridges. The developer shall bear 100 percent of the total cost of all proposed bridge design and construction triggered by new development(s). The city shall help coordinate approval processes through other federal and state agencies, as needed. 
(f)  Payment. Payments made to the city as a condition of this section shall be made prior to the approval of the final plat or engineering site plan (if a final plat is not required). 
 

Figure 6A—Control of Access Limitations for Commercial Property 
 

Figure 6B—Control of Access Limitations for Residential Property 
 

Figure 7—Clear Vision Area 
 

Figure 8—Commercial and Industrial Driveway Layout, Truck Entrances 
 

Figure 9—Residential Alley Adjacent to Major Thoroughfare 
 

Figure 10—Alley Tee Intersection NTS 
 

Figure 11—Residential Alley Intersection (90-degree) NTS 
 

Figure 12—Residential Alley Intersection (45-degree) NTS 
 

Figure 13—Front Entry Residential Driveway Over Sewer Service Line Option 1 
 

Figure 14—Front Entry Residential Driveway Over Sewer Service Line Option 2 
 

Figure 15—Front Entry Residential Driveway Over Sewer Service Line Option 3 
Figure 18—Public Water Main on Private Property - Option 1 
 
* This drawing not to scale 
On-site dead end water lines may not exceed 600' in length. Option 1 provides a public fire protection line with no water meters in a 15' restricted easement that can have "grass only" within the restricted easement. The average fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed that listed in the currently adopted edition of the International Fire Code as modified by local ordinance. 
Figure 19—Public Water Mains on Private Property - Option 2 
 
* This drawing not to scale 
On-site dead end water lines may not exceed 600' in length. Option 2 provides a public fire protection line in a 20' restricted easement that can have "grass only" within the restricted easement. Individual taps may be allowed to include D.C.V.A.'s and individual water meters. The average fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed that listed in the currently adopted edition of the International Fire Code as modified by local ordinance. 
Figure 20—Private Water Mains on Private Property - Option 3 
 
* This drawing not to scale 
On-site dead end water lines may not exceed 600' in length. Option 3 will be a private fire line protected by an approved double check detector check. The average fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed that listed in the currently adopted edition of the International Fire Code as modified by local ordinance. 
Figure 22—Public Water Mains on Private Property - Option 4 
 
* This drawing not to scale 
Option 4 will consist of an onsite looped fire protection line in a 15' restricted easement. "Grass only" will be allowed in a restricted easement. The average fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed that listed in the currently adopted edition of the International Fire Code as modified by local ordinance. Isolation valve shall be required as needed to obtain a looped system. 
Figure 23—Public Water Mains on Private Property - Option 5 
 
* This drawing not to scale 
Option 5 will include a looped water line to provide both fire protection and domestic water. The average fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed that listed in the currently adopted edition of the International Fire Code as modified by local ordinance. This option provides a 20' restricted easement that allows individual taps to include water meters and D.C.V.A.'s. The restricted easement can have grass only within boundaries. Irrigation is to be outside the easement. Isolation valves shall be required to obtain a looped system. 
Figure 24—Public Water Mains on Private Property - Option 6 
 
* This drawing not to scale 
Option 6 will provide an onsite looped fire protection. The average fire hydrant spacing shall not exceed that listed in the currently adopted edition of the International Fire Code as modified by local ordinance. An approved double detector check will monitor and protect this system. Isolation valves shall be required to obtain a looped system. 
 

Figure 26—Utilities Location Plan, Residential & Collector 
 

Figure 27—Utilities Location Plan, Collector & Minor Arterial 
 

Figure 28—Utilities Location Plan, Primary Arterial & Collector/Minor Arterial, 
 

Figure 29—Erosion Control Barriers, Straw Bale Dike 
 

Figure 30—Erosion Control Barriers, Sedimentation Basin/Check Dam 
 

Figure 31—Erosion Control Filters, Inlet/Berm 
 

Figure 32—Erosion Control Filters, Vegetative/Fence 
 

Figure 33—Routing Device 
 

Figure 34—Residential Street, 31-Foot Pavement 
 

Figure 35—Residential Street, 33-Foot Pavement 
 

Figure 36—Collector Street, 37-Foot Pavement 
 

Figure 37—Collector Street, 49-Foot Pavement 
 

Figure 38—Arterial Street, 50-Foot Pavement 
 

Figure 39—Arterial Street, 74-Foot Pavement 
 

Figure 40—Miscellaneous Residential Screening Wall Requirements 
 

Figure 41—Median Landscape Tree Spacing 
Table 1. Street Design Criteria 
Street Classification 
	Residential 	Collector (undivided) 	Principal Arterial (divided) 
No. of lanes 	2 	2 	4 	4 	6 
Width of pavement 	31' (B-B) 	37' (B-B) 	49' (B-B) 	25' (B-B) each direction 	37' (B-B) each direction 
R.O.W width 	50' 	60' 	80' 	100' 	124' 
Design speed (mph) 	25 	30 	40 	50 	50 
Maximum degree of curvature/or minimum radius for design (center line): (normal crown) 	28°/200'* 	13°/428'* 	7°/821'* 	4°/1389'* 	4°/1389'* 
Median width 	— 	— 	— 	25' 	25' 
Parkway width 	9.5' 	11.5' 	15.5' 	12.5' 	12.5' 
Median opening spacing 	— 	— 	— 	400'—600'** 	400'—600'** 
Street intersection radius (curb) 	25' 	25' 	30' 	35' 	35' 
Corner clip R.O.W dedication*** 	12' × 12' 	12' × 12' 	12' × 12' 	18' × 18' 	18' × 18' 
 
Notes: 
1.  The above design standards are considered to be minimum. Other design elements such as stopping sight distance, super-elevation, grades, etc., shall be used in design whenever appropriate as dictated by good engineering practice. 
2.  Additional right-of-way will be required at major intersections for left or right turn lanes (if required) to maintain traffic volume capacities through the intersection. 
3.  Additional right-of-way will be required for acceleration or deceleration lanes where appropriate. 
4.  Residential parking lanes shall be a minimum of 10 feet in width. 
5.  Median and parkway widths may be adjusted by the city engineer to address special conditions. 
6.  All turn lanes shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. 
*  Under special conditions, the city engineer will determine the maximum degree of curvature. (Super-elevation may be required.) 
**  Minimum median opening spacing based on traffic volumes and turning movements. Use 600' minimum where traffic signals may be needed and on all 6-lane thoroughfares. Use 1,320' minimums on all major traffic carriers as identified on the thoroughfare plan. Exact minimums will be reviewed on a case by case basis. 
***  Corner clip dimensions are based on parkway and radii dimensions shown and will be adjusted on a case by case basis when parking and radii dimensions vary from those shown above. 
Table 2. Waterline Easements 
Pipe Size 	Minimum Depth of Cover 	Maximum Depth of Cover 	Minimum Width of Easements 
8"—12" 	3.5' 	5.0' 	15' 
16"—20" 	4.0' 	6.0' 	20' 
24"—48" 	4.5' 	7.0' 	25' 
 
Note: Width(s) may be reduced by five feet when the easement is contiguous with street right-of-way. 
Table 3. Sanitary Sewer Easements 
Pipe Size 	Minimum Depth of Cover 	Maximum Depth of Cover 	Minimum Width of Easements 
8"- 12" 	5.0' 	6.0' 	15' 
15"—21" 	5.0' 	9.0' 	20' 
24"—36" 	5.0' 	12.0' 	25' 
39"—48" 	5.0' 	15.0' 	35' 
 
Notes: 
For each additional two feet of cover, add five feet to easement width. 
Widths may be reduced by a maximum five feet, when the easement is contiguous with street right(s)-of-way. 
An additional five feet may be reduced as conditions warrant and as determined by the city. 
Table 4. Drainage Easements (Enclosed System) 
Pipe Size 	Minimum Depth of Cover 	Maximum Depth of Cover 	Minimum Width of Easements 
18"—24" 	** 	5.0' 	15' 
27"—48" 	** 	7.0' 	20' 
54"—72" * 	** 	8.0' 	25' 
 
Notes: 
*  For pipes larger than 72 inches (diameter) easement width(s) will be determined by the city engineer, based on design conditions. 
**  Minimum depth is controlled by hydraulic grade line requirements. (Hydraulic grade line to be no closer than 1.5 feet from surface per design manual. 
For each additional two feet of cover, add five feet to easement width(s). 
Width(s) may be reduced by five feet when the easement is contiguous with street right(s)-of-way. 
An additional five feet may be reduced as conditions warrant and as determined by the city. 
Table 5. Waterline Requirements 
Water Line 	Minimum Depth Of Cover 	Maximum Depth Of Cover 	Minimum Domestic Tap Size 	Maximum Domestic Tap Size 	Maximum Valve Spacing 
*6" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	1" 	500' 
8" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	2" 	600' 
*10" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	3" 	600' 
12" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	6" 	600' 
*14" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	6" 	600' 
16" 	48" 	72" 	6" 	—- 	600' 
20" 	48" 	72" 	6" 	—- 	1,000' 
24" 	54" 	84" 	6" 	—- 	1,000' 
30" 	54" 	84" 	6" 	—- 	2,000' 
36" 	54" 	84" 	6" 	—- 	2,000' 
42" or larger 	54" 	84" 	6" 	—- 	2,000' 
 
Notes: 
1.  Maximum fire hydrant spacing shall be per appendix C of the currently adopted fire code. 
2.  Waterlines 8" through 12" are considered distribution mains. Waterlines 16" and larger are considered transmission mains. 
* For existing lines only. These line sizes will not be permitted for new development. 
3.  A 6-inch tap is allowed for a fire hydrant only with a lead of less than 50'. 
Table 6. Sanitary Sewer Manhole Size 
Pipe Size 	Depth of Cover (Average) 	Diameter of Manhole 	Maximum Manhole Spacing 	Construction Options 	Maximum Number of Pipe Connections Allowed in Manhole 
12" and under 	5'—6' 
7'—10' 
11'—15' 	4' 
5' 
6' 	500' 	Cast-in-place or pre-cast 
Cast-in-place or pre-cast 
Cast-in-place or pre-cast 	  
3 
  
3 
  
4 
15"—21" 	5'—9' 
10'—15' 
(See note #1 below) 	5' 
6' 	500' 	Cast-in-place or pre-cast 
Pre-cast only 	  
3 
4 
24"—36" 	5'—9' 
10'—20' 
(See note #1 below) 	5' 
6' 	800' 	Cast-in-place or pre-cast 
Pre-cast only 	3 (24"—27") 
2 (30"—36") 
3 (24"—27") 
2 (30"—36") 
39"—48" 	5'—9' 
10'—20' 
(See note #1 below) 	6' 
7' 	1,000' 	Pre-cast only 
Pre-cast only 	2 
2 
 
Notes: 
1.  If the proposed system design requires lines to be constructed to depths greater than shown above, the city engineer's office shall be consulted for additional requirements. 
2.  Where the above requirements cannot be met, a junction structure may be utilized. 
3.  Where drop connections are proposed, the city engineer's office shall be consulted for proper sizing. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3779-06-2010 , § 4, 6-7-10)  
Sec. 6-103. - Access management policy. 
(a)  Introduction and background. Access management is the combination of practices that control the character of the access allowed to a roadway by applying criteria for the location, spacing, design and operation of driveways, median openings and intersections. In general, access management has the goal of balancing the access intensity with the desired mobility function of a particular roadway. For example, access management criteria would typically allow the least intense access to arterial or high-speed facilities to minimize the interruption to traffic flow that results from frequent access points. Local streets, on the other hand, would typically have the highest allowable access intensity because the mobility function is less of a priority. Access management criteria are applied during the development review process or through an application procedure for modifications to existing access for developed property. 
Within the City of Lewisville, the application of access management criteria goes one step further in the management of access along corridors that are undergoing redevelopment. In such corridors, the development of and the granting of access to parcels was done years before access management was understood. As a result, many of the parcels have narrow frontage along roadways and driveways that are spaced much closer than many of the current recommended access management guidelines. As such, the city has developed a driveway spacing standard that takes into account these existing parcels and balances the need for mobility and access along those corridors undergoing redevelopment. 
(1)  Benefits of access management. Access management is one key to preserving the capacity of a particular facility by minimizing turbulence and speed reduction caused by driveway ingress and egress and proper use of auxiliary lanes at driveway and street intersections. On January 1, 2004, the Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT) implemented an access management policy that documented many of the benefits of access management. These benefits include improvements in free flow speed and a reduction in the potential for accidents by minimizing speed differentials between vehicles and turning vehicles. Research has shown that accident rates increase consistently with an increase in access density, while accident rates decrease with the construction of raised medians and controlled cross-access. 
Finally, access management has been shown to have an overall positive economic effect on communities and transportation corridors. Proper access management preserves the flow of traffic within and through corridors, thus supporting the transportation needs of retail and commercial development while providing improved mobility for commuters. Numerous studies have shown that access management has little or no adverse impact on individual business activity, and that corridors with completed access management projects had better retail sales when compared to surrounding communities. 
(2)  Purpose of the access management policy. This access management policy is needed in the city for four main reasons. First, an access management policy will establish a consistent means of reviewing access requests to achieve the benefits described above. Second, this access management policy will support the city thoroughfare plan by allowing different levels of access intensity for roadways based on the intended function. Third, the access management policy will establish guidelines for managing access along redevelopment corridors. And finally, TXDOT will allow municipalities to review and approve access locations and designs on TXDOT roadways within the municipality if the municipality has an approved access management policy and the proposed access is consistent with the approved policy. 
(3)  Engineering basis. The access management criteria are based upon accepted engineering principles and draw upon work included in the TXDOT Access Management Manual and Roadway Design Manual, the AASHTO Policy on the Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, and the Transportation Research Board's Access Management Manual. The criteria are based on satisfying safe stopping requirements, traffic signal operation and the ability to construct deceleration (left-turn or right-turn) lanes for driveways and intersections. 
(4)  Application of access management criteria. The city access management criteria are based on the functional classification of a facility as described in the city's thoroughfare plan and shown in table 1 below. 
Table 1 
Functional Classification 	Description 
Frontage Roads 	2 or 3-lane frontage roadways 
Principle Arterials 	
P6D 	6-lane divided roadway 
P4D 	4-lane divided roadway 
Collectors 	
C4U 	4-lane undivided roadway 
C2U 	2-lane undivided roadway 
Local Streets 	2-lane roadway 
 
(5)  Administration of policy. This policy will be administered by the city engineer or his designee. 
(6)  Deviation and dispute resolution process. Deviations to these criteria may be approved by the city engineer. Disputes will be deferred to and resolved by the city council through the variance process established in the city's general development ordinance. All access management disputes must be accompanied by a traffic impact analysis paid for by the developer per city development procedures. A deviation may be granted when both the city engineer and a development interest mutually agree that specific criteria can't be met because of physical limitations on a lot or parcel. In those cases, the deviation will come as close as physically possible to meeting the applicable criteria. A dispute occurs when the city engineer and a development interest are not able to agree that a deviation is necessary due to physical limitations of the property or is as physically close as possible to meeting the established criteria. 
(7)  Engineering study and TIAs. An engineering study or traffic impact analysis (TIA) may be required by the city engineer or initiated per the city's general development ordinance. Should an engineering study be required, it shall at a minimum include the following elements: trip generation, trip distribution, and traffic assignment at the proposed access point(s). Additionally, the engineering study may require that existing traffic volume data be collected, including turning movement volumes at intersections. The trip generation will be conducted using the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation manual unless there is acceptable data that supports the use of another trip generation source. Trip distribution will be performed with input from city staff and may require the use of the city's travel demand model. The traffic assignment will be conducted to determine the forecasted turning movements attributable to the proposed development. The existing traffic counts will be grown using an annual growth rate as agreed to by the city to the build-out year of the proposed development. Pass-by trips will be addressed using accepted practices as recommended in by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The resulting traffic volumes will be used as background traffic volumes, and the assigned forecasted turning movements will be added to the background traffic volumes resulting in the total traffic volumes. 
If a TIA is required by the city, it shall at a minimum include the above mentioned elements as well as the same type of data for intersections adjacent to the proposed site (specific study limits to be defined by the city). Additionally, the TIA may require operational analyses (including LOS and capacity analyses) for the study intersections as determined during the initial meeting between the applicant and the city. Furthermore, the applicant's TIA shall include recommendations for mitigation measures should the impact of the proposed access point(s) result in unacceptable levels of service. 
(8)  Permitting. Access to city and state controlled roadways shall require a permit. A permit will be granted only after due consideration of safety, traffic flow, and conflicts with existing and proposed facilities. In addition to the above, application for a driveway permit can be made as part of the engineering site plan request or as a separate request. Driveway permit applications shall contain sufficient information to allow the city to fully assess the access location and adequacy of the proposed driveway design. 
The authority for granting access to state facilities rests with the Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT). TXDOT may grant permitting authority to municipalities if the municipality has an approved access management policy. TXDOT will use the municipality's access management plan for considering deviations and variances involving access to TXDOT roadways. At a minimum, the city will apply to have its access management spacing criteria applied to state facilities within the city's jurisdiction. Contact the city engineering department for the current access permitting procedure for state highways within the city's jurisdiction. 
A commercial or multi-family driveway permit application for arterial and collector streets shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Drawn to the maximum scale of one inch = 40 feet. 
b.  The dimensions, locations and design of the driveway(s) being requested. 
c.  The location of any building or structure, either existing or proposed. 
d.  List uses on commercial lots (such as office, retail store, gas station, etc.). 
e.  The parking lot layout with the proposed internal circulation pattern. There shall be a minimum of 40 feet between the street and the internal traffic lane at driveway locations. 
f.  All existing or proposed driveways, gutters, storm sewers, manholes, fire hydrants, utility poles, service fixtures, etc., which may affect driveway operations. 
g.  Any existing driveways or curb cuts located on adjacent lots or lots across the street. 
h.  All of the geometric design features of the roadway itself, including the presence of a median, the number and width of travel lanes, the presence of a shoulder or a parking lane, etc. 
i.  The distances to intersecting streets. 
j.  A traffic control plan. 
(b)  Driveway location and geometry. 
(1)  General provisions. The design, configuration or location of driveways, streets, alley, and driveway intersections including auxiliary lanes shall be in accordance with control of access and access management guidelines set forth in this document as well as the construction standards of the city and the Texas Department of Transportation where applicable. Temporary asphalt streets, connections and driveways will be considered on an individual basis and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. All street construction shall be in accordance with the criteria and design standards shown on street design criteria, table 2. Approval for construction of all driveways in the City of Lewisville shall be by city or TXDOT permit only. 
Table 2. Street Design Criteria 
	Street Classification 
	Residential 	Collector (Undivided) 	Principal Arterial (Divided) 
No. of Lanes 	2 	2 	4 	4 	6 
Width of Pavement 	31 feet (B-B) 	37 feet (B-B) 	49 feet (B-B) 	25 feet (B-B) each direction 	37 feet (B-B) each direction 
R.O.W. Width 	50 feet 	60 feet 	80 feet 	100 feet 	124 feet 
Design Speed (MPH) 	25 	35 	40 	50 	50 
Maximum Degree of Curvature/or Minimum Radius for Design (Center Line): (Normal Crown) 	28°/200 feet* 	13°/428 feet* 	7°/821 feet* 	4°/1389 feet* 	4°/1389 feet* 
Median Width 	—- 	—- 	—- 	25' 	25' 
Parkway Width 	9.5 feet 	11.5 feet 	15.5 feet 	12.5 feet 	12.5 feet 
Median Opening Spacing 	—- 	—- 	—- 	400 feet - 600 feet** 	400 feet - 600 feet** 
Street Intersection Radius (Curb) 	25 feet 	30 feet 	30 feet 	35 feet 	35 feet 
Minimum Tangent Length Between Horizontal Curves 	—- 	100 feet 	100 feet 	100 feet 	100 feet 
 
Notes: 
1.  The above design standards are considered to be minimum. Other design elements such as stopping sight distance, super-elevation, grades, etc., shall be used in design whenever appropriate as dictated by good engineering practice. 
2.  Additional right-of-way will be required at major intersections for left or right turn lanes (if required) to maintain traffic volume capacities through the intersection. 
3.  Additional right-of-way will be required for acceleration or deceleration lanes where appropriate. 
4.  Residential parking lanes shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. 
5.  Median and parkway widths may be adjusted by the city engineer to address special conditions. 
6.  All turn lanes shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. 
* Under special conditions, the city engineer will determine the maximum degree of curvature. (Super-elevation may be required.) 
** Minimum median opening spacing based on traffic volumes and turning movements. Use 600-foot minimum where traffic signals may be needed and on all six-lane thoroughfares. Use 1,320-foot minimums on all major traffic carriers as identified on the thoroughfare plan. exact minimums will be reviewed on a case by case basis. 
*** Corner clip dimensions are based on parkway and radii dimensions shown and will be adjusted on a case by case basis when parking and radii dimensions vary from those shown above. 
All proposed streets and driveways shall: 
a.  Be laid out so that street right-of-way lines and curb lines intersect at 90 degrees and so that no centerline curvature is closer to the point of intersection than 35 feet on residential streets and 50 feet on collector and arterial streets. 
b.  Make use of existing median openings in the thoroughfares if available without any alterations to them except that minimum left-turn lanes shall be provided if not existing. 
Proposed streets intersecting existing streets shall be designed and constructed so as to eliminate dips and humps. This may require removal and replacement of a section of the existing street to the extent required to provide uniform pavement profiles that will accommodate emergency vehicles entering the intersection. It must be assumed that emergency vehicles will not come to a stop before entering the intersection, even though the intersection may be controlled by stop signs. 
(2)  Right-of-way corner clips. At the intersection of street right-of-way lines, a triangular area shall be dedicated for right-of-way, based on the dimensions contained in table 3. In the event the streets intersect at other than 90 degrees, as approved by the granting of a variance, the required dimensions may be increased as determined by the city. 
Table 3. Intersection Corner Clips 
	Residential 	Collector 
(Undivided) 	Principal Arterial 
(Divided) 
P4D, P6D 
		C2U 	C4U 	
Corner Clip 
R.O.W. Dedication** 	15 feet ×15 feet 	15 feet ×15 feet 	15 feet ×15 feet 	20 feet ×20 feet 
 
** Corner clip dimensions are based on parkway and radii dimensions shown and will be adjusted on a case by case basis when parking and radii dimensions vary from those shown above. 
At the intersection of a street right-of-way line and an alley right-of-way line, a 15-foot triangular area (measured along each projected right-of-way) shall be dedicated for right-of-way. In the event the street right-of-way and the alley right-of-way intersect at other than 90 degrees, as approved by a granting of a variance, the 15-foot dimension shall be increased as determined by the city engineer. 
(3)  Clear vision areas. Adequate stopping sight distance must be maintained at all intersections. All plants and other obstructions located within the required sight lines, shown in figure 1, of all intersections will be maintained at a height of 3.5 feet or shorter or a canopy height of at least eight feet such that a clear view is maintained. This allows the planting of low-growing shrubs and trees with a clear canopy high enough to permit drivers an unobstructed view of approaching automobiles. Plantings near intersections will only be allowed after staff review to ensure that adequate sight distance is being maintained. 
 
(c)  Access management standards. 
(1)  Control of access. No residential and collector (two-lane) street intersection with arterial streets shall be allowed within 350 feet of a major arterial street intersection (four-lane undivided and above) and/or within proposed right turn lane limits. 
Control of access at frontage road ramps will be done in accordance with TxDOT design standards contained in the TXDOT Roadway Design Manual. Control of access lines, at street intersections, for driveway locations, are required to be shown on all plats and engineering site plans and shall be in accordance with the guidelines shown in tables 4 and 5. All dimensions are measured to the near radius or flare point(s) of the driveways. See figure 2 for commercial and residential control of access limitations. 
Table 4. Control of Access for Commercial Driveways 
Minimum Distances from Intersection of ROW Lines for Commercial Property 
Street 
Classification 	Approaching 
Intersection 	Leaving 
Intersection 
Residential 	50 feet 	50 feet 
Collector (C2U) 	75 feet 	50 feet 
Collector (C4U) 	100 feet 	75 feet 
Principal Arterial 
(P6D, P4D) 	150 feet 	100 feet 
Select Major Traffic 
Carriers* 
and Frontage Roads** 	250 feet 	250 feet 
 
* Includes FM 1171, FM 3040, FM 407, and SH-121 Business 
** Includes IH-35E Frontage Roads and SH-121 Frontage Roads 
Table 5. Control of Access for Residential Driveways 
Minimum Distances from Intersection of ROW Lines for Residential Property 
Street 
Classification 	Approaching 
Intersection 	Leaving 
Intersection 
Residential 	20 feet 	20 feet 
Residential* 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 
* When residential lots side on a collector or arterial 
 
(2)  Access spacing. The minimum spacing (measured to the near radius points of the driveways) between driveways along: 
a.  Major traffic carriers and frontage roads shall be 230 feet. 
b.  Principal arterials (P6D, P4D) streets shall be 100 feet on the same platted lot, and 50 feet between adjacent lots. 
c.  Collector (C4U) streets shall be 75 feet on the same platted lot and 50 feet between adjacent lots. 
d.  Collector (C2U) streets shall be 50 feet. 
Under no circumstance will existing platted lots or unplatted stand-alone tracts that are physically unable to meet minimum driveway spacing standards be denied access, however will be limited to one driveway. The driveway will be located such that maximum spacing is achieved. 
Table 6 lists the access spacing criteria for the different functional classifications. Control of access requirement listed in tables 4 and 5 above, shall be used when a street intersection is involved. 
Table 6. Access Spacing Criteria on Platted Lots 
Functional Classification 	Minimum Access Spacing 
(same lot) 	Minimum Access Spacing 
(adjacent lots) 
Frontage Roads 	230 feet 	230 feet 
Major Traffic Carriers 	230 feet 	230 feet 
Principle Arterials 		
P6D 	100 feet 	50 feet 
P4D 	100 feet 	50 feet 
Collectors 		
C4U 	75 feet 	50 feet 
C2U 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 
The distances listed in the table above are to be measured from the near radius points between driveways as shown in Figure 3. 
 
In addition to meeting the driveway spacing criteria, all driveways must be located outside the limits of deceleration lanes serving the next adjacent driveway or intersection and designed such that adequate stopping sight distance is provided. Exceptions to the above criteria will be reviewed where properties would be denied access under this criteria and where access through adjacent properties via developers agreements or access easements is not feasible. Requests for deviation to these criteria must be supported by an engineering study and approved by the city engineer. 
(3)  Shared access. Mutual use access into and across adjacent property boundaries will be required for all new developments where it is deemed feasible. This practice ensures that all properties are allowed full access to the roadway system, thus minimizing undesirable traffic patterns and turning movements at nearby intersections. 
(4)  Median openings. Median openings can be particularly problematic due to the impact on traffic flow from left-turning and crossing maneuvers. For this reason, it is critical that median opening spacing be established to minimize the impacts on nearby intersections or driveways. Median openings must be spaced in accordance with table 2, street design criteria and to accommodate fully-developed left-turn bays in both directions (refer to section on auxiliary lanes). Median opening spacing must also be sufficient to avoid interfering with the advance detectors of a nearby signalized intersection. Requests for deviation must be supported by an engineering study and approved by the city engineer. When a dispute arises, requests for a variance to the median opening spacing criteria must be accompanied by a traffic impact analysis (TIA) and approved by the city engineer before consideration by the city council. TxDOT will continue to have authority over the placement and design of median openings on state facilities. 
(5)  Modified (hooded) median openings. In some situations it is beneficial to prevent exiting traffic from making a left-hand or crossing maneuver. Typical applications of hooded median openings would be where cross-access driveways of major retail centers align, adjacent to any intersection that includes an arterial or collector or in a retrofit situation where accident history indicates a safety problem at a median opening. The proposed modified median opening must be located such that fully-developed left-turn bays can be established in both directions of traffic flow. Requests for deviation to the median opening spacing criteria must be supported by an engineering study and approved by the city engineer. When a dispute arises, requests for a variance to the median opening spacing criteria must be accompanied by a traffic impact analysis (TIA) approved by the city engineer. 
(d)  Driveway design and construction standards. 
(1)  General. The contractor shall construct the proposed driveway within five days of the saw cut and removal of the existing pavement. 
(2)  Concrete strength requirements. The minimum compressive strength shall be 3500 PSI at 28 days except that in intersections and in areas where hand finishing is required the minimum compressive strength shall be 3750 PSI. The minimum cement ratio shall be 5.5 sacks per cubic yard, except in intersections and in areas where hand finishing is required the minimum cement ratio shall be six sacks per cubic yard. The use of fly ash shall not be permitted. Early yield high strength concrete having a minimum compressive strength of 4200 psi at three days shall be required for panel replacements and for construction of driveways and auxiliary lanes along existing streets. Under special circumstances, a longer cure time may be specified by the city. The minimum current ratio for early yield high strength concrete shall be eight sacks per cubic yard. 
(3)  Pavement thickness requirements. Street, alley and driveway intersection pavement shall match the pavement section of the existing street however shall not be less than six inches thick. Where right turn, left turn or deceleration lanes are added to existing streets, the pavement thickness shall be ten inches. 
(4)  Base course. All street alley and driveway intersection paving shall be placed on a base course matching that of the existing street however shall not be less than six inches and shall consist of lime or cement stabilization as recommended in the geotechnical report. In small areas where stabilization is not practical, the base course shall consist of six inches of asphalt base as directed by the city. Where the geotechnical report identifies area having high sulfates, the base course shall consist of six inches of asphalt. All base courses shall be on compacted subgrades. Added pavement thickness may be considered for substitution for base course at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(5)  Residential driveway guidelines. Residential driveway approaches for single family and two-family dwellings shall follow these guidelines: 
a.  Driveways will not be permitted onto any streets except residential streets. 
b.  All driveways must access onto alleys where alleys are constructed or will be constructed. 
c.  Width shall be 12 feet (minimum) and 24 feet (maximum), plus a five-foot flare for single-family detached; or a 1.5-foot flare for single-family attached (three units or more attached). 
d.  The radius or flare point at the street or alley of any driveway shall not extend beyond the property line(s). 
e.  All driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard driveway construction details. 
f.  Maximum slope of a residential driveway shall not exceed eight percent within the right-of-way and 14 percent beyond the right-of-way line. 
g.  Water and sewer services may not be located under a residential driveway. 
(6)  Commercial driveway guidelines. Commercial driveway approaches (including multifamily residential) shall follow these guidelines: 
a.  Required widths: 
1.  One-way: 15 feet plus 20-foot radii. 
2.  Two-way: 24 feet minimum and 30 feet maximum plus 20-foot radii. 
(A maximum width of 35 feet plus 25-foot radii will be allowed at driveways for commercial and industrial sites where significant truck traffic is projected and/or at designated truck entrances, in accordance with figure 2.) 
3.  Median style driveways: 24 feet on the entrance side and 24—48 feet on the exit side depending on the need for dedicated turning lanes. A driveway median shall be no more than 24 feet wide measured at the ROW of the intersecting street. 
 
b.  Maximum slope of a commercial driveway shall not exceed eight percent within the right-of-way and ten percent beyond the right-of-way. 
c.  All two-way driveways shall intersect streets at 90 degrees. 
d.  Adequate site distances and on-site maneuvering shall be available from every driveway. The parking lot and driveways shall be so designed to allow vehicles to exit the street in a forward manner; park, load and unload totally within the site, and shall enter onto the street in a forward manner. In no instance shall vehicles back into the street right-of-way. 
e.  All driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the city and/or Texas Department of Transportation standard driveway construction details as applicable. 
f.  Driveways on state maintained highways shall meet the standards within the city access management manual and must be approved by the city based on the finding that the driveway will not create a traffic safety hazard or jeopardize quality of traffic handling. Such factors as vehicular speed, existing traffic patterns, existing and proposed driveway and ramp locations, and existing and future street intersections, shall be considered. 
(e)  Auxillary lanes. Auxiliary lanes include right and left turn lanes at street intersections as well as right and left turn deceleration lanes at driveways. 
Left turn lanes shall be provided on all approaches to intersections where four- or six-lane streets cross (as shown on the city's current thoroughfare plan). Left turn lanes shall also be provided along all divided streets where median openings provide access to streets, alleys or driveways. 
Right turn/deceleration lanes shall be provided on all approaches to intersections of fou-r or six-lane streets, and to approaches where a two-lane collector street intersects a four- or six-lane street (as shown on the city's current thoroughfare plan). Existing single stand alone lots or tracts of less than one acre are exempt from the right turn lane requirement including ROW dedication where required at street intersections. 
Right turn/deceleration lanes shall also be provided at driveways to all commercial developments of five acres or more or any commercial development with access on a major traffic carrier. When multiple entries are proposed for a commercial development, and based on the projected traffic patterns of the site determined by an engineering study approved by the city engineer, staff may waive this requirement at one or more driveways. 
Auxiliary lanes shall at a minimum provide for 100 feet of storage plus 110 feet of taper. Longer storage lengths may be required if an engineering study or TIA performed to support a deviation or variance indicates a need for additional storage. 
Proposed driveway connections shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  All unplatted tracts of land proposed for commercial use, during the platting process, will create no lot of five acres or larger with less than 300 feet of street frontage to provide a full deceleration lane measuring 210 feet, or all access to these properties shall be by mutual access easements which provide a full deceleration lane. Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this section. In the event a developer elects to have more than one driveway, a continuous deceleration lane will be required and where no provision to add a deceleration lane exists, the driveway will be subjected to an exit only condition. 
(2)  All unplatted tracts of land proposed for commercial use along thoroughfares classified as major traffic carriers, during the platting process, will create no lot with less than 300 feet of street frontage to provide a full deceleration lane measuring 210 feet, or all access to these properties shall be by mutual access easements which provide a full deceleration lane. Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this section. In the event a developer elects to have more than one driveway, a continuous deceleration lane will be required and where no provision to add a deceleration lane exists, the driveway will be subjected to an exit only condition. 
(3)  Existing platted lots or unplatted stand-alone tracts proposed for commercial use with less than 300 feet of street frontage and at least 225 feet of street frontage, located mid-block and away from street intersections and requiring a right turn/deceleration lane will provide at minimum a modified deceleration lane measuring 170 feet (60 feet of storage and a 110-foot taper). Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this policy. In the event a developer elects to have more than one driveway, a continuous deceleration lane will be required and where no provision to add a deceleration lane exists, the driveway will be subjected to an exit only condition. 
(4)  Existing platted lots or unplatted stand-alone tracts proposed for commercial use with less than 225 feet of street frontage, no provision to acquire additional street frontage and normally requiring a right turn/deceleration lane will be exempt from the deceleration lane requirements except that a minimum turn-in radius of 40 feet will be required. Where properties are located near major street intersections, additional control of access limitations will apply as outlined in this policy. 
(5)  The street frontages, as outlined above, are defined as frontages usable for access which are free of physical barriers such as bridges, culverts, guardrails, etc. A summary of the above requirements is shown in table 7. 
(6)  The developer shall be responsible for the dedication of all rights-of-way for the construction of all auxiliary lanes to maintain the standard parkway width for the street classification. Variances to required right-of-way dedication on TXDOT maintained roadways will need to be considered by both the city and TXDOT. 
(7)  The city will be responsible for the construction of right and left turn lanes funded by the developer at intersections where the property is developed. The developer shall be responsible for all other construction of turning lanes at intersections where the property is undeveloped. 
(8)  No access will be allowed within the transition segments of a deceleration/right-turn lane. Where a driveway is proposed within a storage segment of a deceleration/right turn lane, the storage segment must be expanded to allow a minimum of 100 feet of storage for each driveway independently. 
Table 7. Auxiliary Lane Requirements Based on Lot Frontage 
Total Property Frontage 	Right Turn Treatment 
Less than 225 feet 	40-foot entering radius (no storage or taper) 
225 up to 300 feet 	60 feet storage + 110 feet taper 
300 feet or greater 	100 feet storage + 110 feet taper 
 
(f)  Major traffic carriers. In addition to the various other requirements listed above, thoroughfares classified as major traffic carriers on the city thoroughfare plan shall also meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Traffic signals. 
a.  Minimum spacing of one-quarter-mile except where approved by the city, based on an engineering study. 
b.  Preference will be given to street intersections over private development driveways. 
c.  Turn lanes and geometrics shall be designed for maximum safety and efficiency of the intersection. 
(2)  Median openings. 
a.  Full median openings shall be at minimum spacing of one-quarter-mile except where approved by the city based on an engineering study. 
b.  Modified median openings designed to restrict cross-access (This allows for left turns along the thoroughfare, but not from the cross street/driveway) may be allowed between full median openings and shall be spaced no less than 600 feet from any other median openings. 
(3)  Driveways. 
a.  A deceleration lane is required on all driveways. No access will be allowed within the storage or transition segments of a deceleration/right-turn lane. Multiple driveways, where approved, shall be served with a weaving/auxiliary lane. 
b.  The radius for entering traffic (onto the thoroughfare) shall be 40-foot minimum and the radius for traffic from the thoroughfare shall be 20-foot minimum. 
(4)  Intersections. Right-turn lanes and traffic islands at intersections shall be provided and designed to allow traffic turning right to enter the cross street after yielding. Signs and markings for traffic islands shall comply with the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Signal Devices. 
(5)  Lane closures. In instances where the proposed construction necessitates the closure of an existing travel lane, the construction plans shall include specifications for traffic control and a work sequence to minimize the effect on existing traffic. As a minimum, early strength concrete shall be specified along with a work sequence whereby lane closures are of minimal duration. Specific details will be reviewed by city staff and approval will be based on the finding that every step has been taken to accomplish the purpose of this section. Depending on conditions associated with the particular site, city staff may alter those requirements where it is determined that existing traffic will not be significantly affected. On major thoroughfares, a cash bond may be required as a guarantee by the contractor that the specifications will be complied with to the fullest. 
(Ord. No. 3732-12-2009 § 1, 12-21-09)  
Secs. 6-104—6-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 6-121. - General provisions. 
(a)  (1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish incentives for the preservation of existing and protected trees, replanting of trees lost due to development and to provide guidelines for minimum landscaping on-site as well as within the city rights-of-way. 
(2)  Removal of trees. Unless otherwise allowed by this article, no property shall be clearcut nor shall a tree be removed without first securing the necessary approvals from the city. For purposes of this article, clearcutting shall mean the removal of all trees from a tract of land. Exceptions: 
a.  Single-family or two-family dwellings. Prior city approval and mitigation shall not be required for the removal of a protected tree or clearcutting if the lot or parcel where the tree(s) is being removed is a final platted lot or parcel that is occupied by a single-family or two-family dwelling for which the city has authorized such occupancy. 
b.  Public utilities and infrastructure. Prior city approval and mitigation shall not be required for the removal of a protected tree or clearcutting in any right-of-way or easement area required or acquired by the city that has been or will be dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
c.  As required by city. Prior city approval and mitigation shall not be required for the removal of a protected tree or clearcutting if the city requests removal of the tree(s) because the city has determined such trees cause a danger or a hazardous condition due to a natural disaster or due to the tree being in violation of any clear vision area or other traffic visibility requirements in the general development ordinance. 
d.  Dead or diseased trees. If a certified arborist provides a tree survey and report to the city showing that the trees proposed to be removed are already dead, dying, or fatally diseased and such report is provided to and approved by the city prior to such removal, mitigation shall not be required. The building official, or his designee, can request any other information he deems necessary to prove the trees are dead, dying, or fatally diseased. 
(3)  Necessary approvals for removal of protected trees. Unless otherwise included in an exception listed in subsection (a)(2) above, removal of protected trees or clearcutting: (1) for development purposes, may only be done in accordance with an approved final plat with construction plans and/or engineering site plan; or (2) for any other purposes, may only be done in accordance with an approved tree survey and mitigation plan submitted in compliance with section 6-125 and approved by the building official, or his designee. The building official, or his designee, may only approve a tree survey and mitigation plan if it complies with this article and if the existing natural landscape character of the site shall be preserved to the extent reasonable and feasible. In an area of the street frontage containing a stand of recommended trees, the owner shall use his best and good faith effort to preserve such trees. 
(4)  Necessary approval for removal of unprotected trees. Generally, removal of unprotected trees shall be allowed without prior approval by the city, but not withstanding anything to the contrary, no more than ten percent of any trees greater than five caliper inches may be removed from one tract of land without prior written authorization by the building official. The building official shall approve such removal so long as a certified arborist hired by the owner shows that such trees proposed for removal are unprotected. The building official or his designee may request any other information he deems necessary to determine that the trees are unprotected. 
(b)  Only trees from the list provided in this section will be considered to meet the requirement of this chapter. For every recommended tree in healthy, thriving condition that is preserved, the developer/owner, the developer/owner shall be given credits as outlined below. Tree caliper shall be measured one foot from the base of the tree. Multi-trunk trees shall count as one tree. Multi-trunk measurements shall be considered as an aggregate total of each trunks individual diameter. Credits for trees saved in the required ten-foot landscape strip will only be applicable for trees required in the landscape strip area. Credits for trees saved in parking areas will be applicable only for trees required in the parking area. 
Size of Existing Trees from
Recommended List 	Credits 
5—9" Caliper 	2 
10—14" Caliper 	3 
15—24" Caliper 	4 
25+" Caliper 	5 
Points granted for trees of greater size will be considered on a case-by-case basis by community development staff. 
 
(c)  Where conflict exists regarding existing protected trees versus required parking spaces to be provided, the following shall apply: 
(1)  A reduction in parking spaces may be allowed on a tree-by-tree basis, up to a maximum of ten percent of the total required parking spaces for protected trees saved located in a parking area. 
(2)  Reduction in the number of parking spaces allowed for each saved protected tree location shall be determined by the requirements of that tree's survivability. 
(d)  The requirements of this section shall apply to all vacant undeveloped property and all property to be redeveloped, including additions and alterations. 
(e)  A landscape plan must be submitted as part of the engineering site plan process for all multi-family, commercial and industrial zoning districts and for nonresidential uses allowed in single-family detached and attached residential districts. A tree survey and mitigation plan shall also accompany all final plats for single-family detached and attached residential additions. 
(f)  Where the location of existing overhead utility lines conflict with the required landscaping strip, planting of trees that mature at a lesser height shall be required, i.e., Chinese pistache, Japanese black pine and aristocrat pear. Where easements containing underground utilities conflict with the required landscaping strip, required tree planting shall be outside the easement on the property owners side. 
(g)  Required landscaping must be permanently maintained in a healthy growing condition at all times. The property owner is responsible for regular weeding, mowing of grass, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning and other permanent maintenance of all plantings, as needed. 
(h)  In a residential district, no fence, structure, or planting higher than three and one half feet above the established street grades, nor any tree with foliage extending below ten feet above the established street grades, shall be maintained within the required clear vision area (figure 7). This restriction is for purposes of maintaining visibility at all times. 
(i)  Approved tree list: 
(1)  Approved tree list for required landscaping on public right-of-way: 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Size at Maturity 
Pinus nigra 	Austrian Pine 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Pinus eldarica 	Afghan Pine 	>25 ft. (40 ft.) 
Quercus macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Quercus virginiana 	Live Oak 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Quercus shumardii 
(a.k.a. texana) 	Shumard Red Oak 
(a.k.a. Texas Red Oak) 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Quercus muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Ulmus crassifolia 	Cedar Elm 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Ulmus parvifolia 	Lacebark Elm 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Pinus thunbergii 	Japanese Black Pine 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Carya illinoinensis 	Pecan 	>25 ft. (100 ft.) 
Cercis candensis 	Eastern Red Bud 	<25 ft. (20 ft.) 
Taxodium distichum 	Bald Cypress 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
 
(2)  Approved tree list for required landscaping on private property: 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Size at Maturity 
Chilopsis linearis 	Desert Willow 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Diospyrus texana 	Texas Persimmon 	<25 ft. (10—30 ft.) 
Fraxenis texensis 	Texas Ash 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Liquidambar styraciflua 	Sweetgum 	>25 ft. (70 ft.) 
Pinus nigra 	Austrian Pine 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Pinus eldarica 	Afghan Pine 	>25 ft. (40 ft.) 
Quercus macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Quercus virginiana 	Live Oak 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Quercus shumardii 
(a.k.a. texana) 	Shumard Red Oak 
(a.k.a. Texas Red Oak) 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Quercus muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Ulmus crassifolia 	Cedar Elm 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Ulmus parvifolia 	Lacebark Elm 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Pinus thunbergii 	Japanese Black Pine 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Carya illinoinensis 	Pecan 	>25 ft. (100 ft.) 
Magnolia grandiflora 	Southern Magnolia 	>25 ft. (60 ft.) 
Acer saccharum "Caddo" 	Caddo Maple 	>25 ft. (60 ft.) 
Quercus accutissima 	Sawtooth Oak 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Taxodium accendens 	Pond Cypress 	>25 ft. (70 ft.) 
Taxodium distichum 	Bald Cypress 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
 
(j)  Protected tree list. Only trees from the list provided in this section will be considered to meet the requirement of a protected tree for this chapter. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Minimum Caliper 
Fraxenis Texensis 	Texas Ash 	5" 
Juglans Nigra 	Black Walnut 	5" 
Quercus Macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 	5" 
Quercus Virginiana 	Live Oak 	5" 
Quercus Shumardii 
(a.k.a. Texana) 	Shumard Red Oak 
(a.k.a. Texas Red Oak) 	5" 
Quercus Muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 	5" 
Carya Illinoinensis 	Pecan 	5" 
Carya Texana 	Texas Hickory 	5" 
Quercus Accutissima 	Sawtooth Oak 	5" 
Quercus Stellata 	Post Oak 	5" 
Quercus Marilandica 	Black Jack Oak 	5" 
Ulmus Crassifolia 	Cedar Elm 	5" 
Ulmus Parvifolia 	Lacebark Elm 	5" 
 
(k)  Mitigation/replacement costs. 
(1)  City-authorized removal of protected trees. Protected trees, if removed, shall be replanted on a 1:1 ratio per caliper inch and shall be from the protected tree list. If protected trees are removed and not replaced, penalties for removal shall be paid according to the following chart: 
Size of Caliper Removed 	Cost of Removing Protected Trees* 
5—9" 	$500.00 
10—14" 	$1,000.00 
15—24" 	$1,500.00 
25"+ 	$2,000.00 
 
* Per tree 
a.  Payment for tree removal shall be due prior to the approval of the applicable tree survey. Funds received for tree removal shall be designated to a general beautification fund as determined by the city. 
b.  Required tree planting for interior landscaping and the ten-foot landscape strip will not count towards replanting or the cost assessed for removing protected trees. (See figures 34-37 as examples). 
(2)  Unauthorized removal of trees. 
a.  Any person who removes a tree without the required city authorization set forth in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each tree removed, and each and every day such violation shall continue until mitigation is provided as set forth in subsection 6-121(k)(2)b. 
b.  Any person who removes a tree without the required city authorization set forth in this chapter shall replace such tree on a 2:1 caliper basis or pay the applicable mitigation costs for the equivalent amount of caliper inches. Replacement trees shall be from the city's approved tree list and shall be at least six feet tall. Replacement trees shall be planted in locations as approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 4277-05-2016 , §§ I—V, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 6-122. - Single-family residential landscaping requirements. 
(a)  These standards shall apply to all detached and attached single-family residential districts. These standards may be met by saving existing trees on the site or planting new trees from the approved list. Lot size designations shall apply to the zoning classification(s) of the subdivision rather than to each individual lot. 
(b)  One shade tree (2.5" caliper minimum) shall be provided for all single-family residential lots less than 6,000 square feet. 
(c)  Two shade trees (2.5" caliper minimum) shall be provided for all single-family residential lots of 6,000 square feet to less than 9,000 square feet. 
(d)  Three shade trees (2.5" caliper minimum) shall be provided for all single-family residential lots of 9,000 square feet or more. 
(e)  All required trees must be planted prior to request for final building inspection of dwelling units. 
 

Figure 42—Scenario 1, All Trees Removed 
 

Figure 43—Scenario 2, All Trees Saved 
 

Figure 44—Scenario 3, Saved Protected Tree/Removed Unprotected Approved Tree 
 

Figure 45—Scenario 4, Remove Protected Tree/Save Unprotected Approved Tree 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-123. - Multi-family and non-residential landscaping requirements. 
(a)  These standards shall apply to all commercial, industrial and multi-family zoning districts and to all non-residential uses allowed in single-family detached and attached residential districts. These standards may be met by saving existing trees on the site or planting new trees from the approved list. 
(b)  A landscaped strip shall be provided adjacent to all public and private streets. The landscaped strip shall be a minimum of 30 feet, exclusive of street right-of-way. 
(c)  A single row of shade (three-inch caliper minimum) spaced 30 feet on-center with a second alternating row of ornamental trees spaced 30 feet on-center is required within the landscape strip with trees. All privacy and security fences must be placed on the interior side of the required landscape strip. 
(d)  Evergreen shrubs must be provided for screening within the landscape strip. The shrubs must be a minimum of two feet in height at time of planting. The screening must extend along the entire street frontage of the lot, exclusive of driveways and visibility clips. A landscape berm may be provided in lieu of required shrubs. The berm must be a minimum of 36 inches above the average grade of the street and parking lot curbs with a slope not to exceed 3:1. If a parking lot is located a minimum of 50 feet from the street right-of-way line, no shrubs or berm will be required. 
(e)  The landscape strip and associated plantings or berm may be reduced if the following standards are met based on development type and building size: 
(1)  Multi-family development may reduce the landscape strip to ten feet in width with one shade tree (three-inch caliper minimum) per every 500 square feet of landscape strip with evergreen shrubs or landscape berm provided for screening only along parking lots and vehicle maneuvering areas; provided that, it does not consist of less than 80 percent brick veneer, measured as the aggregate total of all exterior walls elevations (excluding doors and windows) of each building. 
a.  Multi-family additions. All additions must match existing exterior material ratios in order to preserve the reduced landscaping standards. 
b.  Multi-family accessory buildings. The exterior finish of accessory buildings over 200 square feet must match the existing material ratios of the primary structure in order to preserve the reduced landscaping standards. This requirement shall not apply to accessory buildings less than 200 square feet. 
(2)  Non-residential buildings on a lot that is within 200 feet or served by a driveway or mutual access easement that connects to SH 121, SH 121 Business, FM 407, FM3040/Hebron Parkway, FM 544, FM 1171, IH-35E, Valley Ridge Boulevard, MacArthur Boulevard and Denton Tap Road may reduce the landscape strip and associated plantings as follows: 
a.  Non-residential buildings of 50,000 square feet or less may reduce the landscape strip to ten feet in width with one shade tree provided per 500 square feet of landscape strip; provided that, the building does not consist of less than 80 percent brick veneer. 
b.  Non-residential buildings between 50,001—100,000 square feet may reduce the landscape strip to 15 feet in width with two shade or ornamental trees per 500 square feet of landscape strip; provided that: 
1.  A tilt wall or pre-cast construction types are used and the building does not consist of less than 50 percent brick veneer on the front elevation; 
2.  Each building elevation shall provide architectural features including reveals, articulations, chamfered edges, etc., so that areas bordered by said features do not exceed 100 square feet in size; and 
3.  A minimum of two colors must be used on each elevation. Eighty percent of each elevation must utilize natural and/or earth tone colors. In addition, each elevation may have 20 percent of another type of color if opted. 
c.  Non-residential buildings over 100,000 square feet may reduce the landscape strip to 15 feet in width with two shade or ornamental trees per 500 square feet of landscape strip; provided that: 
1.  A tilt wall or pre-cast construction types are used the building does not consist of less than ten percent brick veneer based on the street-facing elevation but applied anywhere on the building; 
2.  Each building elevation shall provide architectural features including reveals, articulations, chamfered edges, etc., so that areas bordered by said features do not exceed 100 square feet in size; and 
3.  A minimum of two colors must be used on each elevation. Eighty percent of each elevation must utilize natural and/or earth tone colors. In addition, each elevation may have 20 percent of another type of color if opted. 
(3)  Non-residential buildings other than those included in subsection 6-123(e)(2) above may reduce the landscape strip to ten feet in width with one shade tree per 500 square feet of landscape strip; provided that, the building does not consist of less than 80 percent masonry veneer. 
(f)  Interior parking areas shall be landscaped in addition to the required landscaped strip. Trees must be provided in each parking lot spaced at a ratio of one shade tree (2.5-inch caliper minimum) for each 15 parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. These trees must be spaced a maximum of 15 parking spaces apart. In the case of mini-warehouses, such parking spaces shall be determined by the number of parallel parking spaces contained in the required loading and unloading lanes. Additionally, interior parking lot landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following table. Interior landscaping for mini-warehouse parking may be planted on the interior or the perimeter of the property. 
Total Parking Area 	Interior Landscape Area 
0—24,999 square feet 	5 percent 
25,000—49,999 square feet 	8 percent 
50,000 square feet and larger 	10 percent 
 
(g)  Except for customer and employee parking, parking lot landscape requirements do not apply to storage or standing parking spaces incidental to uses, such as sales and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats, trailers or other similar uses. 
(h)  To calculate the total parking area and the subsequent percentage of required interior lot landscaping, total the square footage of parking spaces, planting islands, curbed areas and all interior driveways and aisles except those with no parking spaces located on either side. Landscaped areas located outside the parking lot may not be used to meet the interior landscaping requirement. 
(i)  The required landscaping for parking lots shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout the parking lot, although adjustments may be approved by the community development department where the shape or size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees or other natural constraints reasonably prevent such distribution. 
(j)  All landscaped areas, including the permeable areas and drip lines around trees and planting beds used for visual screening which abut any parking lot or vehicular travel area, shall be protected with curbs, parking blocks or similar barriers sufficient to protect them from vehicular intrusion. 
(k)  An automatic irrigation system is required for all landscaping. Water conservation is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; 0137-19-ORD , § 1, 8-5-19)  
Sec. 6-124. - Landscaping of dedicated streets, medians or other public rights-of-way. 
(a)  General provisions. All unpaved public medians and parkways shall be landscaped with a minimum of four inches of topsoil, sodded with Bermuda grass and irrigated with a properly designed and installed system. Refer to subsection 6-97(h) with regard to irrigation meters. One tree (minimum 2.5-inch caliper from the approved tree list for public right-of-way) shall be planted for every 750 square feet, or any portion thereof in accordance with subsections (a)(1)—(6) listed below. The location of trees shall be coordinated with the city to avoid conflict with any utilities within the medians and traffic movement. These landscape areas shall be maintained by the developer or owner until adequate coverage is attained at a maintenance level compatible with like areas in other parts of the city, unless other contractual arrangements are made between the developer and the city. The city will assume responsibility after one year. This allows the landscaping materials to go through a full cycle of season change. All water usage shall be metered and paid for by the developer. Individuals installing water meters shall pay administration fees, meter costs, meter deposits, but shall be exempt from capital recovery fees associated with meters installed on city rights-of-way. Within medians, no plantings or irrigation facilities shall be permitted within areas five feet in width or less. All such areas shall be covered with stamped concrete in accordance with city regulations. 
In the case where undeveloped land exists on both sides of a public street intended to have a median, the first to develop will carry the burden of submitting plans for landscaping and irrigating the median along with escrowing half the accepted estimated cost of implementation. The second to develop will adjust those accepted plans (if necessary), escrow half the cost of implementation according to the current construction cost, and complete the landscaping with irrigation using both escrowed amounts. In the event that the original escrow amount has fallen short of current construction cost, the city will make up the difference in cost, however if current construction cost have fallen and the original amount covers more than half of the cost, then the extra funds shall be placed in the city's account for maintaining and planting medians. 
Additional rights-of-way landscape requirements shall include: 
(1)  Trees must not be planted within 30 feet of intersections or utility poles. City staff may require a greater setback for safety based on line of sight issues. 
(2)  Trees shall be spaced in accordance with figure 41 depending on median configuration. To prevent uniform disease susceptibility and eventual uniform senescence, no single species shall make up more than 20 percent of the total trees. 
(3)  Only trees with a mature height of less than 30 feet may be planted directly under utility lines. Trees with mature heights greater than 30 feet must be planted a minimum of 15 feet from the outside edge of the last energized line. 
(4)  Ornamental tree spacing will be evaluated based on the desired effect. 
(5)  Trees must be planted a minimum of ten feet from the edge of the curb. 
(6)  Areas where median cuts are made, solid sod (Bermuda grass) will be used to repair any disturbed area. Stamped concrete will be used to cover median noses to the radius point (maximum) or as defined by the city. 
(b)  Submittal of plans. Landscape construction plans shall be submitted as part of the overall construction plans associated with a related plat or engineering site plan, whichever is applicable. The plans shall include the following: 
(1)  A scale drawing (1" = 40') clearly indicating the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials and existing utilities. Planting design of materials must be submitted to ensure adequate coverage. 
(2)  The name of the subdivision or addition, and the name and address of the developer. 
(3)  A north arrow, scale, and date of preparation. 
(4)  A clear indication of the configuration, location, type and size of all irrigation, piping, heads and controllers, including the name, address and license seal of the designer. 
(5)  Such other information reasonably deemed necessary by the community development department. 
(c)  Landscape and irrigation criteria. In areas to be maintained by the city, all landscape and irrigation materials to be used by the developer shall be designed to conserve water and be of low maintenance. All landscape and irrigation improvements shall conform to the requirements of the city governing sight distance for traffic safety and other ordinances of the city. 
A list of all plant types and irrigation plans shall be submitted as part of the engineering site plan for review and approval. The developer shall furnish, or cause to be furnished at its sole expense, all labor, equipment, accessories, and services necessary to install all landscaping materials and irrigation facilities in accordance with the plans as approved by the city. All installation will be inspected by the city. All planting, if maintained by the city, must be approved by the city. 
Irrigation facilities within medians or adjacent to curbs shall be designed and installed with low gallonage and low angle nozzles in such a way as to avoid water overflow into the street. A freeze sensor will be placed in each controller to prevent the irrigation system from activating to create unsafe spillage on roads and/or sidewalks. 
(d)  Maintenance requirement and agreement. Developer, at its sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished, all labor, materials, equipment, accessories, and services necessary to maintain all plant materials when and as they become damaged or die. The developer shall also provide a maintenance fee to the city for ten percent of the total value of the proposed improvements prior to initial acceptance of the project (prior to building permit issuance). The purpose of the maintenance fee is to ensure the proper maintenance and replacement of all landscaping and irrigation facilities beyond the one-year agreement. 
A one-year maintenance agreement shall be executed between the city and the developer to identify the developer's landscaping maintenance responsibility. The agreement shall incorporate the time period between initial acceptance of public improvements associated with the development and final acceptance of landscaping. The one-year agreement shall be executed prior to initial acceptance. Initial acceptance shall be defined, for the purposes of this section, as that time period related to completion and acceptance of all public improvement construction associated with the development. 
In commercial developments, developer, commercial property owners association, or abutting property owners may permanently maintain all landscape and irrigation materials installed in dedicated streets or other public right(s)-of-way (per agreement with the city). 
When a homeowners association or commercial property owners association, or other entity is created for the responsibility of maintaining any areas landscaped under the "median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement," association documents shall be submitted for review and approval by city staff. 
Upon installation, all landscape and irrigation materials within medians or right(s)-of-way shall become the property of the city. 
The city shall periodically inspect the areas landscaped under the "median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement," to determine that such areas are being properly maintained by the developer, or other entity. If the city finds that the developer or other entity is not properly maintaining such areas, the city shall notify the developer or other entity in writing, specifying the deficiencies. If the developer or entity does not remedy such deficiencies within 15 days following receipt of such notice, the city shall have the option of performing the necessary maintenance work itself and bill the developer or other entity for all costs for such maintenance. 
(e)  Miscellaneous median construction. If existing trees are removed, they shall be replaced on a 1:1 basis. 
(f)  Sequencing and final landscaping acceptance. Sequencing and final landscaping acceptance related to public R.O.W. landscaping is required as follows: 
(1)  Landscape construction plans shall be submitted as part of the overall construction plans associated with a related plat or engineering site plan. 
(2)  Obtain city approval of plans. 
(3)  Upon construction completion, the developer, contractor, or responsible party shall pay the ten-percent landscape maintenance fee to the city, have an executed one-year maintenance agreement approved by the P.A.L.S. department, and must obtain an initial acceptance inspection. 
(4)  The developer shall maintain all landscaping features including but not limited to all plantings (grass, trees, etc.) and irrigation systems in accordance with the executed one-year maintenance agreement. 
(5)  At the end of the one-year maintenance agreement (or other timeframes specified in a particular agreement), the P.A.L.S. department shall inspect the R.O.W. for final landscaping acceptance. 
(6)  Upon final acceptance, the city will assume maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-125. - Tree survey and mitigation requirements. 
This section shall apply to all new construction in single-family and commercial developments. 
A tree survey and mitigation plan shall be prepared by a civil engineer, arborist, landscape architect or surveyor. A tree survey and mitigation plan shall be required with single-family preliminary plats, single-family final plats with construction plans, engineering site plan submittals and with individual building permit applications for single-family residential development (new lots). Trees within rights-of-way and city easements do not have to be shown. 
Tree surveys, protection and inspection shall include the following: 
(1)  Single-family: Protected trees (both caliper size and species) outside the building area. 
(2)  Commercial: Protected trees (both caliper size and species) outside the building pad, driveways and mutual accesses. 
(3)  Established drip lines that fall within or encroach onto building areas for single-family parcels of land or building pads for commercial parcels of land, shall be considered as establishing the tree within the "exempted area." 
All protected trees shall be protected during construction by marking protected trees, fencing drip lines and inspections by the developer. All tree protection measures shall be in place and approved prior to the commencement of any on-site construction. Protection measures such as fencing shall be maintained at all times during construction. 
If determined by a registered arborist and the city that a protected tree is diseased, it shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy a third party inspection shall be conducted verifying on-site compliance with the approved plan, paid for by the developer. The results must be submitted to and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Secs. 6-126—6-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - SCREENING DEVICES 
 
Sec. 6-141. - General provisions. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to provide for visual screening between land uses of different character and to establish requirements for the installation and maintenance of screening devices to enhance the community's aesthetic qualities. 
(b)  A screening device shall be a solid brick, stone or decorative block masonry wall not less than six feet in height measured at the highest finished grade, and designed by a professional civil engineer registered in the state. Construction and location details of the required screening devices shall be shown as part of the engineering site plan for all multi-family and nonresidential uses and as part of the final plat/construction plans for all single-family residential uses. The required screening wall shall be constructed prior to any building permits being issued for single-family residential subdivisions or non-single-family developments. 
In areas where non-single-family development is proposed adjacent to established single-family residential dwellings, the screening wall shall be constructed prior to issuance of a building permit. The developer/owner will not be allowed to escrow the screening wall portion of the project costs under the performance escrow policy. 
(c)  A four-foot screening wall maintenance easement shall be provided on private property for all city maintained screening walls adjacent to a city right-of-way. The developer is responsible for obtaining any required off-site easements. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-142. - Single-family residential screening requirement. 
All single-family detached and attached residential subdivisions adjacent to thoroughfares, as identified on the city thoroughfare plan, shall be screened from the street. This includes all lots backing or siding on a thoroughfare. A screening wall is also required where an alley is parallel to and adjacent to a public street. Where single-family lots side on a thoroughfare, a combination of masonry and wrought iron design may be considered if the non-masonry material does not exceed 40 percent of the surface of the screening wall. The wrought iron sections may not extend beyond the building line as shown in the figure 40. A four-foot screening wall easement shall be provided for all city maintained screening walls. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-143. - Screening wall between single-family residential and multi-family residential zoning districts. 
There shall be constructed a structural screening wall of not less than six feet in height along any portion of multi-family residential zoning districts, (MF-1) and (MF-2), which adjoins any single-family detached and attached zoning district, mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. The construction of the screening wall is the responsibility of the multi-family property owner. However, if a single-family residential subdivision is being constructed adjacent to an existing multi-family use with no screening wall in place, the construction responsibility will shift to the single-family residential developer/owner. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-144. - Screening wall between commercial and residential uses. 
There shall be constructed a screening wall of not less than six feet in height along any portion of an office, retail or institutional (schools and churches, etc.) use and a screening wall of not less than eight feet in height along any portion of an industrial or warehouse use, which adjoins any portion of a single-family detached or attached residential, multi-family residential, mobile home park or mobile home subdivision zoning district. L.I.S.D. schools may choose to build a wrought iron fence with brick columns. Churches may choose to use an irrigated living screen or wrought iron fencing with brick columns. The construction of the screening wall is the responsibility of the commercial or industrial property owner; however, if a single-family residential, multi-family residential or a mobile home use is being constructed adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use with no screening wall in place, the construction responsibility will shift to the residential developer/owner. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-145. - Screening hedge between any office, commercial, industrial, or warehouse zoning districts and public parks. 
There shall be planted a screening hedge, composed of plants from the following recommended shrubbery list, of not less than four feet high at the time of planting, growing to not less than six feet high within one year along any portion of an office or retail use and growing to not less than eight feet high within two years along any portion of an industrial or warehouse use which adjoins any portion of a proposed or existing public park. The planting of the screening hedge is the lone responsibility of the retail, commercial, industrial, or warehouse property owner. Property owner/developer, at its sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished, all labor, materials, equipment, accessories, meters and irrigation and services necessary to maintain all plant materials when and as they become damaged or die. 
Recommended list of shrubbery plants: 
(1)  Arborvitae. 
(2)  Cherry Laurel. 
(3)  Hollies. 
(4)  Junipers. 
(5)  Oleander. 
(6)  Photinia (Chinese, Fraser). 
(7)  Pittosporum. 
(8)  Privet. 
(9)  Viburnum. 
(10)  Wax Myrtle. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-146. - Screening wall requirement for mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions. 
All mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions shall be screened by a screening wall of not less than six feet in height on all sides. The construction of the screening wall is the responsibility of the mobile home park or subdivision property owner. However, if a single-family residential subdivision is being constructed adjacent to an existing mobile home park or subdivision with no screening wall in place, the construction responsibility will shift to the single-family residential developer/owner. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-147. - Screening requirement for wrecker service storage yards and wrecked vehicles. 
All wrecker service storage yards shall be screened by a screening wall of not less than eight feet in height on all sides. Screening walls shall also be provided anywhere wrecked vehicles are kept, such as auto body shops and repair garages. This provision does not apply if wrecked vehicles are kept within a completely enclosed building. Any portion of the storage yard adjacent to or fronting a street shall be screened with an eight-foot brick, stone or decorative block masonry wall. The wall shall be placed beyond the required ten-foot landscaped strip. Other portions of the storage yard not adjacent to or fronting a street, may be fenced with an eight-foot solid, opaque fence. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-148. - Screening requirement for outside storage. 
In all zoning districts where outside storage of equipment, material, goods and supplies is allowed, all outside storage shall be screened from the view of any adjacent public street by a screening wall not less than six feet in height. Any portion of the storage yard within 25 feet of a street right-of-way shall be screened with a six-foot brick, stone or decorative block masonry wall. Materials and supplies may not be stacked higher than the height of the wall. The wall shall be placed beyond the required ten-foot landscaped strip. Other portions of the storage yard not adjacent to or fronting a street, may be fenced with a solid, opaque fence. 
A detail of the proposed opaque fence in section and elevation and/or a manufacturer's detail and specifications must be provided on the engineering site plan for a project and/or as part of the fence permit process. The fence must be constructed with a manufacturer approved fencing material. The fence must completely conceal outside storage. 
This provision does not apply to display of goods for sale incidental to a retail use, plant nursery, sales and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats or trailers. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-149. - Maintenance requirement. 
(a)  Required screening walls for multi-family, commercial and industrial uses shall be maintained in good condition by the property owner. 
(b)  Required screening walls for single-family residential subdivisions shall be maintained by the city when within the right-of-way or within a wall maintenance easement. At the time of initial development, the developer shall pay 20 percent of the total cost of initial construction, to be placed in the city's screening wall maintenance account for future repair and upkeep of the screening walls within the city.  
Secs. 6-150—6-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 6-161. - General provisions. 
In all districts there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered, off-street parking spaces. All parking and loading or unloading facilities, approaches, access driveways and standing or storage parking spaces for vehicles shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. This provision shall also apply to any use located on the property with no building or structure, i.e. public or private parking lots, vehicle sales and service centers and mobile home sales lots. Trailers are defined as vehicles. Single-family residential RV and boat storage are addressed in sections 15-134 and 15-135 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-162. - Parking requirements based on use. 
(a)  All required off-street parking shall be in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Auto repair, paint and body shops and tire shops: One parking space for each 200 square feet of shop area. Work bays will be considered in the calculation, a work bay will be counted as one parking space. 
(2)  Bowling alley: Six parking spaces for each alley. 
(3)  Business or professional office, studio, bank, medical or dental clinic: 
Gross Leasable Area 	Parking Requirements 
0—9,999 sq. ft. 	One per 200 sq. ft. 
10,000—74,999 sq. ft. 	One per 250 sq. ft. 
75,000 sq. ft. and over 	One per 300 sq. ft. 
 
(4)  Church or other place of worship: One parking space for each three seats in the main auditorium. 
(5)  Community center, library, museum, art gallery or skating rink: Ten parking spaces plus one additional space for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet. If an auditorium is included as part of the building, its floor area shall be deducted from the total and additional parking provided on the basis of one space for each four seats that it contains. 
(6)  Dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall without fixed seats: Two parking spaces for each 100 square feet of floor area used thereof. With fixed seating, one parking space for each four seats or bench seating spaces. 
(7)  Day care: One parking space for each 250 square feet of floor area plus a minimum three car off-street drive through for pick-up and delivery of children. 
(8)  Dwellings, single-family attached or detached: A minimum of one car garage plus two additional concrete spaces shall be provided. Conversion, enclosure or alterations of a garage for non-parking use shall be prohibited. 
Exception: Conversion, enclosure or alteration of a garage may be allowed, provided that an equivalent to the existing garage be constructed on the lot, which meets all applicable city codes and permit requirements, prior to any changes being made to the existing garage. 
(9)  Dwellings, multi-family: Two parking spaces for each dwelling unit; except that deed restricted senior apartments shall be calculated at 1.2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(10)  Fraternity, sorority or dormitory: One parking space for each two beds. 
(11)  Furniture or appliance store, hardware store, wholesale establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe repair or service: Two parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet. 
(12)  Golf course and driving ranges: 75 parking spaces for each nine holes plus requirements for other listed uses and one parking space per tee for driving range. 
(13)  Hospital: One space per bed, plus additional parking as required for other listed categories. 
(14)  Hotel: One parking space for each two sleeping rooms or suites plus one space for each 200 square feet of commercial floor area contained therein. 
(15)  Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, printing or plumbing shop or similar establishment: One parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
(16)  Mobile home park: One space for each mobile home plus additional spaces as required herein for accessory uses. 
(17)  Mortuary or funeral home: One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms. 
(18)  Motel: One parking space for each sleeping room or suite plus one space for each 200 square feet of commercial floor area contained therein. Offices, lobby areas, bars, conference rooms, etc. shall be considered commercial floor area. 
(19)  Motor-vehicle salesrooms and car lots: One parking space for each 500 square feet of sales floor for indoor uses, or one parking space for each 1,000 square feet of outdoor display area. See also, rules for computing number of parking spaces, this section, for mixed used parking requirements. 
(20)  Retail store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein: 
Gross Leasable Area 	Parking Requirements 
0—2,499 sq. ft. 	10 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
2,500—9,999 sq. ft. 	7.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
10,000—599,999 sq. ft. 	5.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
600,000 sq. ft. and Over 	5.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
 
(21)  Restaurant, night club, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment: One and one-half parking spaces for each 100 square feet of floor area. Restaurants with bar areas shall be calculated at one parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area, plus one parking space per ten sq. ft. of bar area. 
(22)  Rooming or boarding houses: One parking space for each two sleeping rooms. 
(23)  Sanitarium, convalescent home, home for the aged for similar institution: One parking space for each six beds. 
(24)  School, elementary: One parking space for each five seats in the auditorium or main assembly room, or one space for each classroom plus six spaces, whichever is greater. 
(25)  School, secondary and college: 
a.  High schools: One parking space for each three seats in the auditorium plus requirements for other listed categories. 
b.  College or adult education: One parking space for each 125 square feet of classroom area plus parking space for all other listed use categories, i.e. office and storage areas. 
(26)  Theater, auditorium (except school), sports arena, stadium or gymnasium: One parking space for each four seats or bench seating spaces. 
(27)  Self-storage buildings and facilities: 
a.  Non-climate controlled: Ten-foot parallel loading or unloading lanes shall be provided around all buildings. The loading or unloading lanes shall be in addition to any required fire lanes. 
b.  Climate controlled: One parking space for each 1,000 square feet of storage area. 
(28)  Storage rooms: One parking space for each 300 square feet of storage room area. 
(29)  Warehouse: 
Floor Area 	Parking Requirement 
0—24,999 sq. ft. 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
25,000 sq. ft. and over 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. 
 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3719-11-2009 , § 1, 11-16-09; Ord. No. 3860-05-2011 , § I, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 6-163. - Rules for computing number of parking spaces. 
(a)  "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to the nearest whole number. 
(b)  The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. 
(c)  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this chapter is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwellings units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this chapter is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. 
(d)  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-164. - Location of parking spaces. 
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows: 
(1)  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed 500 feet from any other non-residential building served. 
(2)  Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required [by] (1) theaters, bowling alleys, dance halls, night clubs, cafes or similar uses, and not more than [eight] 80 percent of the parking for a church or school auditorium or similar uses may be provided and used jointly by (2) similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in (1); provided, however, that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified below. 
(3)  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned and shall be filed with the site plan application. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of property used for detached single family or duplex residential use to allow a driveway or parking surface in the required front yard setback to exceed 27 feet in width on lots 60 feet wide or greater or 45 percent of the lot width for lots less than 60 feet in width. For purposes of this requirement, the lot width shall mean the width of the lot measured at the front yard setback. In no case shall the parking or driveway area cover more than 45 percent of the required front yard of the lot. Driveways shall be paved with concrete except that expansion of an existing driveway may be with concrete or a continuation of an existing nonconforming material adjacent to the side of the driveway being expanded, provided that the total parking area complies with the width requirements herein and not more than 45 percent of the required front yard shall be used for parking. A permit is required for all driveway and parking surface improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3405-01-2007, § 1, 1-22-07)  
Sec. 6-165. - Minimum dimensions for off-street parking. 
(a)  The minimum dimensions for off-street parking shall be as follows: 
(1)  Ninety-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide or less than 18 feet in length. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 24 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(2)  Sixty-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 17 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 20 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(3)  Forty-five-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 16 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 18 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(4)  Parallel parking: Each parking space shall be not less than ten feet wide nor less than 24 feet in length. Parallel parking will not be considered except when it can be situated in such a manner that persons entering and exiting vehicles will be out of the flow of traffic. 
(b)  When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of said alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement. Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts herein specified, or when off-street parking facilities are provided but not required by this chapter, said off-street parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space herein specified. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-166. - Off-street loading space. 
(a)  Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles or materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the same premises loading and parking space. 
(b)  For all industrial, warehouse and large retail (>50,000 sq. ft.) developments, one loading space for each 10,000 feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in the building. 
(c)  For all commercial and institutional uses, one loading space shall be provided for a building between 5,000 square feet to 15,000 square feet of floor area, and one additional loading space for each 15,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in excess of 15,000 square feet. A loading space is not required for retail and service uses under 5,000 square feet. 
(d)  Each required loading space shall have a minimum size as described herein. A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith, providing for the standing, loading, or unloading of trucks, and having minimum dimensions of 12 by 80 feet for industrial, warehouse and large retail uses (>50,000 sq. ft.) and 12 by 40 feet for commercial and institutional uses with a vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. 
(e)  Access and maneuvering areas shall be provided on the same building lot as the principal use for which the loading and parking is intended. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 100 feet for industrial and warehouse uses and 50 feet for commercial and institutional uses. The intended use of the building shall be considered and these requirements may be increased if in the opinion of the city the requirements stated above does not accomplish the intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-167. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Handicapped parking spaces and/or loading zones shall be provided by the building or facility owner, agent, or occupants. All other requirements shall be established by the state or federal authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-168. - Fire lanes. 
When required, all fire lanes shall conform to the current edition of the latest addition of the International Fire Code and amendments adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Secs. 6-169—6-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 6-181. - Exterior finish requirements. 
(a)  General provisions. The exterior wall surface of buildings shall comply with the standards outlined in this section. On a multi-building site, each building shall be required to meet the required coverage percentage unless otherwise stated. Brick veneer and masonry veneer shall be interpreted as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Residential. The aggregate total of all exterior walls elevations (excluding doors and windows) of all buildings erected in all "R-districts" (R-5, R-6, R-7.5, R-9, R-12 and R-18), Towne Estate (TE), Duplex (DU), Estate Townhouse (ETH) and Townhouse (TH) zoning districts shall consist of not less than 80 percent brick veneer. No single wall elevation shall consist of less than 60 percent brick veneer. 
(1)  Residential additions. All additions must match existing exterior material ratios. 
(2)  Residential accessory buildings. The exterior finish of accessory buildings over 200 square feet must match the existing material ratios of the primary structure. 
(c)  Multi-family. The aggregate total of all exterior walls elevations (excluding doors and windows) of all buildings erected in multi-family one (MF-1), multi-family two (MF-2) and multi-family three (MF-3) zoning districts shall consist of not less than 80 percent brick veneer. This requirement shall not apply to accessory buildings less than 200 square feet, which are erected in the zoning districts listed in this paragraph. 
(1)  Multi-family additions. All additions must match existing exterior material ratios. 
(2)  Multi-family accessory buildings. The exterior finish of accessory buildings over 200 square feet must match the existing material ratios of the primary structure. 
(d)  Non-residential. Non-residential buildings shall meet the coverage requirements as specified in this section. Masonry gateway standards shall take precedence over zoning district masonry standards. Allowable non-residential buildings constructed in a residentially zoned district, shall meet the coverage requirements specified for residential buildings. 
(1)  Brick veneer gateways. The aggregate total of al exterior wall elevations (excluding doors, windows and glass) of all buildings which are on a lot that is within 200 feet or served by a driveway or mutual access easement that connects to SH 121, SH 121 Business, FM 407, FM3040/Hebron Parkway, FM 544, FM 1171, IH-35E, Valley Ridge Boulevard, MacArthur Boulevard and Denton Tap Road shall consist of not less than 80 percent brick veneer or may utilize the following exceptions for tilt wall and/or pre-cast concrete construction: 
Size* 	Minimum Requirements 
0—50,000 sq. ft. 	80 percent brick veneer 
50,001—100,000 sq. ft. 	50 percent brick veneer (front only) 
Panel requirement 
Color requirement 
Require parapets 
15-foot landscape requirement with two trees/500 sq. ft. 
100,001 sq. ft. and greater 	10 percent brick veneer (based upon the front elevation and can be located anywhere on the building) 
All other features listed above 
 
* The aggregate total square footage of individual buildings will count toward the tilt-wall or pre-cast construction options listed above if they are included in the same phase/lot on an engineering site plan. 
As an addition to the chart above, the following requirements must be met when concrete tilt wall or pre-cast construction types are used in a Brick Veneer Gateway. These include: 
a.  Utilize the percent of brick veneer specified in the chart. Calculations will be considered minus the doors and windows. 
b.  Each building elevation shall provide architectural features including reveals, articulations, chamfered edges, etc. so that areas bordered by said features do not exceed 100 square feet in size. 
c.  A minimum of two colors must be used on each elevation. Eighty percent of each elevation must utilize natural and/or earth tone colors. In addition, each elevation may have 20 percent of another type of color if opted. 
d.  A 15-foot wide private landscape strip shall be provided adjacent to all public and private streets. Within the landscape strip, two trees (2.5-caliper inch minimum) shall be provided for every 500 square feet, or any portion thereof, of landscape strip. The required trees shall be planted along the strip in 500 square foot increments as to form a tree-screening barrier. 
e.  Parapets shall be provided on each elevation as to provide screening for roof mounted fixtures. Parapet height shall be designed to screen roof-mounted fixtures from a viewpoint measured at five feet above grade from street views. 
(2)  Zoning district. The aggregate total of all exterior wall elevations (excluding doors, windows and glass) of all buildings which are in the following zoning districts; MD, OD, LC, GB, GB2, WH, PK, LI, SU and PU, shall consist of not less than 80 percent masonry veneer. 
(3)  Commercial building additions. Additions equal to less than 35 percent of the area of the existing structure must match the exterior finish material ratios of the existing structure. Additions equal to or greater than 35 percent of the existing structure must be 80 percent brick veneer on gateways and 80 percent masonry veneer exterior materials elsewhere. All additions greater than 50 percent of the area of the existing structure will require the entire structure to be upgraded to 80 percent brick veneer on gateways and 80 percent masonry veneer exterior finish materials elsewhere. 
(e)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
(1)  Agricultural open (AO) standards. All buildings constructed within an agricultural zoning district (AO) shall comply with the applicable exterior standard for residential, multi-family or non-residential as specified in this section. 
(2)  Mobile home park (MHP) and mobile home subdivision (MHS) standards. The aggregate total of all exterior walls elevations (excluding doors and windows) of all buildings erected in MHP and MHS zoning districts shall consist of not less than 80 percent brick veneer. No single wall elevation shall consist of less than 60 percent brick veneer. State-certified manufactured homes, used as a residence, shall be exempt from this requirement. This requirement shall not apply to accessory buildings less than 200 square feet, which are erected in the zoning districts listed in this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03)  
Sec. 6-182. - Hotel/motel/extended-stay facilities. 
(a)  General provisions. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for all hotels, motels and extended-stay facilities constructed or modified, if such modification exceeds 50 percent of the appraised value (as set by Denton County Appraisal District) of the existing facility. 
(b)  Mandatory requirements. The following items shall be included in the design and construction or modifications of all hotels, motels and extended-stay facilities: 
(1)  Minimum guest room size. The minimum guest room or suite size shall be 325 square feet of floor space. A room size summary table shall be included on the engineering site plan for all hotel, motel and extended-stay facilities. 
(2)  Guest room access. All guest rooms or suites shall be accessible from a common interior corridor. 
(3)  On-site staffing and housekeeping. At least one staff member shall be available on-site 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Daily housekeeping service is required. 
(4)  Furnished rooms. All guest rooms must be fully furnished. Minimum furnishings include bed, dresser drawer, night stand and television. 
(5)  Number of guest rooms. A minimum of 120 guest rooms is required. 
(6)  Height. All new construction shall be a minimum of four stories in height. 
(7)  Enhanced architectural standards. Enhanced design features, as listed below in subsections (7)a and (7)b, shall be provided for all building façades. Elevations and color renderings depicting the material, design and color are required to be submitted with the engineering site plan submittal. 
a.  All elevations shall have the same architectural features and façade articulation including the following: 
1.  Variation in building form such as recesses and projections; 
2.  Vertical accents or focal points; 
3.  Change in material and texture; 
4.  Emphasis on building entry through form, detail, color or materials; 
5.  Recessed windows minimum of three inches; 
6.  Projecting window sills; 
7.  Projecting cornices, roofs. 
b.  Building form shall include a uniform level of quality on all sides of the building and incorporate similar features as the front facade. 
(8)  Miscellaneous. Two of the following items shall be included in the design and construction or modification of all hotels, motels and extended-stay facilities: 
a.  Fitness facility - Minimum 400 square feet. 
b.  Indoor/outdoor pool - Minimum 1,000 square feet. 
c.  Spa/sauna - Minimum 800 square feet. 
d.  Gift shop - Minimum 400 square feet. 
e.  Outdoor atrium/plaza with seating space - Minimum 1,000 square feet. 
(c)  Other requirements. In addition to the above-listed mandatory requirements, at least three of the following five items shall be included in the design and construction or modification of all hotels, motels and extended-stay facilities: 
(1)  Enhanced landscaping standards. Landscaping shall be increased by 30 percent from the current city standards in overall landscaping areas, tree planting, shrubs and decorative landscaping features. Enhanced hardscaping and paving shall be used in pedestrian areas, connections from parking to the front door, and in guest front drop off areas. This may include brick/concrete pavers, pave stones, stamped and stained concrete or similar materials that will enhance the aesthetic character of the project. 
(2)  Restaurant. A restaurant or a bar which provides service to the general public and hotel guests, during the evening hours. Minimum hours of operation shall be from 6:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. The bar and/or restaurant shall provide a minimum seating capacity of 50. The bar or restaurant shall not be a self-service operation. 
(3)  Meeting space. A minimum of 1,500 square feet of designated meeting or conference room space shall be provided. The meeting space may be one large room or a combination of several meeting rooms. Guest room space or lobby space shall not count as meeting space. 
(4)  Height. Increase minimum height to five or more stories. 
(5)  Enhanced building materials. Eighty percent stone or brick veneer, or a combination totaling 80 percent shall be used on all facades, and exterior insulated finishing systems (EIFS) shall not be used below nine feet from finished grade. 
(d)  Economic development incentives. Subject to approval of an economic development agreement by the city council, a project that meets all five requirements in subsection (c) above, may be eligible for an economic development incentive for reduction of development fees. 
(e)  Cooktop/oven. The construction or modification of a hotel, motel or extended-stay facility with a cooktop or oven in a guest room shall require the approval of a special use permit in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2936-05-2003, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 3718-11-2009 , § I, 11-16-09; Ord. No. 4236-12-2015 , § I, 12-21-15; 0141-19-ORD , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 6-183. - Avigation release. 
(a)  The map entitled "Aircraft Sound Exposure: Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport and Environs" dated October 14, 1971, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, is hereby approved and adopted as it relates to the enforcement of this section. 
(b)  Any party desiring to subdivide their property pursuant to and in accordance with the statutory requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq., and the subdivision rules and regulations of the city, which property is located within the area delineated as zone "B" or zone "C" on the map adopted in subsection (a) shall execute an "avigation release" which avigation release shall appear on the face of all hereinafter approved subdivision plats. No subdivision plat of property located within said zones "B" and "C" shall be approved without said avigation release being executed in the form hereinafter described in subsection (d). 
(c)  Any party desiring to construct any new residence on property which improvement requires the obtaining of a permit which property is located within the area delineated as zone "B" or zone "C" on the map adopted in subsection (a) shall execute an avigation release in the form described in subsection (d) of this section as a condition precedent to the obtaining of a building permit. This provision shall not apply to reconstruction due to disaster, or to remodeling or other improvements after a residence has been initially constructed on a property within said zones. 
(d)  The form of the avigation release required pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section is contained in exhibit "A", which exhibit is attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and available for inspection in the office of the city secretary, and incorporated herein for all purposes and is hereby approved. 
(e)  This section to the extent necessary shall be deemed an amendment to the city ordinances governing rules and rules of subdivisions and the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3011-12-2003, §§ 2—6, 12-15-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3011-12-2003, §§ 2—6, adopted Dec. 15, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as section 6-183 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 6-184. - Unified sign area. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, multiple parcels or lots shall be treated as one lot for purposes of sign regulations if a unified sign area is approved. Unless otherwise provided herein, signs within the unified sign area must comply with the sign regulations set forth in chapter 11 of the city Code. 
(b)  To apply for creation of a unified sign area, all property owners within the proposed area must jointly submit a sign coordination plan to the city requesting the creation of the unified sign area. 
(1)  The sign coordination plan shall include: 
a.  A site plan drawn to scale showing the location of existing and proposed signs in the proposed area and, if required by staff, on adjacent properties. 
b.  Elevations of all signs within the proposed area illustrating the materials of construction, colors, lighting, fonts of letters and dimensions of the signs. If the sign is to be attached to a building, the elevation shall be a composite of the sign and the building. 
c.  Elevations depicting the size of the signs in relation to the size of the buildings within the development. 
d.  Letters from all property owners within the proposed area requesting the creation of the unified sign area. 
e.  Any other information the building official, or his designee, deems necessary to illustrate the consistency and uniformity of the signs. 
(c)  The building official, or his designee, shall review the sign coordination plan and shall approve the creation of the unified sign area only if the sign coordination plan meets the following criteria: 
(1)  No parcels or lots shall already be included in another unified sign area. 
(2)  All parcels shall be contiguous, and development on said parcels must be united through common building architecture, building color, building materials, landscaping, access and parking. 
(3)  All proposed signs shall be constructed of materials and designed to complement the buildings located within the proposed area. For purposes of these regulations, EIFS shall not be an approved material. 
(4)  Except for business park entry signs, all freestanding signs in a unified sign area shall be low-profile monument signs. In addition to the other applicable regulations related to low-profile monument signs, low-profile monument signs in a unified sign area may have up to 60 square feet in area and shall have a minimum one foot masonry border around the sign. A sign constructed entirely of masonry materials shall satisfy the border requirement. 
(5)  For business park entry signs, the following shall control within a unified sign area: 
a.  Maximum area is 60 square feet plus an additional 12 square feet for each five acres that exceed 20 acres. In no circumstance, shall a business park entry sign exceed 168 square feet in area. 
b.  For signs that are a maximum of 60 square feet, the setbacks shall be three feet from any property line. For larger signs, the setback shall be ten feet from any property line. 
c.  Maximum height is ten feet measured from the finished grade to the top of the sign, but staff may allow exceptions for architectural embellishments. 
d.  Maximum number of business park entry signs shall be three per unified sign area, plus an additional sign for each five acres that exceed 20 acres. The maximum number of signs shall not exceed seven regardless of the size of acreage for the unified sign area. There are no limits related to the number of street entrances where business park entry signs may be located. 
(d)  Any proposed amendment to the approved sign coordination plan for an existing unified sign area, including changes to the placement or size of any sign appearing on the sign coordination plan, must be jointly submitted by all property owners in the area in writing to the city and approved by the building official or his designee, who shall approve the amendment if it is in compliance with the criteria outlined above. 
(e)  If a unified sign area or an amendment to an approved sign coordination plan is denied, any property owner within the proposed area may appeal the decision to the city manager's office if such appeal is made in writing within ten days. The city manager's decision shall be final. 
(f)  The building official or his designee may terminate a unified sign area if he finds that the unified sign area was obtained through fraud or deception. If all property owners currently in a unified sign area submit a written application for termination of the unified sign area, including letters from all property owners within the proposed area requesting the termination of the unified sign area, the building official or his designee shall terminate the unified sign area. 
(Ord. No. 4397-07-2017 , § 1, 7-17-17)  
Secs. 6-185—6-210. - Reserved. 
Appendix 1 
•Title block for plats and engineering site plans 
•Staff and utility company signature blocks for engineering site plans 
•Owner's certificate of dedication 
•Signature blocks for preliminary plats 
•Signature blocks for final plats 
 

Title block for plats and engineering site plans 
 

Amended Final Plat Title Block 
 

Engineering Site Plan Title Block 
 

Staff and Utility Company Signature Blocks for Engineering Site Plans 
 

Owner's Certificate of Dedication 
 

Signature Blocks for Preliminary Plats 
 

Signature Blocks for Final Plats 
 

Signature Blocks for Final Plats (cont'd) 
Appendix 2 
•Certificate of abandonment form 
•Certificate of correction form 
•Application for floodplain permit 
•Floodplain development permit 
 

Certificate of Abandonment Form 
 

Certificate of Correction Form 
 

Application for Floodplain Development Permit 
 

Floodplain Development Permit 
Appendix 3 
•Agreement for payment of construction cost 
•Agreement for performance escrow for public improvement construction 
 

Agreement for Payment in lieu of Construction 
 

Agreement for Payment in lieu of Construction (cont'd) 
 

Agreement for Performance Escrow for Public Improvement Construction 
 

Agreement for Performance Escrow for Public Improvement Construction 
Appendix 4 
•List of other development ordinances and regulations 
The following is a list of other ordinances and regulations which, although not specifically a part of this chapter, may be applicable for development projects within the city. Copies of and information about these regulations are available from the department of community development. 
Abandonment of real property 
Air quality control (state authority having jurisdiction) 
Assessment policy 
Capital recovery ordinance 
Comprehensive drainage study 
Design criteria for sewage systems (state authority having jurisdiction) 
Drainage maintenance ordinance (1331) 
Fee ordinance 
Fence ordinance 
Flood damage prevention ordinances (1330, 1345) 
International Building Code 
International Energy Code 
International Fire Code 
International Mechanical Code 
International Plumbing Code 
Lewisville Code of Ordinances 
Manual on uniform traffic control devices 
Master thoroughfare plan 
National Electric Code 
Park dedication ordinance 
Rules and regulations for public water systems (state authority having jurisdiction) 
Sign ordinance 
Standard fire hydrant specifications 
Standard specifications for public works construction (North Central Texas Council of Governments) 
Storm water management 
Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations (Public Accessibility) 
Wastewater system collection master plan 
Water and sewer regulations 
Water distribution system master plan 
Water well regulations (state authority having jurisdiction) 
Water and sanitary sewer connection ordinance (1442) 
Zoning ordinance 
Appendix 5 
•Fees 
Following is a summary of fee schedules for permits and requirements pertaining to this Code. Additional fees may be required, in the course of development, at the time of applying for other city services. This list is for reference only. Please confirm fees with city staff. Items include and are not limited to: 
Application fee for abandonments 	$150.00 
Board of adjustment (each request) 	100.00 
Development and construction variance fee 	250.00 
Driveway permit: 	
  City permits 	25.00 
  State permits 	50.00 
Engineering site plan: 	
  Less than 1 acre 	250.00 
  1 to 4.99 acres 	400.00 
  5 to 24.99 acres 	400.00 plus 30.00 per acre 
  25 acres and up 	750.00 plus $30.00 per acre 
General development ordinance book 	25.00 
Grading plan: 	
  Less than 1 acre 	125.00 
  1 to 4.99 acres 	200.00 
  5 acres and up 	200.00 plus $15.00 per acre 
Preliminary plat/final plat/replat: 	
  Single-family 	200.00 plus $5.00 per lot 
  Commercial, industrial, and multi-family 	200.00 plus $30.00 per acre 
(Checks for filing documents at Denton County, based on current schedule, must be made in the exact amount to the Denton County Clerk.) 
Public works inspection 	3.5 percent of construction costs 
State permit fees for water and sewer connections 	50.00 
Traffic control devices: 
  Per linear foot per lane line (painting) 	0.25 
  Per street intersection (signage) 	150.00 
  Per divided street intersection (signage) 	300.00 
Tree preservation: 
  Size of Caliper Removed 	Cost of Removing Protected Trees (per tree) 
5—9" 	500.00 
10—14" 	1,000.00 
15—24" 	1,500.00 
25"+ 	2,000.00 
Zoning change requests: 	
  Less than ½ acres 	150.00 
  ½ acre to 4.99 acres 	250.00 
  5 acres to 24.99 acres 	400.00 
  25 acres to 49.99 acres 	750.00 
  50 acres to 99.99 acres 	1,000.00 
  100 acres and more 	1,500.00 
  
Chapter 7 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Private emergency ambulance service, § 5-178; loudspeakers or sound trucks prohibited during certain hours, § 9-5; signs, ch. 11; sign requirements for businesses and professions, § 11-48; hotel occupancy tax, § 14-61 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Prepayment for gasoline and diesel fuel at retail fuel businesses. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means the person(s), other than the owner or manager/supervisor, employed to perform services on the premises of a retail fuel business and who have no supervisory responsibilities. 
Manager/supervisor means the person(s) granted authority or responsibility by the owner for the operations of the retail fuel business. 
Owner means the individual, group, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group or entity that owns a retail fuel business. 
Payment means payment by any legal means, including cash, credit card, debit card, check or otherwise. Presenting a form of payment to be finalized at the conclusion of the transaction shall be considered payment in full. 
(b)  Offenses. It shall be an offense for a retail fuel business owner, manager/supervisor, or employee to: 
(1)  Activate any gasoline or diesel fuel pumping device prior to receiving payment in full for the gasoline or diesel fuel; or 
(2)  Allow or permit any person to dispense gasoline or diesel fuel from a pumping device at a retail fuel business unless the person has first made payment in full. 
(c)  Defense. It shall be a defense if the owner, manager/supervisor or employee of a retail fuel business allows the dispensing of gasoline or diesel fuel for repair and/or testing of the dispensing devices used by the retail fuel business. 
(d)  Exception. It is an exception to the application of this article if a merchant enters into a civil agreement with customers, pursuant to which customers may activate a fuel pump prior to payment through the use of a card or similar device, issued by the merchant that activates the pump. Such an agreement shall include identifying information of the customer that may be used by the merchant for seeking compensation in the appropriate civil court should the customer fail to pay for fuel after activating the pump with such a card. 
(Ord. No. 3412-02-2007, § 1, 1-8-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3412-02-2007, § 1, adopted January 8, 2007, provides for an effective date of 2-17-07.  
Secs. 7-2—7-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, adopted Aug. 3, 1998, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 7-26—7-54, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1990, §§ 4-3-1—4-3-15; Ord. No. 1526-3-90, §§ 4-3-1—4-3-16, 3-19-90; Ord. No. 1822-7-93, § I, 7-12-93. 
 
Sec. 7-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; 
Charitable shall mean and include the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, health, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, cultural or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
Contributions shall mean and include the words alms, money, subscription, property or any donations under the guise of a loan or money or property. 
Department shall mean the department of community development. 
Director shall mean the director of community development. 
Peddler shall mean any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, carrying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature and offering the same for sale. This definition also includes any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this article. 
Peddling includes all activities ordinarily performed by a peddler as indicated under the definition of "peddler" in this section. 
Person means a natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization. 
Solicitor means any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been invited by the occupant thereof for the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future. This definition also includes any person who, without invitation, goes upon private property, to request contribution of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable, religious or other noncommercial purposes. 
Solicitation includes all activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as indicated under the definition of "Solicitor" in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-27. - Permit requirements and exemptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person 18 years of age or older to engage in peddling or solicitation activities within the city without first obtaining a permit issued by the department of community development; provided, however, that the following are exempted from the provisions of this section: 
(a)  Any solicitation made upon premises owned or occupied by an organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made; 
(b)  Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members of the organization at the time of such solicitation; 
(c)  Any solicitation in the form of a collection at a regular meeting, assembly or service of a charitable organization; 
(d)  Any solicitation for the relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation where the solicitor represents in each case that the entire amount collected shall be turned over to the named beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-28. - Permit for sponsoring juvenile peddlers. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted to engage in peddling except as provided in this section. 
(b)  A permit shall be obtained by a sponsoring person, company or organization for the conduct of any peddling or solicitation activities involving, in whole or in part, a sales force of one (1) or more persons under 18 years of age. 
(c)  The sponsor shall be responsible for supervising and controlling the conduct of all persons, including juveniles, peddling under the sponsor's permit. 
(d)  The sponsor shall provide to each individual in its sales force a badge or other easily readable form of identification which identifies the name of the sponsor and the name of the individual. The sponsor shall require all individuals in its sales force to wear such identification so that it is clearly visible at all times when the individuals are peddling or soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-29. - Permit application. 
Every person subject to the provisions of this article shall file with the director of community development an application in writing on a form furnished by the department, which shall provide the following information: 
(a)  Date of birth, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant's driver's license, articles of incorporation (for sponsors), or other legally recognized form of identification; 
(b)  Names, addresses, driver's license numbers or other form of legally recognized form of identification of all persons who may act as agent or employee of the applicant; 
(c)  A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted or goods to be sold; 
(d)  If employed, the name, address and telephone number of employer; or if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be; 
(e)  The length of time for which the right to peddle or solicit is desired; 
(f)  The applicant's state sales and use tax permit number, if required by law in order to conduct the proposed business, or proof of exemption if none is required; 
(g)  If a vehicle is to be used, make, model, color and license number shall be provided; 
(h)  Whether applicant, upon sale or order, shall demand, receive or accept deposit or total payment in advance of final delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-30. - Fees. 
A fee which is set out in section 2-201 shall be paid prior to the issuance of a permit for each solicitor or peddler. When any solicitor or peddler shall engage in an activity through one or more agents or employees, in addition to the fee for the applicant, a permit fee shall be paid for each agent or employee so engaged, and the fee shall entitle the agent or employee to a permit for the same term and upon the same conditions as that of the primary permit. No permit fee shall be refunded.  
Sec. 7-31. - Application review and permit issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application, the director of community development, or authorized representative, shall review the application as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with section 7-29. 
(b)  If the director, or authorized representative, shall endorse his/her approval on the application and shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue the required permit to the applicant. 
(c)  The permit shall show the name, address and driver's license number of the permittee, the class of permit issued, the kind of goods or services to be sold or delivered, the date of issuance, and the length of time that the permit will be in effect. The permit will also show the permit number. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-32. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  Upon the director of community development, or authorized representative's review of the application, the director or representative may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The location and time of solicitation or peddling would endanger the safety and welfare of the solicitors, peddlers or their customers; 
(2)  An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application; 
(3)  There is no proof as to the authority of the applicant to serve as an agent to the principal; or 
(4)  The applicant has been denied a permit under this article within the immediate past year, unless the applicant can and does show to the satisfaction of the director that the reasons for such earlier denial no longer exist. 
(b)  The director, or authorized representative's disapproval and reasons for disapproval shall be noted on the application, and the applicant shall be notified that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-33. - Permit expiration. 
All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire six months from the date of issuance, unless an earlier expiration date is noted on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-34. - Permit exhibition. 
Every person required to obtain a permit under the provisions of this article shall exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any prospective customer, department employee or police officer. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-35. - Transfer prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the permittee to use or exhibit any permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-36. - Entry upon signed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or unlicensed, while conducting the business of a solicitor or peddler, to enter upon any residential premises in the City where the owner, occupant or person legally in charge of the premises has posted, at the entry to the premises, or at the entry to the principal building on the premises, a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers", "No Solicitors", or words of similarly import. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-37. - Hours of solicitation. 
No person, while conducting the activities of a solicitor or peddler, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any private property, knock on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their residences between the hours of sunset and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98; 0228-20-ORD , § I, 7-6-20)  
Sec. 7-38. - Permit revocation. 
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked or suspended by the director of community development, after notice and hearing, for any of the following reasons; 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made by the permittee in the course of conducting solicitation or peddling activities; 
(3)  Conducting solicitation or peddling activities contrary to the provisions contained in this article. 
(4)  Conducting peddling or solicitation activities in such a manner as to create a public nuisance, constitute breach of peace or endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-39. - Notice and hearing. 
Notice of a hearing for revocation of a permit issued under this article shall be provided in writing and shall set forth specifically the grounds for the proposed revocation and the time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address shown on the permit application or at the last known address of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-40. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the action or decision of the director of community development to deny, suspend or revoke a permit applied for under the provisions of this article shall have the right to appeal such action or decision to the city manager within 15 days after the notice of the action or decision has been mailed to the person's address as shown on the permit application form, or to his last known address. 
(b)  An appeal shall be taken by filing with the director a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. 
(c)  The director shall transmit the written statement to the city manager within ten days of its receipt and the city manager shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. 
(d)  A hearing shall be set not later than 20 days from the date of receipt of the appellant's written statement. 
(e)  Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided for the mailing of notice of action or decision. 
(f)  The decision of the city manager on the appeal shall be final and binding on all parties concerned. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-41. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any peddler or solicitor who is not known by such officer to be duly permitted, to produce his permit and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-42. - Claims of exemption. 
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this article, or from the payment of a permit fee, shall cite to the director of community development the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the director proof of qualification for such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 2359-8-98, § I, 8-3-98)  
Secs. 7-43—7-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOUSE MOVING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways and property, ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 7-76. - License; bond. 
No person shall move any building over or along any street or highway within the city limits, and every such person, before engaging in such occupation, shall obtain an annual license for which license the fee is set out in section 2-201. Such license shall not be granted until the person applying therefor shall have given a bond in the sum which is set out in section 2-201 with one or more good and sufficient sureties, to be approved by the city council, conditioned, among other things, that the party will pay any and all damages which may happen to any house, building, tree, pavement, street or sidewalk, or any awning, wire, fire alarm, telegraph or other pole, or to any other thing injured by any house mover, whether such injury or damages shall be inflicted by the party or his agents, employees or workmen; and conditioned also that the party will save and indemnify and keep harmless the city against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses which may in anywise accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of such license, and will in all things strictly comply with the conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1990, § 4-5-1)  
Sec. 7-77. - Permit. 
Upon the execution of a bond and its approval by the council and the payment of the license fee, a license shall be issued to the person applying therefor as a licensed house mover, but such licensed house mover shall in each case and every instance before moving any building apply to the director of building inspections and chief of police for permission so to do, in which application the building to be moved shall be described, its location stated, the place to which it is proposed to remove the same described, and the time required for such removal stated, together with a description of the street or public or private property over which it is proposed to move the building, and thereupon, if the chief of police and director of building inspection shall grant such permission, they shall issue a permit, for which the applicant shall pay a fee in the amount set out in section 2-201. The permit shall prescribe the route to be taken and limit the time for such removal, and such house mover shall immediately notify the fire marshal and any and all companies maintaining electric wires across or along any street included in the designated route along which the house is to be moved, and the time when it is to be moved. 
(Code 1990, § 4-5-2)  
Sec. 7-78. - Duty to cut and repair wires. 
Within five hours after the notice required by section 7-77 has been received by any company maintaining electric, telephone or other type wire, it shall be the duty of such company to furnish an agent or employee, whose duty it shall be to cut and repair the wires of such company with which the house or structure being moved may come in contact, and which it may be necessary to cut in order to permit the house or structure to be moved along the street. 
(Code 1990, § 4-5-3)  
Sec. 7-79. - Failure to furnish employee to cut or repair wires. 
Whenever any corporation, or any of its agents, operating or using any line of electric wires along the designated route, has been notified of the intention to move the house, and fails to furnish an agent or employee to cut and repair the wires that may be necessary to permit the house to be moved along the designated route, so as not to delay the work of removing the house, it shall be fined not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1990, § 4-5-4)  
Sec. 7-80. - Failure of employee to repair wires. 
Whenever the agent or employee of any company using or operating wires for the conduct of electricity shall cut any wire for the purpose of allowing the house which is being moved to pass along the street, and shall fail to carefully repair such wire, or shall repair the same in such manner that it shall become unsafe for persons using the street, such agent or employee shall be fined not more than $100.00. 
(Code 1990, § 4-5-6)  
Sec. 7-81. - House movers not to cut wires. 
It shall be unlawful for any house mover or firm of house movers, at any time, to cut any wire across or along any street of the city, carrying an electric current or for the purpose of carrying an electric current. 
(Code 1990, § 4-5-5)  
Sec. 7-82. - Night moving. 
It shall be the duty of all house movers to schedule the moving of any building so that the moving will take place before the hours of darkness. Should the moving not be completed by the hour of darkness, adequate red lights shall be placed about the structure to protect the public and two night watchmen shall be put on duty. 
(Code 1990, § 4-5-7)  
Secs. 7-83—7-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOMES AND CERTAIN RECREATIONAL VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 7-106—7-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MOBILE HOME OR CAMPER TRAILER PARK 
 
Sec. 7-116. - Definitions. 
Mobile home/trailer coach shall mean any registered vehicle within the State of Texas having no foundation other than wheels and so designed and constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes, and so used, or a house trailer that is used as a permanent residence and is not capable of being moved without a state permit from the Texas Department of Transportation and does not have the ability to be self-propelled. 
Mobile home/trailer park shall mean any site, lot, field or tract of ground upon which ten or more mobile homes/trailer coaches are placed, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such park. 
Mobile home lot shall mean a unit of level, adequately drained ground of definite size, clearly indicated by corner markers, for the placing of a mobile home, trailer coach or a trailer coach and tow car. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-1; Ord. No. 1808-6-93, § I, 6-7-93)  
Sec. 7-117. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate, within the limits of the city, any mobile home or camper trailer park unless such person shall first obtain a license. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-3)  
Sec. 7-118. - Application for license. 
(a)  Applications for a mobile home or camper trailer park license shall be filed with the city secretary. Applications shall be in writing, and signed by the applicant, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The location and legal description of the park. 
(3)  A complete plan of the park showing compliance with this division. 
(4)  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed, or to be constructed within the park in accordance with all existing applicable ordinances or statutes within the city. 
(5)  Such further information as may be requested by the city to determine if the park will comply with the legal requirements. 
(b)  If the applicant and the park are in compliance with all provisions of this division and all other applicable ordinances or statutes, the city may approve the application, and in the case of proposed parks, make such approval contingent upon completion of the park according to the plans and specifications submitted with the application. The city shall issue the license. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-5)  
Sec. 7-119. - Plan requirements. 
The mobile home or camper park shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  The park shall be located on a well drained site, properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(2)  Spaces shall be provided, consisting of a minimum of 1,000 square feet for each space, which shall be at least 25 feet wide and clearly defined. Mobile homes or camper trailers shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be at least 20 feet of clearance between trailer coaches; provided, however, that in respect to trailer coaches parked end to end, clearance between mobile homes or camper trailers may be less than 20 feet but shall not be less than 15 feet from any building within the park or from any property line bounding the park. 
(3)  The park plan required by section 7-118 shall provide a legal description and map clearly setting out the following information, and where applicable comply with the subdivision regulations: 
a.  The extent and area to be used for park purposes. 
b.  Driveways at entrances and exits, roadways and walkways. 
c.  Location of sites. 
d.  Location and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including proposed toilets, washrooms, laundries, laundry drying space and utility rooms. 
e.  Method and plan of sewage disposal. 
f.  Method and plan of garbage removal. 
g.  Plan of water supply. 
h.  Plan of electric lighting. 
i.  Such further information as may be requested by the city manager. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-6)  
Sec. 7-120. - License fees. 
The license for a mobile home or camper trailer park shall be obtained from the city and the fee for such permit is set out in section 2-201. Such fee is payable by the park owner on the first day of each consecutive month. Payment is to be based on the number of occupied spaces reported by the park owner each month. Failure to pay on this basis will result in the park owner being billed by the city on the number of platted spaces with no refunds granted by the city should there be a lesser number of occupied spaces. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-4)  
Sec. 7-121. - Water supply and sanitary sewer. 
Every mobile home or camper trailer park shall have city water connections when available furnishing an ample and adequate supply of water and shall be connected with the sanitary sewer when available and adequate provision shall be made for the collection and removal of waste and garbage in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the city and state statutes. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-7)  
Sec. 7-122. - Register of occupants. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the licensee of a park licensed under this division to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home or camper trailer owners and occupants located within the park. The register shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of each occupant. 
(2)  The make, model and year of all automobiles and trailer coaches. 
(3)  License number and owner of each mobile home or camper trailer and automobile by which it is towed. 
(4)  The state issuing such license. 
(5)  The date of arrival and of departure of each mobile home or camper trailer coach. 
(b)  The park shall keep the register available for inspection at all times, by law enforcement officers, public health officials and other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information contained in the register. The register records shall not be destroyed for a period of two years following the date of registration. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-8)  
Sec. 7-123. - Revocation of license. 
The city may revoke any license to maintain and operate a mobile home or camper trailer park after the licensee is given due notice and hearing for any violation of this division. After such conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with the law and the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-9)  
Sec. 7-124. - Moving permit. 
No mobile home or camper trailer over 30 feet in length shall be moved upon the public streets of the city without first obtaining a moving permit from the office of the director of building inspection as provided in section 7-76 et seq., regarding house movers. No fee for such permit shall be charged. No such permit shall be issued unless and until all ad valorem taxes on such mobile home or camper trailer shall be paid in full, including prorated ad valorem taxes for a partial year and including all penalty, interest and attorney's fees provided for by the city charter, this Code and the state. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-10)  
Sec. 7-125. - Mobile homes outside licensed park. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain any such trailer coach, mobile home, or house trailer over 45 feet in length or that cannot be moved without a state permit from the Texas Department of Transportation in any place in the city other than a duly licensed and lawful mobile home/trailer park or an approved mobile home/trailer coach sales location. No person shall be permitted to live in any mobile home/trailer of any size that is not situated in an approved, licensed trailer park. It shall be a defense to the provisions of this section if a permit for security personnel usage has been obtained under section 17.02 of the zoning ordinance [section 17-17(b) of this Code]. 
(Code 1990, § 4-6-2; Ord. No. 1808-6-93, § II, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 1929-6-94, § I, 6-20-94)  
Secs. 7-126—7-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIAL EVENTS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, adopted March 19, 2007, amended Article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article V, §§ 7-146—7-155, 7-171—7-182, pertained to special events, and derived from Ord. No. 1666-1-92, 1-20-92 as amended. See Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-146. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "special events ordinance," may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this article." 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 1.1, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-147. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide requirements to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the location, duration, hours of operation and quality of materials and appurtenances for special events within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 1.2, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-148. - Applicability. 
As defined in section 7-149, or unless otherwise exempted in section 7-172, this article shall apply to events including, but not limited to parades, fairs, festivals, exhibits, block parties, street dances, carnivals, circuses, temporary commercial outdoor amusements, outdoor concerts, and sporting events when public or private property is to be used in excess of the intended and permitted use for the property (as defined by city codes). 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 1.3, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 1703-7-92, § I, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-149. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain phrases and words shall be construed as specified in this section. Where terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context in which they are used. 
Applicant shall mean any person who has filed a written application for a special events permit. 
Arterial streets shall mean major streets in the city's street system that serve as avenues for the circulation of traffic into, out of, or around the city and that carry a high volume of traffic, designated on the thoroughfare plan as P6D, P4D. 
Block parties shall mean one-time outdoor activities that require the temporary closing of one or more residential streets. 
Carnival shall mean a temporary amusement area featuring rides, games and sideshows. 
Chairperson shall mean the individual responsible for conducting the special event. 
Circus shall mean a public entertainment with performances by acrobats, clowns, and/or trained animals. 
City-operated event shall mean any permitted special event that is operated directly by the city using city resources and staff. Third-party sponsors might be solicited for city-operated events, but the city retains all final decision-making authority. 
City-sponsored event shall mean any permitted special event that is operated by an outside party that has executed an agreement with the city naming the city as an event sponsor. Sponsorship can come in the form of cash, in-kind equipment, or in-kind personnel support contributed by the city according to the terms of the agreement. A council-approved waiver of fees, in and of itself, shall not be deemed to constitute a city-sponsored event. 
Closure shall mean the time and equipment used to secure one street at one point from curb to curb. 
Commercial outdoor amusement shall mean an outdoor area, portable building or portable and/or motorized equipment open to or used by the public, which provides entertainment or amusement for a fee or admission charge. 
Department of community development shall mean the officer or his duly authorized representative charged with the administration and enforcement of this article. 
Exhibits shall mean temporary displays of static art, artifacts, memorabilia, merchandise or other objects intended for public viewing that extend beyond the normal use of the property or facility. 
Fair shall mean a temporary outdoor activity involving three or more vendors or exhibitions. 
Festival shall mean a one-time or recurring outdoor program of performances, attractions or competitions especially those requiring temporary street closures or other city support services. 
Parade shall mean the assembly of three or more persons or vehicles whose gathering is for the common design and purpose of traveling in procession on a public thoroughfare from one location to another. 
Sidewalk shall mean a paved path for pedestrian foot traffic. 
Special event shall mean a temporary gathering of participants using either private or public property and involving one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Parades, fairs, festivals, exhibits, block parties, street dances, carnivals, circuses, temporary commercial outdoor amusements, outdoor concerts, and sporting events when public or private property is to be used in excess of the intended and permitted use for the property (as defined by city codes). 
(2)  Closing a public street. 
(3)  Blocking or restricting use of public property. 
(4)  Temporary installation of a full sized stage, in excess of 400 square feet in size with or without overhead structural supports, band shell, portable building, portable and/or motorized equipment (except small generators less than 12,000 watts in size), grandstand or bleachers on public or private property. 
(5)  Requirement of traffic control, placement of temporary traffic control signs in public rights-of-way, or public safety support, from the city, due to large anticipated crowds of people or traffic congestion beyond the capacity of the premises or surrounding public infrastructure. 
Special events permit shall mean an official document issued by the department of community development authorizing performance of a special event. 
Street shall mean a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, boulevard, or any other designation. 
Street dances shall mean one-time outdoor activities that require the temporary closing of one or more public streets for the purpose of an interactive musical performance, but that do not include third-party vendors, exhibitions or attractions. 
Vendor shall mean a person, organization, partnership, corporation or other entity that reserves space at a permitted special event for the purpose of selling products, goods or services to event attendees. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 4.1, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 1703-7-92, § I, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 3742-02-2010 , §§ 1, 2, 2-1-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 7-150. - Preparation, conduct, etc. 
All special events shall comply with the following requirements unless specific exemptions are noted on the special events permit: 
(1)  Barricades. The traffic division of the public services department will provide, place, remove and control all required barricading for street closures. 
(2)  Notice of property owners. When required, all owners of property abutting a special event location shall be notified in writing by the applicant of any upcoming event that may by scope and nature impact such owners. 
(3)  Parking. Applicants shall submit evidence of adequate parking. Parking on property not owned by the applicant shall require a written agreement signed by the involved persons. 
(4)  Amusement rides. Amusement rides and/or attractions associated with special events shall comply with rules and regulations set forth in § 2151.101 et seq., Occupations Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. Proof of a current/valid ride safety certification inspection report is also required. 
(5)  Street closing. Special events that require street closing (such as, but not limited to, block parties, festivals, fairs and street dances) shall be limited to four hours in length. Extended closings can be approved by the city council. The proposed hours and locations of all closures shall be specified in the special event permit application. If the permit application requests street closures that are the same or less than street closures that have been approved by city council for past events, then the director of community development may issue a permit to the applicant upon conformance with all other requirements of this article. Street closings for previously unapproved streets shall require submission to and approval by the city council. Block parties associated with residential street closings shall not require city council approval. 
(6)  Tent use, fire lanes. Special events that include the use of tents, canvas material or any temporary structures shall comply with the requirements set forth in the fire and building codes as adopted by the city. When required, fire lanes shall be provided and maintained and the site shall be maintained in such manner that fire hazards are not created. 
(7)  Food service. Where food service is provided, each food vendor shall comply with the rules and regulations outlined by the Texas Department of State Health Services (Texas Food Estabishment Rules) In addition, each food vendor shall obtain necessary temporary food service permits from the Health and Code Enforcement Division of the City of Lewisville. Food vendors shall comply with insurance requirements outlined in this chapter. All food vendors are required to be inspected and approved prior to the start of sales to the public. 
(8)  Sanitary facilities. Permanent and/or portable type sanitary facilities shall be provided on the premises and evenly distributed throughout. The number required shall be one toilet for every 200 people. For single user portable toilet units clustered at a single location, at least five percent but no less than one toilet unit complying with ADA standards must be provided. Accessible units shall be identified by the International Symbol of Accessibility. 
(9)  Animal waste; proximity of animals to other uses. Waste from animals used in any event shall be removed daily by the applicant from public or private property. Animals shall not be kept closer than 300 feet to any residential use districts or commercial use districts during nonoperating hours of such event. 
(10)  City water. When required, provisions for the purchase of city water shall be made through the customer service division. 
(11)  Solid waste. Solid waste containers/dumpsters shall be required for all outdoor special events. Solid waste containers/dumpsters shall be contracted through waste management. Only waste management receptacles will be allowed per the city's solid waste franchise agreement (excludes trash cans and barrels). 
(12)  Liability insurance. 
a.  Required. An applicant for a special event permit shall furnish the city with a certificate of commercial liability insurance, with the city listed as an additional insured before such special events permit is issued. The certificate shall serve as evidence of a policy written by a company licensed in the state. The policy is to be in effect for the duration of the event, with minimum limits of liability of $500,000.00 per occurrence, $1,000,000.00 aggregate for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage, and workers' compensation limits as required by the Labor Code of the State of Texas and Employers Liability minimum limits of $100,000.00 per injury, $300,000.00 per occurrence and $100,000.00 per occupational disease. 
b.  Food, alcohol and amusement vendors participating in a city operated or sponsored event shall furnish the city with a certificate of commercial liability insurance, with the city listed as an additional insured before such special events permit is issued. The certificate shall serve as evidence of a policy written by a company licensed in the state. The policy is to be in effect for the duration of the event, with minimum limits of liability of $500,000.00 per occurrence, $1,000,000.00 aggregate for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage, and workers' compensation limits as required by the Labor Code of the State of Texas and Employers Liability minimum limits of $100,000.00 per injury, $300,000.00 per occurrence and $100,000.00 per occupational disease. 
c.  Exception. The provisions of subsection 7-150(12) shall not apply to private parties that will not be open to the general public. 
(13)  Indemnification of city. An applicant for any special events permit shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents and representatives, against all claims and liability in causes of action resulting from injury or damage to persons or property arising out of the special event. If the applicant is a governmental entity or state institution and unable by law to indemnify the city, it shall not be required to indemnify the city but shall instead sign an agreement that the applicant is responsible for the acts and negligence of its own officers, employees, agents and volunteers engaged in the special event. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 5.1, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 1703-7-92, § I, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 3742-02-2010 , § 3, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 7-151. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Safe and orderly movement of normal traffic shall not be substantially interrupted. "Substantially interrupted" shall be determined by the city. 
(b)  The event shall not impede the movement of firefighting equipment or ambulances. 
(c)  An event shall not conflict, in time and location, with any other event for which a permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 5.2, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-152. - Restrictions. 
(a)  An event shall not require the diversion of so great a number of police, ambulances or firefighting equipment that normal emergency services could be hindered. 
(b)  The concentration of people, vehicles and animals at assembly points for any event shall not unduly interfere with fire and police protection or ambulance service to areas near such assembly points. 
(c)  The city may prohibit or restrict, or require additional parking when it is deemed reasonable and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 5.3, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-153. - Events calendar. 
The department of community development will maintain a special events calendar of events that have been reviewed and approved for permit. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 1.5, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-154. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a special event or cause the same to be held in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 2.4, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Secs. 7-155—7-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 7-171. - Required. 
No special event shall be held without first obtaining a permit from the department of community development. Applications for special events will not be accepted more than 180 days prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 3.1, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 1703-7-92, § I, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 3758-04-2010 , § 1, 4-5-10)  
Sec. 7-172. - Exempt events. 
(a)  A special events permit will not be required for the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Neighborhood crime watch groups utilizing block parties as a means of building support for the program shall have a one time per year exemption. The one time per year block party would require registration with the department of community development; all other block parties would require a permit and payment of fees. 
(b)  Exemption from the permit requirement shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any special event to be held in violation of the provisions of this article or any other laws, ordinances or codes of the city. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to waive any other requirement for separate building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, health, and fire prevention-related permits when these trades are applied. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 3.2, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 1703-7-92, § I, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-173. - Application; issuance. 
(a)  Contents of application. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the department of community development for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
(1)  Identify the type of special event to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)  Give the name, address and telephone number of the person, organization or company conducting the event. 
(3)  Give the name, address and telephone number of the event chairperson or responsible party. 
(4)  Identify the proposed location, parking areas and event dates and hours. 
(5)  For parades or similar events, identify the assembly area, starting point, route, disbanding area and the approximate time to complete the event. 
(6)  Indicate the approximate number of persons and vehicles, also the number and type of any animals. 
(7)  Indicate the purpose of the special event. 
(8)  Give such other data and information as may be required to obtain compliance with this article. 
(b)  Filing, review, issuance. 
(1)  The application and other such data as may be required shall be filed with the department of community development at a minimum of ten working days prior to the proposed date of the event. The application shall be reviewed by the parks and leisure services department, department of community development, fire department, department of public services, police department and human resources department to verify compliance with this article or any other applicable laws, ordinances or codes of the city. When it has been determined the special event will conform to the requirements of this article and all other pertinent laws, ordinances and codes, and all fees have been paid, the permit will be issued to the applicant. 
(2)  If the application for permit contains information which shows that the request for particular arterial street closings is the same or less than particular arterial street closings which have been previously approved by the city council, then the director of community development may issue a permit to the applicant upon conformance with all other requirements of this article. Arterial street closings for previously unapproved streets and those wherein approval of the city council was not received shall require submission to and approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, §§ 3.3, 3.4, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-174. - Notice and verification of insurance. 
When notification of special events to property owners and proof of insurance is required by this article, verification shall be provided prior to the issuance of any special events permit. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 1.4, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-175. - Modifications to event specifications. 
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved with date, time, location or route, the city may propose an alternate date, time, location or route for special events and the permit applicant shall have two working days to accept or reject the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 1.6, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-176. - Scope. 
The issuance of a permit for a special event shall not be construed to be a permit for any violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance or code of the city or any laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 3.5, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-177. - Duration and frequency. 
No single special event permit shall be valid for a period of more than 14 consecutive days. Setup and takedown related to a special event shall not exceed three days prior to the special event and shall not exceed three days after the special event. After takedown the location of the special event shall be restored to its use and condition prior to the event. No more than two special event permits shall be issued per premise within a 12-month period. Frequency for special even permits shall be no less than 180 days apart from the completion of takedown. The requirements of this section do not apply to city sponsored or city operated events. 
(Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 3758-04-2010 , § 2, 4-5-10)  
Sec. 7-178. - Expiration. 
Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the special event authorized by such permit is not held on the permitted date. Before such special event can be recommended, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee shall be one-half the amount required for the first permit, provided the suspension has not exceeded 45 calendar days from the date of the first permit issuance. In order to renew after this expiration, the applicant shall pay a new full permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 3.6, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-179. - Denial or revocation. 
(a)  An applicant may be denied a special events permit when city staff determines from the information provided on the application that the special event will not comply with the requirements of this article, other city codes and ordinances, or the laws of the state. 
(b)  The police chief, fire chief or director of community development may revoke immediately a permit issued under the provisions of this article whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or code, or any of the provisions of this article, or the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 3.7, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-180. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees for each special events permit listed below shall be as set forth in section 2-201: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Carnival. 
(3)  Circus. 
(4)  Barricading: 
a.  First two closures. 
b.  Each additional closure. 
c.  Each additional traffic control sign. 
d.  Next-day inspection for multi-day closures. 
e.  Public services per man-hour. 
(5)  Police personnel, per man-hour. 
(6)  Fire department personnel, per man-hour. 
(7)  Fire fighting apparatus, stand-by (plus staffing), per hour. 
(8)  Emergency medical apparatus, stand-by (plus staffing), per hour. 
(9)  Parks and leisure services, per man-hour. 
(10)  Building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire prevention and health permit fees will be separate and in addition to the above-listed fees. 
(11)  Commercial outdoor amusements. 
(b)  The Lewisville Independent School District shall be exempt from all fees. 
(c)  City operated events shall be exempt from all fees. 
(d)  No waiver of fees may be granted, except by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 3.8, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 1703-7-92, § I, 7-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-181. - Inspections. 
Prior to, during and after the issuance of a special events permit, duly authorized members of the city shall perform inspections of the event premises at any time. If no hazardous conditions or violations of this Code are detected at the time of the inspection, or reinspection, the applicant shall be allowed to continue with the event. If at any time during the event a violation of this Code occurs, the applicant and/or their representative shall make correction immediately or within the time frame given by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 3.9, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. 3742-02-2010 , § 4, 2-1-10)  
Sec. 7-182. - Provision of public safety personnel. 
After review, and at the discretion of the police chief and/or the fire chief, public safety personnel may be required to be on duty at a special event in order to ensure the safety of special events participants and nonparticipating citizens. The costs incurred by the city for providing public safety personnel when required by the city or when requested by the event organizer shall be included in the calculation of fees for permit (see section 7-179), and shall be paid prior to issuance of a special events permit. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 2.2, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Sec. 7-183. - Appeals. 
The city council may hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by city staff. An applicant wishing to appeal shall submit his request in writing 15 working days prior to a regular city council meeting date in order to have his request placed on the city council meeting agenda. 
(Ord. No. 1666-1-92, § 2.3, 1-20-92; Ord. No. 3424-03-2007, § 1, 3-19-07)  
Secs. 7-184—7-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OCCASIONAL SALES 
 
Sec. 7-201. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the term "occasional sales" shall mean sales of tangible personal property at retail out of the home, garage, carport or patio. 
(Code 1990, § 4-9-1)  
Sec. 7-202. - Permit required. 
A permit shall be obtained from the city hall for such occasional sales and the cost of the permit is set out in section 2-201. 
(Code 1990, § 4-9-4)  
Sec. 7-203. - Frequency of sales. 
Occasional sales shall not exceed two in number during any 12-month period by a person who does not hold himself out as engaging, or does not habitually engage in the business of selling such personal property at retail. 
(Code 1990, § 4-9-2)  
Sec. 7-204. - Location of sale restricted. 
The tangible personal property offered at an occasional sale shall be sold only on the premises of the owner or lessee of the property where the sale is conducted and such owner or lessee shall be the legal owner of such tangible property at the time of such sale. Such sales shall be confined to the garage, patio or carport on such premises.  
Sec. 7-205. - Duration. 
The duration of an occasional sale shall not exceed three consecutive calendar days. 
(Code 1990, § 4-9-2(C))  
Sec. 7-206. - Advertisement. 
Only one sign is permitted, not to exceed two square feet, upon the property where the sale is taking place. Any other signs at any location remote from the sale site are illegal. 
(Code 1990, § 4-9-3)  
Sec. 7-207. - Restriction on merchandise. 
No new merchandise (i.e., merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of resale) shall be sold at occasional sales. 
(Code 1990, § 4-9-2(B))  
Secs. 7-208—7-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, adopted Apr. 18, 2011, deleted the former Art. VII, Div. 1, §§ 7-226—7-245, Div. 2, §§ 7-246—7-254, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to food service establishments and derived from the Code of 1990, §§ 7-4-1—7-4-16; Ord. No. 2204-3-97, § I, 3-17-97; Ord. No. 2778-02-2002, § I, 2-18-02; Ord. No. 2923-04-2003, § I, 4-7-03. 
State Law reference— Texas Food Establishment Rules, 25 TAC §§ 229.161—229.171, 229.173—229.175. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-226. - Rules, code adopted. 
The Texas Food Establishments Rules, Title 25, Part 1, Chapter 228 of the Texas Administrative Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, are herein adopted, together with the additions, deletions and amendments hereinafter contained, as the minimum standards for retail and food service operations within the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, that in such rules the words "regulatory authority" shall be understood to refer to the "City of Lewisville" and the words "regulatory administrator" shall be understood to refer to the "City of Lewisville Health Manager." A copy of the Texas Food Establishment Rules hereby adopted shall be on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 4370-04-2017 , § 1, 4-17-17)  
Sec. 7-227. - Amendments to the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
The following are revisions and additions to the Texas Food Establishment Rules (25 Texas Administrative Code Chapter 229, Subchapter K) adopted in this article: 
Section 229.162 Definitions: (40) Food establishment - 
(B) Food establishment includes: (add the following two subsections) 
(iii) an establishment that offers only prepackaged foods that are not potentially hazardous; 
(vi) a produce stand that offers cut and uncut fresh fruits and vegetables; 
(C) Food establishment does not include: 
Delete subsections (i) and (ii) 
Section 229.163(b)(2): being a certified food protection manager who has shown proficiency of required information through passing an examination that is part of an accredited Food Protection Management Program approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services (DSHS). 
Section 229.163(c): Duties, person in charge. The person in charge shall ensure that: 
(13) a sign is prominently displayed in each restroom lavatory used by food service employees that states as follows: Employees must thoroughly wash hands before returning to work after using the restroom; 
(14) during operational hours, at least one person in charge who is responsible for supervising food preparation and service, has a valid Food Protection Management Training Certificate issued by the Texas DSHS; 
(15) Food Protection Manager Certificates are available for immediate inspection upon request by the regulatory authority; 
(16) a certified food protection manager is working during operational hours; provided, however, that if there are several Food Establishments located in the same building and under the same ownership and management, only one certified food protection manager employed in a supervisory capacity need be present; and 
(17) a new Food Establishment, or an existing Food Establishment that has changed ownership, or a Food Establishment whose certified food protection manager has resigned complies with the requirements of this article within 30 working days. 
Section 229.163(c): Exemptions. The following establishments are exempt from the requirements of section 229.163(c): Temporary Food Establishments; Food Establishments that sell or distribute only pre-packaged foods or uncut produce; and Food Establishments that serve only fountain drinks, coffee, alcoholic beverages, popcorn and/or snow cones. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-228. - Definitions. 
NSF-approved means that an independent, third-party organization (namely the National Sanitation Foundation) has determined that the equipment or product complies with the relevant standards and/or protocol set by said organization. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-229. - Violations; injunctions. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, it is unlawful for any person to violate a provision of this article. Any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food establishment that does not comply with the requirements of this article shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may also seek to enjoin violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 7-230. - Inspections. 
An inspection of a food establishment shall be performed at a frequency as determined by the regulatory authority, and such frequency shall be in compliance with the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
(a)  Additional inspections of the food establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this article, or whenever the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or violation of this article. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building or premises. 
(1)  If such building or premises is occupied, proper credentials shall be presented prior to requesting entry. 
(2)  If such building or premises is unoccupied, reasonable efforts shall be made to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises so that entry can be requested. 
(3)  If such entry is refused or if the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises cannot be located, the regulatory authority shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(c)  If the place of business becomes abandoned, the regulatory authority may order the cleaning of a building, establishment, or ground from filth, carrion or other impure or wholesome matter. 
(d)  The regulatory authority will comply with state law regarding notice to a property owner of work or improvements required on the building or premises. If, after the required notice, the property owner fails to correct the violation(s), the city, in accordance with state law, may do the work or make the improvements required and charge the expenses to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-231. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
(a)  Food may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority as often as necessary for enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge specifying with particularity the reasons therefore, place a notice of detention on any food which it believes is in violation of this article. 
(1)  The regulatory authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the notice of detention. 
(2)  No food subject to a notice of detention shall be used, served or removed from the establishment. 
(3)  The regulatory authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the notice of detention, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. 
(c)  The notice of detention shall state that a request for an appeal may be filed within ten working days and that if no appeal is requested, the food shall be destroyed. Based on evidence produced at the appeal hearing, the notice of detention may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-232. - Maintenance of the facilities. 
(a)  Floor maintenance. Floors shall be clean and maintained in good repair. 
(b)  Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings, including doors, windows, skylights and similar closures, shall be clean and maintained in good repair. 
(c)  Attachments. The light fixtures, vent covers, wall-mounted fans, decorative materials and similar equipment attached to the walls and ceilings shall be easily cleanable and shall be maintained in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-233. - Insect and rodent control. 
(a)  All food establishments subject to this article must use effective measures intended to prevent the presence of rodents, flies, cockroaches and other insects on the premises. Whether the measures utilized are effective will be determined by the regulatory authority. The premises shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of insects or rodents. 
(b)  Insect control devices that are used to electrocute or stun flying insects shall be designed to retain the insect within the device and be installed so that the devices are not located over food preparation areas. 
(c)  Preventive application for insect and rodent control shall be performed by a certified pest control operator. 
(d)  Openings to the outside shall be effectively protected against the entrance of rodents and insects by tight-fitting, self-closing doors, closed windows, screening, controlled air currents or other means. The screen doors shall be self-closing. Screens for windows, doors, skylights, transoms, intake and exhaust air ducts and other openings to the outside shall be tight fitting and free of breaks. Screening material shall not be less than 16 mesh to one inch. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-234. - Dogs and outdoor dining. 
Dogs may be allowed to be present in the outdoor patio area of a food establishment if the following provisions are met: 
(a)  A separate entrance must be provided from the outside of the food establishment to the outdoor patio so that a dog will have direct access to the patio without entering the interior of the food establishment or any playground area of the food establishment. 
(b)  A sign must be posted at the front entrance of the food establishment so that it is easily visible to the public. The sign must state: "DOG FRIENDLY RESTAURANT - DOG ACCESS ONLY THROUGH OUTDOOR PATIO." 
(c)  All outer doors to patio from the interior of the food establishment must be protected with self-closing hardware. 
(d)  No food preparation, including mixing drinks or serving ice, may be performed in the outdoor patio area. 
(e)  The outdoor patio must be cleaned upon the departure of a dog with animal friendly chemicals that sanitize the area, and the waste must be disposed of outside of the food establishment in an appropriate waste receptacle. Equipment used to clean the outdoor patio must be kept outside of the food establishment. 
(f)  While on duty, wait staff or other food handlers at the food establishment may not pet or have contact with any dog. 
(g)  A dog must be kept on a leash and remain in the control of the customer while in the outdoor patio area. The dog must be wearing a collar or harness with a current rabies tag attached to it. 
(h)  A dog is not allowed on a seat, table, countertop, or similar surface in the outdoor patio area. 
(i)  An owner, officer, manager, or other person in charge of a food establishment commits an offense if he, either personally or through an employee or agent, violates, allows a violation of, or fails to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 7-235. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  No person or firm shall operate a food establishment or other type of food service in the city without a valid permit issued by the regulatory authority. 
(2)  In cases where a person or firm operates, in a single building or at the same address, more than one establishment, regardless of the type of food service, a separate permit and payment of a separate fee shall be required for each establishment. 
(b)  Authority to issue. The regulatory authority is hereby authorized to issue a permit to any person or firm making an application for a permit for a food establishment or other type of food service in the city if that establishment complies with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Application. 
(1)  Application for a permit as required by this article shall be made in writing to the regulatory authority using forms furnished by the regulatory authority. 
(2)  A food establishment permit is required for each establishment that changes ownership or location. Whenever a new permit is required, the regulatory authority shall inspect the establishment prior to beginning operation to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Failure to provide all required information or falsifying information on the application may result in denial or revocation of the permit. 
(d)  Posting. 
(1)  Every food establishment permit issued pursuant to this article shall, at all times, be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(2)  All other permits issued pursuant to this article shall, at all times, be available on the premises for inspection by the regulatory authority. 
(3)  If the premises is a mobile unit, the permit must be displayed on the driver's side and the rear of the mobile unit. 
(4)  The permit on a pushcart must be displayed on both sides of the unit. 
(e)  Duration. 
(1)  A food establishment permit or any other food service permit not otherwise specifically addressed in this article shall remain in full force and effect for 12 months from the date of issuance unless the permit is suspended or revoked sooner. If a permit lapses for non-payment of the annual permit fee, the permit holder may be issued a citation for non-compliance. 
(2)  A temporary food establishment permit shall remain in full force and effect for a period of time not to exceed ten consecutive days from date of issuance unless suspended or revoked sooner; provided however, that a temporary food establishment permit issued in conjunction with a special event permit shall remain in full force and effect for a period of time not to exceed 14 consecutive days from date of issuance unless suspended or revoked sooner. 
(3)  A food handler's permit shall remain in full force and effect 24 months from the date of issuance unless suspended or revoked sooner. 
(4)  A mobile food establishment permit shall remain in full force and effect until the last day of the year (December 31st) in which it was issued unless suspended or revoked sooner. 
(5)  A roadside vendor permit shall remain in full force and effect for the 12-hour period printed on the permit itself, unless suspended or revoked sooner. 
(f)  Non-transferable. 
(1)  Every permit issued pursuant to this article shall be non-transferable and non-refundable. This includes a mobile food establishment permit which may not be transferred from one mobile unit to another mobile unit. 
(2)  A food establishment or temporary food establishment permit shall allow the operation of the establishment only at the location and for the type of food service for which the permit was granted. 
(g)  Suspension. 
(1)  The regulatory authority may, without prior notice or hearing, suspend any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
a.  When a permit is suspended, food service operation shall immediately cease. 
b.  Suspension is effective upon service of the notice. 
(2)  Food service operations shall not resume until a re-inspection determines that the conditions responsible for the requirement to cease operation no longer exist. Opportunity for a re-inspection shall be offered within a reasonable time, as determined by the regulatory authority. 
(3)  Operations shall not be resumed until authorized, in writing, by the regulatory authority. 
(h)  Denial. The regulatory authority may deny a permit if the applicant does not comply with the requirements of this article or if the operation constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. 
(i)  Revocation. 
(1)  The regulatory authority may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article; failure to pay the permit fee; failure to maintain a current permit; or interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duty. 
(2)  Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit or the person in charge of the reason for revocation and that the permit will be revoked at the end of the ten working days following service of such notice, unless a written request for an appeal is filed with the regulatory administrator by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period. 
a.  If no request for an appeal is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final and nonappealable. 
b.  The holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit upon compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-236. - Notice of appeal. 
(a)  Upon denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit, the regulatory authority shall notify, in writing, the applicant, permit holder, or person in charge of the reason for which the permit was denied, suspended, or revoked. 
(1)  The applicant, permit holder, or person in charge may file a written request for an appeal with the city council within ten working days following service of such notice. 
(2)  If no written request for an appeal is filed within the ten-day period, the denial, suspension or revocation is final and nonappealable. 
(b)  The appeal shall be conducted within 30 working days of the date on which the notice of appeal was filed with the city council. 
(c)  Based upon the evidence presented at the appeal, the city council shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the appeal. The written decision of the city council shall be furnished to the permit holder by the regulatory administrator. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-237. - Service of notice. 
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the permit holder or person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-238. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for the permits issued pursuant to this article are set out in section 2-201 of this Code. 
(b)  All permit fees must accompany the completed permit application form. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
DIVISION 4. - TYPES OF FOOD SERVICE 
 
Sec. 7-239. - Food establishments—Plan specifications. 
(a)  Floors. In food preparation areas, bars, storage areas, dish washing areas, restrooms and dressing rooms, floors shall be constructed of smooth, durable, easily cleanable, non-absorbent materials of commercial grade. Flooring must be light colored, without texture or patterns that create difficult places to clean. Floors that are water-flushed or that receive discharges of liquid shall be constructed of sealed concrete, terrazzo, ceramic quarry tile, or similar material that is graded to a properly installed, trapped floor drain. Floors of food service areas of day care centers, food storage, food display, and retail display areas shall be of non-absorbent materials designed to be easy to clean. 
(1)  Prohibited floor covering. The use of cardboard, sawdust, wood shavings or non-sealed wooden floor, or similar materials as a floor covering is prohibited in food preparation areas. Carpet shall be prohibited in food service areas and retail food areas. 
(2)  Floor sinks. Floor sinks are required under all indirectly plumbed sinks. 
(3)  Mats and duckboards. Mats shall be of non-absorbent, grease resistant materials and of such size, design and construction as to facilitate their being easily cleaned. 
(4)  Floor junctures. The juncture between walls and floors shall not present an open seam of more than 1/32 -inch. The floor/wall junctures of all floors must have coving, baseboard or sealant. 
(5)  Utility line installation. Exposed utility service lines shall be installed in a way that does not obstruct or prevent cleaning of the floor. In all new or extensively remodeled establishments, installation of exposed horizontal utility lines on the floor is prohibited. 
(b)  Walls/ceilings. In food preparation, bars, storage areas, dish washing areas and restrooms, walls and ceilings must be smooth, non-textured, easily cleanable, non-absorbent, light in color and durable. Exposed joists, rafters, or pipes are not permitted. Wall areas behind sinks or places that receive heavy use must be finished with fiber reinforced plastic (FRP), ceramic tile, or similar material to withstand moisture. In heavy food prep areas, walls behind stoves, grills or fryers shall be of stainless steel materials all the way to the floor. Bathroom walls shall be finished with similar material as those walls located behind food prep sinks. 
(c)  Lighting. 
(1)  Artificial lighting must be at least 50 foot candles over food preparation and dish washing areas, and positioned so that light is directly above sinks and food preparation areas. The walk in refrigeration units must have 50 candles. All other areas of the kitchen must have 30 foot candles, and 20 foot candles in storage rooms, restrooms and dining areas. 
(2)  Shields are required on light fixtures in all food preparation, food storage, dish washing areas, inside refrigeration units and in vent-a-hoods. If using plastic sleeve type shields, they must have tight-fitting end caps. 
(d)  Ventilation. All rooms shall have sufficient ventilation to keep them free of excessive heat, steam, condensation, vapors, obnoxious odors, smoke and fumes. Ventilation systems shall be installed and operated according to the current building code. When vented to the outside it cannot create an unsightly, harmful or unlawful discharge. Intake and exhaust air ducts shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of dust, dirt and other contaminating materials. Ventilation hoods are required for any cooking, baking, grilling and frying areas, and in areas above dishwashers to vent steam. 
(e)  Building and utility inlets. Conduit and ductwork shall be kept to an absolute minimum and shall be installed in such a way as not to obstruct cleaning of walls, floors or ceilings. No pipes are to run along the floor. 
(f)  Ice machines. Ice machines shall be of adequate size and located in areas that meet wall, floor and ceiling design standards for food preparation areas. Drain lines to ice machines are required to be plumbed to a floor drain with an approved air gap on the drain line. The ice machine cannot be located near sources of potential contamination such as exposed sewer lines. 
(g)  Aisles and working spaces. Aisles and working spaces shall be unobstructed and of sufficient width to permit employees to perform their duties readily without contaminating food or food contact surfaces by clothing or personal contact. 
(h)  Sneeze guards. Sneeze guards are required for all buffet and salad bars and shall have an average height of four feet six inches to five feet from the floor. Clean plates shall be made available and required of patrons for return trips to food bars. A sign to this effect shall be posted at salad bars and buffet tables. 
(i)  Storage areas. 
(1)  Food supplies and all food must be stored at least six inches above the floor with the exception of soda canisters or other impervious containers. Wood shelving is allowed in dry storage areas if it is light in paint color and finished with varnish or high gloss so that it is smooth, non-absorbent and easy to clean. 
(2)  Contact type or other shelf paper is prohibited. The use of rubber webbing type covering is allowed under glasses to prevent chips on glassware. 
(3)  Walls and ceilings in dry storage areas shall be finished with a light FRP color, or high gloss, enamel type paint that is light in color. Walls and ceilings in these areas must be smooth, non-textured, easily cleanable, non-absorbent, light in color, and durable. 
(j)  Personal belongings/personal hygiene. Personal belongings must be kept in a designated storage place separate from food and food supplies. If lockers are used they are to be kept clean and in good repair. Employees may have beverages in the kitchen only if the cup is a tight-fitting, non-spillable container to preclude hand to mouth contamination. 
(k)  Toxic chemical storage. Pesticides, cleaning supplies and other chemicals used in the operation of the establishment must be stored separately from any food, food supplies, single-service items and be stored separately from each other. All chemicals must be properly labeled with the name of the chemical contents, including all spray bottles. 
(l)  Toilet facilities. Establishments that have areas for dining are required to provide restroom facilities for the general public. Public access cannot be through food preparation or storage areas. The handicap requirements must comply with the current building code. Walls, floors and ceilings are to be constructed as in food preparation areas to be durable, non-absorbent, light in color and easily cleanable. Self-closing doors and covered waste receptacles are required in the women's room and in the men's room if a diaper deck is installed. Toilet seats are to be of the open front design and kept in good repair. Knee pedals, electronic eye and metered faucets are allowable in public restrooms. 
(m)  Sinks. 
(1)  A three compartment sink is required for manual washing, rinsing and sanitizing of all pans, dishes, tableware and utensils. All sinks must be provided with hot and cold running water by means of a combination, mixing-valve type faucet. Water temperature for hand washing shall be 110°F. The sinks must be large and deep enough to completely submerge everything that is washed. Two self-draining boards (one on each side of the sink) must be available to allow dishes to air dry. An open grate shelf that is drainable, durable and non-absorbent will be allowed above sinks. 
(2)  A separate utility sink or curbed cleaning facility with a floor drain is required for cleaning mops, brooms, and proper disposal of waste water. A rack to hang the mops and brooms off the floor and a mounted hose bracket to hang utility hoses are required. 
(3)  A separate hand wash sink is required in food preparation and in dish washing areas. This is in addition to the hand wash sinks in restrooms. A hand sink shall be located within every 25 linear feet of unobstructed space in food preparation and dish washing areas so that it is convenient for employees to wash hands as often as necessary. If the sink is too close to other equipment, a splashguard is required. Sinks are to be of adequate size to allow for the thorough washing of hands and forearms. A sign shall be posted requiring employees to wash their hands before returning to work. Knee pedal type faucets, electronic eye faucets, and metered faucets are not allowed in food preparation areas. A supply of liquid soap, paper towels, hand sanitizer and a waste receptacle must be located at each hand sink. At the discretion of the regulatory authority, additional sinks such as pot sinks, dump sinks, fill sinks, utility wash sinks and food preparation sinks may be required. 
(n)  Dishwashing machines. If an automatic dishwasher is used, it must properly wash, rinse and sanitize dishes. Chemical test papers or accurate, numerically-scaled thermometers/gauges to check the strength of the sanitizer or water temperature must be available. Dishwashing machines meant to sanitize by heat must be in accordance with the manufacturer's directions. A commercial dishwasher is required if the food establishment serves the public on dishware such as plates, glassware or reusable plastics. 
(o)  Equipment and utensils. Equipment and utensils shall be designed and fabricated for durability under conditions of normal use and must be resistant to denting, bucking, pitting and chipping. All equipment shall be NSF-approved or equivalent and/or approved by the regulatory authority. 
(p)  Food contact surfaces. Food contact surfaces must be durable, non-absorbent, easily cleanable, free of cracks, crevices, or seams and impervious to liquids. 
(q)  Non-food contact surfaces. Non-food contact surfaces must be easily cleanable and constructed of such materials to be kept in good repair. 
(r)  Floor mounted equipment. Floor mounted equipment must be six inches in height or sealed to the floor. Space must be provided between walls and fixtures to permit easy access for cleaning. 
(s)  Refrigerators/freezers. Refrigerators/freezers must be commercial grade or NSF-approved, and each unit must have a visible and accurate, numerically-scaled thermometer. Walk-in refrigeration units must be commercially built and have interiors of impervious, non-absorbent materials. Wood and marlite surfaces in walk-in refrigeration units are not allowed. Shelves must be resistant to rust. 
(t)  Outer openings. Outer doors must be self-closing to prevent entrance of insects/rodents and be effectively screened and tight fitting. Screening must not be larger than 16 mesh to one inch. 
(u)  Paved areas. Paved areas must be smooth, non-absorbent, easily cleanable, and graded to drain. Paved areas are required around establishment entrances, exits, garbage, and receptacle wash areas. 
(v)  Compactor/garbage receptacles/dumpsters. Compactor/garbage receptacles/dumpsters must be of durable, non-absorbent materials that are easily cleanable and leak proof. Lids must be available for garbage receptacles. Dumpsters and compactor lids and side-doors must be kept closed when not in use. 
(w)  Water heaters. Water heaters must be of adequate size to provide enough hot water on demand for all hand washing, dish washing and cleaning during operation. 
(x)  Laundry facilities. Laundry facilities shall be utilized only for the washing and drying of items used in the operation of the establishment. The washer and dryer must be located where there is no exposed food, cleaning equipment, utensils and single-use service articles. 
(y)  Outdoor smoker/grill unit in a food establishment. 
(1)  Outdoor smoker/grill units are required to be in an enclosure of adequate size to allow for the free movement of personnel around equipment. 
(2)  The enclosure shall conform to all applicable city ordinances including building codes, fire codes, zoning regulations, etc. 
(3)  The walls of the enclosure shall be constructed of solid material or screen material not to exceed 16 mesh to one inch. 
(4)  The roof shall be constructed of a non-permeable material which is water resistant as well as fire resistant and shall be sloped to allow for proper drainage. 
(5)  The floors shall be constructed of asphalt or cement which has been sealed so as to be non-absorbent and easily cleanable. 
(6)  All outer openings shall be tightly sealed so as to prevent flies and other insects from entering the enclosure. 
(7)  No food preparation is allowed in the enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-240. - General service cart vendor. 
(a)  A general service cart is a mobile food establishment that sells limited approved food products at a fixed location. 
(b)  Permit. The permit fee is per unit and must accompany a completed application form, which includes the name and address of the commissary where products are purchased, the proposed vending locations and the hours of operation of the unit. A notarized commissary letter must also accompany a completed application form. 
(c)  Inspection. Each unit must be inspected by the regulatory authority before the permit will be issued. All applicants for a permit must contact the regulatory authority 48 hours in advance in order to schedule an inspection appointment. Mechanical warmer, refrigeration and freezer units must be on the unit or inside a protected structure such as a store. Thermometers must indicate the proper temperatures and all required cleaning supplies and sanitizers must be on the vehicle at all times. 
(d)  Restricted operations. 
(1)  It is unlawful for general service cart vendors to sell food on any street, median or sidewalk of the city or on residential property. 
(2)  It is unlawful for general service cart vendors to sell food in city parks unless the vendors have a written agreement with the city. 
(3)  General service cart vendor units will be subject to inspection in the field. 
(e)  General requirements. 
(1)  The business/firm name and phone number shall be displayed on the outside of the cart in letters that are at least three inches tall. 
(2)  An approved commissary for basic cleanup and restocking of foods is required. 
(3)  A copy of the city health permit must be posted on the cart at all times. 
(4)  The general service cart vendor must operate from a base of operation, such as a commissary or other fixed food establishment permitted by the regulatory authority. 
(5)  The operator of the permitted cart must report the cart daily to the commissary or fixed food establishment for all supplies and for all cleaning and servicing of the unit. 
(6)  Potentially hazardous foods must be hermetically sealed, labeled as to type of food, location of preparation, and date of preparation. All unused potentially hazardous foods must be disposed of at the end of each day of operation. No home-prepared foods will be allowed. 
(7)  All condiments must be served in single-service containers, packages, or approved commercially filled dispenser-type containers. No bulk dispensers, bottles, or other similar containers will be allowed. 
(8)  Single service articles must be used during time of operation. Gloves or utensils must be used to prevent direct hand contact with the food. 
(9)  All potentially hazardous foods must be kept at an internal temperature of 41°F or below or at an internal temperature of 135°F or above during storage in all units. Mechanical hot-holding and cold-holding units must have accurate, numerically-scaled thermometers conspicuously placed inside the units. 
(10)  All vendors are required to sell only between sunrise and sunset, unless approved by the regulatory authority. 
(f)  Design and operational procedure. 
(1)  A semi-enclosed stainless steel cart with overhead protection, capable of being maneuvered by one person. 
(2)  The size can be no more than eight feet long, six feet wide (excluding wheels), and four feet high (excluding required overhead protection). 
(3)  All cooking apparatus must be permanently attached to the cart. 
(4)  Unit must provide storage areas capable of maintaining potentially hazardous foods at 41°F or below or 135°F or above. Unit thermometers must be provided. 
(5)  Unit must have a potable water system under pressure that is equipped with a permanently installed water supply tank of sufficient capacity to furnish sufficient hot and cold water for food preparation, utensil cleaning and sanitizing, and hand washing during hours of operation. 
(6)  Three-compartment sink and a separate hand-washing sink are required. 
(7)  Water for hand washing and utensil washing must be heated on a demand system, to generate water at a minimum of 105°F and not to exceed 120°F. 
(8)  All liquid waste that results from the unit must drain into a permanently installed liquid waste retention tank of at least 15 percent greater capacity than the potable water supply tank. 
(9)  All liquid waste must be discharged to a sanitary sewerage disposal system constructed and operated according to law. 
(10)  Operator may not serve, sell, or distribute any food from the cart unless the cart is on a surface constructed of a smooth non-absorbent material (such as concrete or machine-laid asphalt), maintained in good repair, and graded to drain. 
(11)  Only foods approved by the regulatory authority and written on the permit may be served, sold, or distributed. 
(12)  Cutting of vegetables and other food items is prohibited on site. 
(13)  A metal stem thermometer is required to check internal food temperatures. 
(14)  Units must also supply liquid soap, disposable towels, and sanitizer. 
(15)  The operator of the cart must be state-approved in the food protection management training program. 
(16)  The cart must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-241. - Mobile food establishments. 
(a)  A mobile food establishment is a vehicle mounted food establishment that is readily moveable. 
(b)  Permit. A completed permit application form shall include the valid license plate number of the mobile food unit, a notarized form with the name and address of the commissary where products are purchased, two proposed vending locations and the hours of operation of the unit. A valid driver's license and proof of insurance will also be required at the time of application submittal. 
(c)  Inspection. Each mobile unit must be inspected by the regulatory authority before a permit will be issued. All applicants for a permit must contact the regulatory authority at least 48 hours prior to scheduling an inspection appointment. The warmer, refrigeration and freezer units must be operational, fully stocked and have visible and accurate, numerically-scaled thermometers at the time of inspection and at all times thereafter. Cleaning supplies and sanitizer must be present in the vehicle at the time of inspection and at all times thereafter. 
(d)  Restricted operations. 
(1)  It is unlawful for mobile food establishments to sell food on any street, median or sidewalk of the city or residential property, except for ice cream through limited service pushcarts. 
(2)  It is unlawful for mobile food establishments to sell food within city parks unless the vendors have written agreement from the city. 
(3)  Mobile food units will be subject to inspection in the field. 
(4)  It is unlawful for a mobile food establishment to operate within 1,000 feet of a school, an event operating with a special event permit or a city-operated event. 
(e)  Types of mobile food units: 
(1)  Produce vendors. Vends nuts, uncut fruits and vegetables only. 
(2)  Ice cream trucks. Vends pre-wrapped and sealed ice cream, canned soft drinks, pre-packaged candy, chips and pickles. 
(3)  Mobile cold trucks. Vends pre-packaged prepared potentially hazardous and non-potentially hazardous food in individual packages for immediate consumption. 
(4)  Mobile hot trucks. Prepares and vends potentially hazardous and non-potentially hazardous foods on site. On this unit, food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned for service, sale or distribution. 
(5)  Limited service pushcarts. Vends pre-packaged, non-potentially hazardous frozen desserts, or food approved by the city. 
(f)  General requirements. Specific requirements for mobile food units are determined by the type of unit as outlined in this article. In addition to the specific requirements for each type of mobile food unit, each unit must satisfy all of the following: 
(1)  Business/firm name and phone number on both sides of the unit in at least three inch letters if the unit is a cart or at least six inch letters if the unit is a truck. 
(2)  A copy of the most recent inspection report must be on the unit at all times. 
(3)  All mobile food establishments must operate from a base of operation, such as an approved commissary or other fixed food establishments permitted and inspected by a city. 
(4)  The operator of the permitted mobile food establishment must report daily to the commissary for supplies, cleaning and servicing of the unit. Mobile food establishments must be stored at the commissary when not in use. 
(5)  Mobile food establishments are prohibited from remaining at the same location for a period of ten minutes after the last sale. 
(6)  Potentially hazardous foods must be hermetically sealed, dated, and labeled as to type of food and location of preparation. All PHF must be disposed of at the end of each day of operation. No home-prepared foods will be allowed. 
(7)  If food is purchased at a permitted food establishment, the establishment must be licensed with the appropriate state agency as a food manufacturer. These foods must meet the same packaging and labeling requirements as listed above. 
(8)  All condiments must be dispensed in single-service containers, packages or in an approved commercially filled dispenser-type container. 
(9)  Single-service cups must be dispensed in a sanitary manner. 
(10)  No direct food handling of any type will be permitted by mobile cold truck vendors or customers. 
(11)  All potentially hazardous cold foods must be kept at an internal temperature of 41°F or below. All potentially hazardous hot foods must maintain an internal temperature of 135°F or higher. Mechanical hot-holding and cold-holding units must have accurate, numerically-scaled thermometers conspicuously placed inside the units. 
(g)  Specific requirements. 
(1)  Ice cream trucks. 
a.  Must be an enclosed or covered truck or van with a smooth easily cleanable floor. 
b.  Must have an enclosed freezer with a visible and accurate, numerically-scaled thermometer to store ice cream. 
c.  All ice cream must be pre-wrapped, sealed, labeled and obtained from an approved source or commissary. 
d.  Pre-packaged candy, chips and soft drinks may be sold in single-service units. 
e.  Signs in front and rear of the unit bearing the words "Caution - Watch for Children" must be present in three-inch letters on a contrasting background. 
f.  Vehicles must have one revolving amber strobe light that is visible from a distance of 500 feet in the daylight and shall be placed on top of the vehicle. The light should be used only when slowing down or stopping in the right lane with flashing amber lights working. 
g.  All sales shall be conducted from the curb side of the vehicle. 
h.  Everything that is necessary for the operation of the truck must be on the truck. 
i.  Unit must be maintained in good repair and in a clean condition. 
j.  No sales shall be conducted after sunset. 
(2)  Mobile cold trucks. 
a.  Must be an enclosed commercial unit operated from a truck with proper storage and display space. 
b.  Must provide proper equipment (such as NSF-approved mechanical holding ovens, NSF-approved surfaces for food contact and cold storage areas) to keep potentially hazardous food at 135°F or above for hot foods or 41°F or below for cold foods. An accurate, numerically-scaled thermometer must be displayed inside both hot and cold storage units. 
c.  Only pre-wrapped, bottled, canned or otherwise packaged food in individual servings for immediate consumption may be sold. 
d.  All food must be properly labeled and obtained from an approved commissary. The label on all foods must declare the common name of the food, list of ingredients, contents by weight or volume, packaging date and the name and address of manufacturer or packer. 
e.  Only non-potentially hazardous beverages dispensed from covered urns or other protected equipment may be served. 
f.  If ice is used to keep food cold, it must be drained into a retention tank to be properly disposed of at the commissary location. No block ice allowed. 
g.  Everything that is necessary for the operation of the truck must be on the truck. 
h.  All condiments must be dispensed in single-service containers, packages, or an approved commercially filled dispenser-type container. 
i.  An accurate, numerically-scaled metal stem thermometer is required to check food temperatures. 
j.  Unit must be maintained in good repair and in a clean condition. 
k.  An approved commissary is required, which is permitted and inspected by the appropriate regulatory authority, at which those foods to be sold are obtained and prepared, and also for servicing the unit. 
l.  A spray bottle of sanitizer (appropriate mixture of approved sanitizer) must be available. All chemicals, cleaners, etc., must be stored away from food and food contact items. 
m.  Appropriate chemical test kits must be present on the truck. 
n.  A container of liquid hand sanitizer must be available for the operator. 
(3)  Mobile hot trucks. 
a.  Must be an enclosed commercial van designed for the transportation, storage and preparation of potentially hazardous and non-potentially hazardous foods. 
b.  Must provide proper equipment (such as stainless steel three-compartment sink, and stainless steel hand wash sinks), supplied with both hot and cold potable water under pressure. 
c.  Wastewater retention tank is required and must be at least 15 percent greater capacity than the potable water supply. 
d.  Water for hand washing and dish washing must be heated via an electrical, on demand system to generate water at a minimum temperature. 
e.  NSF-approved mechanical refrigerators, freezers, stoves, ovens and hot holding units are required to maintain potentially hazardous food at or above 135°F for hot foods or at or below 41°F for cold foods. Units used to store PHF must be provided with visible and accurate, numerically-scaled thermometers. 
f.  Unit must be provided with adequate ventilation, exhaust fans and proper lighting and shields. 
g.  All food must be obtained from an approved source or commissary. 
h.  Only non-potentially hazardous beverages that are dispensed from covered urns or other protected equipment may be served. 
i.  The serving of ice for beverages can be dispensed from an automatic dispenser or served by the mobile hot truck operator(s) only. 
j.  Everything that is necessary for the operation of the truck must be on the truck. 
k.  An accurate, numerically-scaled metal stem thermometer is required to check food temperatures. 
l.  Other items that must be present are liquid hand soap, disposable paper towels, approved sanitizer, chemical test kit, fire extinguisher and a first aid kit. 
m.  Operator must have a valid food protection manager certification. All other employees must have a valid food handler permit. 
n.  Unit must be maintained in good repair and in a clean condition. 
(4)  Limited service pushcarts. 
a.  An enclosed mobile food establishment capable of being maneuvered by one person. 
b.  Pre-packaged frozen desserts must be maintained frozen by means of dry ice or a mechanical freezer. 
c.  Everything that is necessary for the operation of the unit must be located on the unit. No additional ice bins, ice chests, tables, etc., are allowed. The unit must be a stand-alone, self-contained unit with a visible and accurate, numerically-scaled thermometer. 
d.  Units must be maintained in good repair and in a clean condition. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-242. - Catered foods. 
A catering company operating from a facility located outside the city that sells, distributes or transports food inside the city may not conduct operations inside the city unless the facility: 
(a)  Furnishes the regulatory administrator with a certificate from a health authority having jurisdiction over the facility indicating that the facility complies with applicable health laws; or 
(b)  Furnishes the regulatory administrator other information that the administrator determines is necessary to enforce the provisions of this article or otherwise protects the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-243. - Farmers market. 
A farmers market is an establishment or location used by producers and vendors primarily for the distribution and sale of raw and custom shelled agricultural products directly to consumers and wholesalers. The sale of other food products at such market shall not disqualify the establishment as a farmers market provided that such food products meet all applicable federal, state, and local health laws regulating the manufacture and sale of such food products. The occasional sale of non-food products not regulated by the state department of state health services shall not disqualify the establishment as a farmers market. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-244. - Snow cone vendor. 
(a)  Structures. 
(1)  All structures must be approved by the city and must comply with sections 7-232 (maintenance of the facilities), 7-233 (insect and rodent control) and 7-239 (food establishments—plan specifications) of this article. 
(2)  An agreement with the property owner for use of the restroom facility for the employees must be obtained. A copy of the agreement must be provided to the regulatory authority at the time of application. 
(b)  Approved food and ice only. 
(1)  Only snow cones and food approved by the regulatory authority shall be served. 
(2)  Snow cones and snow cone products shall be defined as crushed or shaved ice served in a single-service paper cup and topped with flavored syrups. 
(3)  Only cream toppings approved by the regulatory authority will be allowed. All products must come from an approved source. 
(4)  Ice must be obtained in chipped, crushed, cubed or block form and in single use, plastic bags filled and sealed at the point of manufacture. The ice must be held in these bags until it is dispensed in a way that protects it from contamination. 
(5)  If ice is stored in a container outside of the snow cone stand, the container must be kept locked at all times. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-245. - Roadside vendor. 
(a)  A roadside vendor permit is required for each sale date. An application for the roadside vendor permit must be obtained from the regulatory authority 48 hours prior to the sale date. A permit will be issued only if 120 calendar days have elapsed between sale dates. Owners/companies will be granted three permits a year for roadside vending. 
(b)  Sales are only permitted on private property. Written permission to use private property for seasonal/temporary sales from the owner or the owner's agent shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(c)  The application must include the proposed list of foods to be sold onsite. No preparing or processing of food product allowed. Roadside vendors shall meet the sanitation requirements for temporary food establishment events. Only foods approved by the regulatory authority will be allowed for sale at the temporary location site. 
(d)  Provisions for off-street parking shall be determined in accordance with the general development ordinance, but in no case shall less than four be provided. Proof of such parking shall be attached to the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-246. - Temporary food establishment events. 
(a)  Only six temporary food establishment events may be held at the same location or issued to the same permit holder in one calendar year, unless the event is a city-operated or city-sponsored event. 
(1)  Examples of temporary food establishment events are parades, fairs, festivals, exhibits, block parties, street dances, carnivals, circuses, temporary commercial out-door amusements and sporting events. 
(2)  Temporary food establishment events may include a one-time grand opening event, charity sponsored function, or a U.S. nationally observed holiday. 
(b)  A temporary food establishment permit is required for each event. 
(1)  Applications for temporary food establishment permits must be obtained from the regulatory authority at least 30 days prior to the event. 
(2)  The individual/group/entity preparing and serving the food at the temporary food establishment event must apply for the permit. Food manufacturers must submit a copy of their state manufacturer license with their application. 
(3)  No permit will be issued before 60 days has passed between each event. 
(4)  A list of all foods to be served must accompany the application for the permit and must be approved in advance by the regulatory authority. 
a.  Only foods approved by the regulatory authority and written on the permit may be sold or distributed. 
b.  Only those food items requiring a minimum of handling, mixing or preparation (including but not limited to foods such as hot dogs or pre-cooked hamburgers) are allowed to be prepared at the event. 
c.  Potentially hazardous foods will be limited to only the following: pre-cooked meats approved by the regulatory authority, dairy products, rice, beans and potatoes. 
d.  Home preparation of food or home storage of food is not allowed. However, certain non-potentially hazardous baked desserts may be prepared at home (bake sales) with approval of the regulatory authority. 
e.  If the facility is fully equipped with sinks and hot and cold running water, commercial and mechanical refrigeration/heating equipment, then preparation of other food items may be allowed as permitted by the regulatory authority. 
(5)  All food distributed to the public must originate from an approved source and may not be prepared or stored in a facility not approved by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  The regulatory authority may impose additional requirements and restrictions related to the operation of the temporary food establishment event to protect the health of the consumer and may prohibit the sale of any or all food products. 
(d)  Specifications. 
(1)  All temporary food establishments are required to have approved flooring, which may include concrete, asphalt or tight-fitting plywood. 
(2)  All food must have suitable overhead covering for food preparation, cooking, dish washing, and service areas. Such coverings must meet the city fire code requirements. A table skirt or other form of protection is recommended to protect food, single-service articles and utensils. 
(3)  Food product display must be covered and protected. 
(4)  Food product samples must be dispensed in single-service portions or in a safe, sanitary manner. 
(5)  All meat, dairy and perishable food products while being stored, prepared, displayed and transported must be kept at the following safe temperatures: 
a.  Cold foods must be maintained at 41°F or below. 
b.  Hot foods must be maintained at 135°F or above. 
c.  Canned heat (sterno) and charcoal is not allowed for maintaining hot food temperatures at outside events. 
(6)  An accurate, numerically-scaled metal stem thermometer must be provided for checking internal food temperatures during preparation and storage. 
(7)  All condiments, including onions, relish, peppers, catsup, mustard, etc. for customer self-service shall be from an approved sanitary dispenser or in individual single-service packets. 
(8)  All foods, food containers, utensils, napkins, straws, etc., must be stored in accordance to state requirements and be adequately protected from splash, dust, insects, weather or other contamination. Baked goods such as cakes, cookies, pies, etc., should be sold wrapped as a whole or provided as wrapped, individual servings. 
(9)  When self-service ice dispensers are not provided, ice scoops are required. Ice for consumption must be dispensed by employees. Ice scoop handles must extend out of ice, or be stored in a sanitary manner. Ice used for human consumption must be stored separately from ice used to refrigerate drink bottles, cans, cartons or food. Ice storage units must have open drains to prevent submergence of chilled drink cartons, cans, bottles or food in melted ice water, and must drain to a wastewater receptacle. 
(e)  Sanitation. 
(1)  All temporary food establishments in which open food will be handled or prepared must have convenient hand washing and dish washing facilities that meet the regulatory authority requirements. 
(2)  Food handling personnel must wash hands as frequently as necessary. Disposable gloves and hand sanitizer may be used but are not substitutes for hand washing. 
(3)  Those establishments which are in operation and sell non-packaged, potentially hazardous food must furnish the following facilities if hot and cold running water and sanitary sewage facilities are not conveniently available: 
a.  Sufficient amount of potable water in sturdy plastic dispensing container to be used for hand washing, dish washing and sanitizing. If potable water replenishment is not readily available, additional containers of potable water shall be required. 
b.  Hand wash facilities must be conveniently located inside all establishments which handle open food. The facilities must provide flowing water, liquid soap, hand sanitizer, paper towels, and a collection bucket for wastewater. Coffee urns, drink coolers, or bottled water with a spigot work well for this purpose. 
(4)  A three compartment dish wash facility is required. Three sturdy plastic pails or tubs of at least two gallons capacity; one for washing, one for rinsing, and one with an approved sanitizer of the correct parts per million are required. 
(5)  An approved sanitizer and chemical test kits are required. 
(6)  A sturdy wastewater container with a small opening and funnel to receive and store liquid wastes is required. Wastewater from sinks, steam tables, etc., must be drained into the city sanitary sewer system or disposed of in accordance with liquid waste disposal ordinances and regulations. 
(7)  Convenient solid waste receptacles are required with plastic liners. 
(8)  The use of tobacco and eating food is prohibited in food preparation and food service areas. Sitting on tables and counters is also prohibited. 
(9)  Suitable hair restraints, including hairnets, caps or hair spray, are required in food preparation and serving areas. 
(10)  Animals, except service animals, are prohibited in all temporary food establishments. 
(f)  TABC-permitted/licensed distillery, brewery, or winery in the Old Town Design District. 
(1)  Except as otherwise set forth below, a TABC-permitted/licensed distillery, brewery, or winery in the Old Town Design District shall comply with all temporary food establishment permit requirements and must have a current off-premises alcohol sales permit from the city. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, up to 18 temporary food establishment permits may be issued per calendar year for events located at a TABC-permitted/licensed distillery, brewery or winery in the Old Town Design District. There is no elapsed time requirement for said temporary food establishment permits, but each such permit shall only remain in effect for two consecutive days from date of issuance unless suspended or revoked sooner; provided however, if a temporary food establishment permit for a TABC-permitted/licensed distillery, brewery, or winery in the Old Town Design District is issued in conjunction with a special event permit, then the relevant provisions of subsection 7-235(e)(2), Duration, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11; 0035-18-ORD , § 1, 6-4-18; 0119-19-ORD , § 1, 5-6-19)  
DIVISION 5. - FOOD HANDLER PERMIT 
 
Sec. 7-247. - Required. 
(a)  Every person whose work brings him into contact with the handling of food, utensils, or food service equipment must possess a food handler's permit. 
(b)  Every person who owns, manages, or otherwise controls any food establishment shall not permit any person to be employed therein whose work brings him into contact with the handling of food, utensils or food service equipment who does not possess a valid food handler's permit within 45 days from the date of his initial employment. 
(1)  Application for a permit shall be made to the regulatory authority. 
(2)  The owner/manager shall be responsible for the payment of the food handler's permits on a yearly basis. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-248. - Exemption. 
Every person who possesses a current and valid manager's certification certificate from completing a course permitted by the state department of health shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection 7-247(a) of this division. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-249. - Eligibility. 
(a)  The regulatory authority shall issue a permit to the applicant if the applicant has: 
(1)  Completed watching a video provided by the city; 
a.  The video may be viewed at a pre-scheduled city-provided class; or 
b.  A state-certified food protection manager may borrow from the city the approved video upon payment of a deposit; or 
c.  A state-certified food protection manager may purchase from the city a copy of the approved video. 
(2)  Achieved a score of 70 or above on the basic knowledge test provided by the regulatory authority; and 
a.  If the video is viewed at a pre-scheduled city-provided class, the city shall administer the test and counsel an applicant who does not score 70 or above prior to re-administering the test. 
b.  If the approved video is borrowed or purchased from the city, the state-certified food protection manager shall administer the test and counsel an applicant who does not score 70 or above prior to re-administering the test. The state-certified food protection manager shall submit to the city, within 24 hours after completing the test, the graded test and the name of the applicant. 
(3)  Is not suspected of being: 
a.  Infected with a disease in a communicable form that can be transmitted by foods; or 
b.  A carrier of organisms that cause such a disease; or 
c.  Infected with a boil, an infected wound, or an acute respiratory infection. 
(b)  Before a food handler's permit application is rejected for a medical reason, confirmation by a physician shall be required. 
(c)  In the event a food handler's permit application is rejected, the regulatory authority shall notify the applicant of the rejection in writing by certified United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-250. - Reserved.  
Sec. 7-251. - Confiscation. 
The regulatory authority shall have the authority to confiscate a food handler's permit that has expired or is otherwise invalid. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-252. - Revocation. 
(a)  The regulatory authority shall have the right to revoke a food handler's permit at any time the holder of such permit becomes: 
(1)  Infected with a disease in a communicable form that can be transmitted by foods; or 
(2)  A carrier of organisms that cause such a disease; or 
(3)  Infected with a boil, an infected wound, or an acute respiratory infection. 
(b)  A medical confirmation by a physician shall be required before a food handler's permit is revoked. Such revocation shall remain in effect until a licensed physician certifies the food handler is free from any communicable disease. 
(c)  No such person shall work in a food establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of such person contaminating food or food-contact surfaces with pathogenic organisms capable of transmitting disease to another person. 
(d)  The regulatory authority shall notify the permit holder in writing of the reasons for which the permit is being revoked. Revocations shall be final unless the permit holder files a written request for an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Sec. 7-253. - Appeal. 
A person shall have the right to appeal the regulatory authority decision to deny issuance of a food handler's permit or to revoke a food handler's permit by giving written notice to the regulatory administrator within five calendar days following notice of the denial or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 3862-05-2011 , § 1, 4-18-11)  
Secs. 7-254—7-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CATV SYSTEMS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, § 10.02. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 7-276—7-285. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REGULATION OF BASIC SERVICE CABLE TELEVISION RATES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1862-12-93, adopted Dec. 6, 1993, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Div. 2, §§ 7-285—7-293. 
 
Sec. 7-286. - General provisions. 
The following provisions are hereby adopted to conform with the regulations established by the FCC for regulation of cable television in the City of Lewisville, Texas. If any section or provision herein is inconsistent with the Cable Act of 1992 or FCC regulations, such Act or FCC regulation will prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1862-12-93, § I, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 7-287. - Notification of proposed rate increase. 
(a)  A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of any increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or associated equipment at least 30 days before any proposed increase is effective. The notice shall include a provision stating that protests to such prices may be filed with the city at 1197 West Main, Lewisville, Texas 75067. The notice shall also include a statement that such protests must be filed with the city no later than 30 days after the notice is received by the subscriber. 
(b)  In addition to the notice required in subsection (a), the cable operator shall give the city a minimum of 30 days' advance written notification of any changes in rates for cable programming service or associated equipment. 
(Ord. No. 1862-12-93, § II, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 7-288. - Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates. 
A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment with the city within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. 
(Ord. No. 1862-12-93, § III, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 7-289. - City review of basic cable rates and equipment costs. 
(a)  After a cable operator has submitted to the city for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs, or a proposed increase in these rates (including increases in the baseline channel charge that results from reductions in the number of channels in a tier), the existing rates will remain in effect or the proposed rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of submission to the city. Provided, however, that the city may toll this 30-day deadline for an additional time by issuing an order as described in paragraph (d) of this section within 30 days of the rate submission explaining that it needs additional time to review the rates. The city may, at any time, require the cable operator to produce additional information, including proprietary information, that the city deems necessary in order to make a rate determination. If proprietary information is provided, the provisions of section 7-290 hereof will apply to such information. 
(b)  Upon receipt by the city, the cable operator's submittal shall be available for public inspection and copying. Comments on the submittal by interested persons may be submitted in writing or orally at a city council meeting held at any time during the initial 30-day review period. Written comments shall be addressed to the city secretary and must be received prior to the end of the 30-day review period. 
(c)  If a cable operator submits a proposed rate increase for review that appears to exceed the presumptively reasonable level and does not include a cost-of-service showing to justify the rate, the city will permit the cable operator to cure this deficiency and submit a cost-of-service showing. 
(d)  If the city is unable to determine, based upon the material submitted by the cable operator, that the existing or proposed rates are within the permitted basic service tier charge or actual costs of equipment, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the basic service tier charge, the city may toll the 30-day deadline in paragraph (a) of this section to request or consider additional information or to consider the comments from interested parties as follows: 
(1)  For an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings; or 
(2)  For an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showing. 
During the additional time periods provided in this paragraph, comments from interested persons may be submitted in writing, as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, or orally during at least one city council meeting during the period of abatement. 
(e)  The city shall have the right to select and engage rate consultants, accountants, auditors, attorneys, engineers, or any combination thereof to investigate, present evidence, advise, represent or assist the city in any regulatory proceeding before the city council, the FCC or any other regulatory authority, or in court. The cable operator engaged in any such regulatory proceedings shall be required to reimburse the city for the reasonable costs of such services. 
(f)  If the city has availed itself of the additional 90 or 150 days permitted in paragraph (d) of this section, and has taken no action within these additional time periods, then the proposed rates will go into effect at the end of the 90- or 150-day period, or existing rates will remain in effect at such times, subject to refunds if the city subsequently issues a written decision disapproving any portion of such rates. Provided, however, that in order to order refunds, the city must have issued a brief written order to the cable operator by the end of the 90- or 150-day period permitted in paragraph (d) of this section directing the operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid. 
(Ord. No. 1862-12-93, § IV, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 7-290. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If the city has required the cable operator to produce proprietary information under the provisions of this article, the cable operator may submit therewith a request that such information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and shall cover all of the materials to which it applies and all copies of those materials. If feasible, the materials to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any materials to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the materials to which the request applies shall be identified. 
(b)  Each such request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding the materials from inspection and of the facts upon which those reasons are based. If the request is that the materials be withheld from inspection for a limited period of time, that period shall be specified. 
(c)  Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section will not be considered. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a request in compliance with paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section, the city will not grant routine public access to the materials. A letter to that effect will be placed in a public file in lieu of the materials withheld from public inspection. 
(e)  Provided, however, if a written request for the materials is received by the city pursuant to the Texas Open Records Act, the city will notify the person providing the materials of the request for the materials. If the person providing the materials requests the city to do so, the city will request an opinion from the Attorney General, pursuant the Open Records Act, regarding the public availability of the materials. If the person providing the materials does not request the city to request an opinion from the Attorney General, the city may, at its option, either request such an opinion or provide the materials to the public. 
(f)  If the Attorney General issues an opinion or letter ruling requiring the city to make the materials available to the public, the materials will be made available for public inspection. 
(g)  If no request for confidentiality is submitted, the city assumes no obligations to consider the need for non-disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 1862-12-93, § V, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 7-291. - Burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its existing or proposed rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with the Cable Act of 1992. 
(b)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier or associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost of equipment the cable operator must submit the appropriate FCC form to the city. 
(c)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier that exceeds the permitted tier charge, the cable operator must submit to the city a cost-of-service showing to justify the proposed rates. The cost-of-service showing must be in conformance with Accounting and Cost Allocation Requirements as adopted and amended by the commission for cable system operators. 
(Ord. No. 1862-12-93, § VI, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 7-292. - Reduction of rates; prescription of rates. 
(a)  The city may order a cable operator to implement a prospective reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with FCC standards. 
(b)  The city may prescribe a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable. 
(Ord. No. 1862-12-93, § VII, 12-6-93)  
Sec. 7-293. - Refunds. 
(a)  The city may order a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates determined by the city to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate charged as reasonable. Before ordering a cable operator to refund previously paid rates to subscribers, the city shall give the operator notice and opportunity to comment. The operator's opportunity to comment upon the proposed refunds may be at any meeting of the city council during the city's period of review of the operator's rates. 
(b)  An operator's liability for refunds is limited to a one-year period, except that an operator that fails to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city shall be liable for refunds commencing from the effective date of such order until such time as it complies with such order. 
(Ord. No. 1862-12-93, § VIII, 12-6-93)  
Secs. 7-294, 7-295. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2203-3-97, § I, adopted March 17, 1997, repealed §§ 7-296—7-301 and 7-311—7-318 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to massage establishments and derived from Ord. No. 2070-11-95, § I, adopted November 20, 1995. 
 
Secs. 7-296—7-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - WRECKER SERVICES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3769-05-2010 , § 1, adopted May 17, 2010, repealed the former Art. X, §§ 7-331—7-363, and enacted a new Art. X as set out herein. The former Art. X pertained to wrecker services and derived from Ord. No. 2680, §§ 1—33, 5-7-01; Ord. No. 2759-12-2001, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 2773-01-2002, §§ 1—4, 1-28-02; Ord. No. 3221-07-2005, § 1, 7-11-05. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 7-331. - Towing for the city. 
No person shall provide wrecker service to the city without first executing a contract therefor with the city. Provided, however, nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from utilizing the services of noncontract wreckers as allowed for in the contract. 
(Ord. No. 3769-05-2010 , § 1, 5-17-10)  
Secs. 7-332—7-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Sexually oriented businesses, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 7-371. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult arcade shall mean any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult bookstore or adult video store shall mean a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities." 
Adult cabaret shall mean a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult motel shall mean a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater shall mean a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult theater shall mean a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities." 
Chief of police shall mean the chief of police of the city or his designated agent. 
Escort shall mean a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency shall mean a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
Establishment shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business. 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business. 
(3)  The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business. 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually-oriented business. 
Licensee shall mean a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nude model studio shall mean any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or a state of nudity shall mean: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to completely and opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or part of a female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. For purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered an opaque covering. 
Operates or causes to be operated shall mean to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually-oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner or licensee of the business. 
Residential district shall mean a single-family, duplex, patio home, townhouse, multi-family or mobile home zoning district as defined in the zoning ordinance which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
Residential use shall mean a single-family, duplex, patio home, townhouse, multi-family or mobile home park and mobile home subdivision use as defined in the zoning ordinance which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
Semi-nude shall mean a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center shall mean a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude. 
Sexually-oriented business shall mean an adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas shall mean human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activities shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts. 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy. 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above. 
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business shall mean the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area existed on the date the permit was issued. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business. 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means. 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-2; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-2), 5-21-90; Ord. No. 3902-10-2011 , § 1, 10-17-11; Ord. No. 4010-07-2013 , § 1, 7-15-13) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 7-372. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually-oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-1; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-1), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-373. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 31.00 et seq., of the zoning ordinance which is on file in the city secretary's office is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-20), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-374. - Classification. 
Sexually-oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades. 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores. 
(3)  Adult cabarets. 
(4)  Adult motels. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters. 
(6)  Adult theaters. 
(7)  Escort agencies. 
(8)  Nude model studios. 
(9)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-3; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-3), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-375. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, and department of community development to inspect the premises of a sexually-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually-oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-7; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-7), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-376. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)  An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-13; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-13), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-377. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-14; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-14), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-378. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-15; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-15), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-379. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually-oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-16; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-16), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-380. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually-oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1990, § 4-17-17; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-17-17), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-381. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 18 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or video cassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy. 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts. 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola. 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)  In this section "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)  It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)  The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-18; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-18), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-382. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 7-377(d) or 7-396 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 7-396(a) that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale, or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-19; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-19), 5-21-90)  
Secs. 7-383—7-395. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 7-396. - Required. 
A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually-oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-4(a); Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-4(a)), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-397. - Application. 
An application for a license under this division must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions or the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 7-380 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 7-380. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-4(b); Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-4(b)), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-398. - Qualifications. 
(a)  The applicant for a license under this division must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 7-399 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(c)  The fact that a person possesses a valid theater license, dance hall license, or public house of amusement license does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually-oriented business license. A person who operates a sexually-oriented business and possesses a theater license, public house of amusement license or dance hall license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this article as well as the requirements and provisions of section 31.00 et seq., of the zoning ordinance which is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-4(c)—(e); Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-4), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-399. - Issuance. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue a license to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually-oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually-oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The license fee required by this division has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually-oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually-oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with sections 7-375 through 7-381 and 7-405. 
(8)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: 
i.  Prostitution; 
ii.  Promotion of prostitution; 
iii.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
iv.  Compelling prostitution; 
v.  Obscenity; 
vi.  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; 
vii.  Sexual performance by a child; 
viii.  Possession of child pornography; 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: 
i.  Public lewdness; 
ii.  Indecent exposure; 
iii.  Indecency with a child; 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
5.  Trafficking persons as described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 20A; or 
6.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is for a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(8) of this section may qualify for a sexually-oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(8)b. of this section has elapsed. 
(d)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually-oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-5; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-5), 5-21-90; Ord. No. 3902-10-2011 , § 2, 10-17-11)  
Sec. 7-400. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a sexually-oriented business license is set out in section 2-201. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-6; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-6), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-401. - Expiration. 
Each license issued under this division shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 7-396. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-8; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-8), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-402. - Suspension. 
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 7-375 through 7-381 and 7-405. 
(2)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually-oriented business premises as authorized by this article. 
(3)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually-oriented business premises. 
(4)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually-oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-9; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-9), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-403. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 7-382 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 7-399(a)(8)a. for which the time period required in section 7-399(a)(8)b. has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 7-399(a)(8)a., for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person was an employee of the sexually-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually-oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 7-399(a)(8)b. has elapsed. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-10; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-10), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-404. - Appeal. 
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of police shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the state district court. An appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-11; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-11), 5-21-90)  
Sec. 7-405. - Transfer. 
A licensee under this division shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 1990, § 4-16-12; Ord. No. 1545-5-90, § I(4-16-12), 5-21-90)  
Secs. 7-406—7-424. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - TEMPORARY CHRISTMAS TREE LOTS 
 
Sec. 7-425. - Definition. 
[As used in this article,] "Christmas tree lot" shall mean any outdoor place where resin-bearing and/or artificial manmade trees and related items, such as yard decorations, are sold to the public within prescribed limits set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2169-11-96, § I, 11-4-96) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2169-11-96, adopted November 4, 1996, amended Art. XII by adding a new section, but did not provide for specific designation; hence, inclusion of such new provisions as § 7-425 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 7-426. - Enforcement. 
The community development department of the city shall issue all permits required under this article and shall be vested with the authority to inspect lots at all reasonable times and as often as is necessary to carry out the intent of this article. 
(Code 1990, § 4-17-6)  
Sec. 7-427. - Permit required. 
All persons or entities seeking to operate a temporary Christmas tree lot within the city shall first obtain a permit for such lot from the community development department of the city. Each lot shall require a separate permit and fee. 
(Code 1990, § 4-17-1)  
Sec. 7-428. - Permit fees. 
A fee which is set out in section 2-201 shall be collected by the city for each permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1990, § 4-17-1)  
Sec. 7-429. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  No permit shall issue for a temporary Christmas tree lot until a site plan of the proposed lot is submitted to the community development department of the city, including therein the location and size of the following: 
(1)  All tents and/or air-supported structures. 
(2)  All portable buildings. 
(3)  All electrical service. 
(4)  All signs. 
(5)  All traffic egress and parking. 
(b)  Failure to obtain a permit prior to any erection or construction of structures upon a lot or sales of any type from the lot, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  Failure to restore the lot to its pre-permit condition after lapse of all Christmas-related business or January 1 of the new year, whichever is sooner, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1990, § 4-17-2)  
Sec. 7-430. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under this article may be suspended or revoked when it is determined by the fire marshal that: 
(1)  It is used for a location other than that for which it was issued; or 
(2)  Any conditions or limitations set forth in this article or pertinent codes have been violated; or 
(3)  The possessor of the permit fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with any order or notice served upon him under the provisions of this article within the time period provided therein; or 
(4)  There has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the plans, specifications or documentation upon which the permit was based; or 
(5)  Any deviation from any element or item contained within the approved site plan. 
(Code 1990, § 4-17-3)  
Sec. 7-431. - Additional requirements. 
The requirements of this article shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other permit requirements, code requirements, and ordinances currently in force and effect or hereafter adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1990, § 4-17-4)  
Sec. 7-432. - Effective date of permit. 
The effective date of each permit shall be from November 1 of one year until January 1 of the following year. It shall be a violation of this article to operate or conduct business at a time other than permitted by this section. 
(Code 1990, § 4-17-5)  
Secs. 7-433—7-450. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS CABLE SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 7-451. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Grantee shall mean AT&T and the lawful successor or assignee of AT&T. 
Public way shall mean any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, park, parkway, sidewalk, driveway, utility easement, right-of-way, and all other public places, areas, or ground within or without the corporate limits of the city, owned or held in trust for the city, as now constituted or as may be added hereafter. 
System shall mean an AT&T fiber optic cable system for the transmission and distribution of communication signals, including any and all conduit, fiber optic cable, splicing boxes, surface markers or other facilities of grantee located within the public way, as described by exhibit A to Ordinance No. 1654-11-91. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § I, 11-4-91) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.  
Sec. 7-452. - Permit granted. 
There is hereby granted to AT&T, hereinafter referred to as "grantee", a nonfranchise telecommunications cable permit under this article, granting the right and privilege to construct, operate and maintain in, upon, across, along, above, over and under the public ways of the city, a fiber optic cable system subject to the terms and conditions contained herein. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § II, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-453. - Status of grant of authority. 
The right to use and occupy the public way of the city for purposes hereinafter set forth shall not be exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § III, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-454. - Assignability of privileges. 
If the grantee shall at any time sell or assign its rights and privileges under this article to any other person, firm or corporation, the assignment shall be in writing and a duly executed copy of same shall be filed with the city clerk. Such assignment shall not become effective until the assignee shall have agreed in writing with the city to become responsible for the full performance of all the conditions, liabilities, covenants and obligations contained in this article, and until such time as the assignment has been approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § IV, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-455. - Compliance with law. 
The system of the grantee shall at all times be installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all laws, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States of America, the state and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § V, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-456. - Permit application. 
(a)  Application form. All applications for permit under this article shall be made upon forms approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Filing application; permit issuance. All applications for grants of authority under this article shall be filed with the city engineer. Upon approval of such application and payment of the application fee to the finance department of the city as set out in sections 7-459 and 7-462 the city engineer shall issue the permit required for use of the public ways for fiber optic telecommunications cable systems. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, §§ VI, VII, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-457. - Use and repair of public ways. 
(a)  The grantor's system shall be installed, operated and maintained in such a manner as will be consistent with reasonable necessity, least interfere with other public uses of the public ways, and in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the city's engineering division. No construction shall commence until such plans and specifications have been approved by the city engineer, which plans shall include, at a minimum, plan and profile sheets and construction details, and until a permit for the work is duly issued. 
(b)  Except in cases of emergency, the grantee shall give at least 48 hours' notice to the city engineer of its intent to excavate or disturb the surface of any public way. The grantee shall notify the city the next business day of any emergency work undertaken. After such excavation or disturbance, the grantee shall, with due diligence and dispatch, place the public ways in a condition in compliance with city's reasonable standards and specifications. 
(c)  Upon the grantee's failure to commence or complete any construction, maintenance or restoration work required by this article with due diligence and dispatch, the city may cause such work to be done after written notice to the grantee, given so as to afford the grantee an opportunity to commence and complete such work within such time as designated in the notice. The cost of such construction, maintenance or restoration incurred by the city upon the grantee's failure shall then be charged and collected from the grantee. Such costs shall be paid within 30 days of notice to the grantee, or all rights and privileges given to the grantee by this article shall be revoked. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to make and enforce reasonable regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the grantee's system located along, across, over, or under the public way and to reasonably designate where the system shall be placed. 
(e)  The grantee shall keep and maintain at its principal offices a complete and accurate set of maps, construction drawings and specifications describing the exact location of its system within the public way. The grantee shall also keep a complete and accurate set of such maps, drawings and specifications on file with the city engineer's office. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § VIII, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-458. - Construction and maintenance specifications. 
The grantee shall conform to the following minimum specifications: 
(1)  Prior to any boring, AT&T shall identify and verify the elevation of all existing utilities and adjust the bore to avoid contract by a minimum of 12 inches below existing utilities. 
(2)  The depth of conduit, measured from the top of the conduit to the surface of the ground, shall be a minimum of six feet. 
(3)  Within the street right-of-way, with the exception of road crossings, city utility crossings and driveways, a four-inch PVC conduit, with two innerducts, encased with a four-inch cap of concrete or a four-inch black steel pipe installed by jacking or boring should be used. A three-fourths-inch fiber cable shall then be pulled through the conduit in place. 
(4)  Under all road crossings, city utility crossings and driveways, a four-inch, black steel pipe will be installed by jacking or boring, maintaining a depth as specified in subsection 7-158(1). 
(5)  Trenching shall be promptly backfilled with earth and tamped with a mechanical tamper at six-inch lifts, so that the earth is restored to original grade to assure no hazard to vehicular, animal or pedestrian traffic. Compaction shall be to 95 percent standard proctor and test results shall be furnished directly from the laboratory to the city engineer. All open trenches will be properly guarded or barricaded to prevent damage or injury. 
(6)  All cable, where practical, shall be located to cross the roadbed at approximately right angles thereto. No cable shall be placed at any culvert or within five feet of the closed point of same. 
(7)  In areas of potential erosion, the plug method of erosion control shall be used. 
(8)  Operations along roadways, walkways and sidewalks shall be kept clear of excavated material or other obstructions at all times. Barricades, warning signs and lights, and flagmen, when necessary, shall be provided by the contractor or the grantee. Operations involving traffic control shall be in accordance with an approved traffic control plan. 
(9)  Damage to banks, any public utilities, ditches, roads, fences, lawns, shrubbery, drives and any other property, public or private, caused from the equipment and installation of the communication system shall be immediately reported and repaired to the satisfaction of the public authorities having jurisdiction over the right-of-way involved, at the cost of the grantee. 
(10)  All bores shall be accomplished by the dry-bore method. 
(11)  No appurtenances shall be located in existing or planned sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § IX, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-459. - Inspections; abatement of dangerous conditions; fees. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to inspect any construction as it progresses and when it is completed in order to assure compliance with all applicable rules, regulations and laws. The city may at any time order the grantee to remove or abate any conditions that the city deems dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of life or property. If the grantee fails or refuses to remove or abate such condition, the city shall cause the removal or abatement at the sole expense of the grantee. The grantee shall not be entitled to compensation or reimbursement nor shall the city be liable for any damages to the system occasioned by the removal or abatement of any dangerous condition, as determined by the city. 
(b)  There is hereby levied a fee in the amount set forth in section 2-201 per lineal foot of fiber optic cable laid within the right-of-way for the inspection of the construction of the system. This fee shall be paid to the finance department of the city at the time application is made for a permit to use the public way for any purpose granted by this article, and shall be in addition to any fee levied for the use of the public way. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § X, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-460. - Duty to move or alter lines. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to lay or permit to be laid cables, electric conduits, water, sewer, gas or other pipelines and to do or permit to be done any underground work deemed necessary and proper by the city, along, across, over or under the public ways. In permitting such work to be done, the city shall not be liable to the grantee for any damages occasioned, nor shall the city in doing such work be liable to the grantee for any damages. 
(b)  Whenever, by reason of establishing a grade or changes in the grade of any street or in the location or manner of construction of any public way, cables, electric conduits, water, sewer, gas or other underground structures, it shall be deemed necessary by the city to alter, change, adapt or conform, or relocate the system of the grantee, such alterations or changes shall be made within a reasonable time by the grantee, as ordered in writing by the city, without claim for reimbursement or compensation for damages against the city, or its franchise holders. The grantee shall not be entitled to compensation for damages of any nature occasioned by the city's use of the public way for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § XI, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-461. - Indemnification of grantor. 
The grantee shall indemnify, become responsible for and forever save harmless the city from any and all damages, judgments, reasonable costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, which the city may suffer or incur, or which may be legally obtained against the city, for or by reason of the negligent construction, maintenance, use, repair or occupation of any public way within the corporate limits of the city by the grantee pursuant to the terms of this article or resulting from the negligent exercise of the grantee of any of its privileges or by reason of its carrying on its business in the city; provided, however, that in the event of such claim or claims being prosecuted against the city, the grantee shall have the right to defend against the same, and to settle or discharge same in such manner as it may see fit, and the city shall give prompt written notice to the grantee of the presentation or prosecution of such claims. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § XII, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-462. - Payment of fee; term; when due. 
In consideration for the rights and privileges granted by this article, the grantee agrees to pay the city a sum as described in section 2-201 per linear foot of fiber optic cable installed within the public way, including street crossings. Such fee shall be paid on a yearly basis and shall be due and payable on or before the beginning of the fiscal year commencing October 1 of each year. Whenever an application is approved prior to the end of the current fiscal year, such fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the fiscal year and shall be payable upon approval of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § XIII, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-463. - Duration of rights granted. 
The rights granted by the city to the grantee under this article shall continue and remain in full force and effect until revoked by the city. The city shall have the right at any time, upon notice to the grantee, to revoke any and all rights hereunder. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the grantee at its principal offices by certified mail. The grantee shall notify the city clerk of any change of address of its principal offices. Upon revocation, the grantee shall remove its system from the public way of the city. Such removal shall be done in a manner that will least interfere with other uses of the public way and shall be completed within 60 days of the notice to remove. In the event such grant is revoked, the grantee shall be entitled to reimbursement fee of a pro-rata share of its yearly fee based on a proportional number of days remaining in the fiscal year that such grant is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § XIV, 11-4-91)  
Sec. 7-464. - Priorities. 
The rights and privileges granted to the grantee by this article are deemed to be inferior to those of any franchise holder of the city. As such, the grantee's use of the public way shall be subject to the needs of any franchise holder to use the public way. 
(Ord. No. 1654-11-91, § XV, 11-4-91)  
Secs. 7-465—7-480. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - SEASONAL/TEMPORARY SALES ACTIVITIES[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3853-04-2011 , § 1, adopted Mar. 21, 2011, deleted the former Art. XIV, §§ 7-481—7-491, and enacted a new Art. XIV as set out herein. The former Art. XIV pertained to seasonal/temporary sales activities and derived from Ord. No. 1816-6-93, §§ 1.1—11.1, 6-21-93. 
 
Sec. 7-481. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
City-operated event: Means any permitted special event that is operated directly by the city using city resources and staff. Third-party sponsors might be solicited for city-operated events, but the city retains all final decision-making authority. 
Person: The word "person" as used herein shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm, or corporation, association, partnership, co-partnership, or other entity. 
Seasonal/temporary sales activity: Means any sales activity in which items are displayed for sale outdoors; or in a truck, pickup, car, station wagon, or other motor vehicle or trailer, which is parked, stopped, or standing at a fixed location for a period of 15 minutes or more; or in a tent, shed, or other temporary structure intended to be used for a limited time only. 
(Ord. No. 3853-04-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 7-482. - Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct any seasonal/temporary sales within the corporate limits of the City of Lewisville. 
(Ord. No. 3853-04-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 7-483. - Exemptions. 
The following seasonal/temporary sales activities shall be exempt from this article: 
(1)  Outdoor sales and promotions on shopping center parking lots when accessory to a tenant or tenants of the shopping center; and 
(2)  Sales at city-operated events. 
(Ord. No. 3853-04-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Sec. 7-484. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be punished upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3853-04-2011 , § 1, 3-21-11)  
Secs. 7-485—7-500. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 7-501—7-530. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE MOTOR VEHICLE ESCORT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2053-9-95, adopted Sept. 11, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ I—XVII of said ordinance as §§ 7-531—7-547 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 7-531. - Definitions. 
In this division, [the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where context clearly indicates a different meaning]: 
Motor vehicle escort guide shall mean a person engaged in the business of furnishing a private motor vehicle escort for hire who personally escorts or guides a funeral cortege or overwidth, overlength, or overheight motor vehicle or an employee of a person engaged in the business of furnishing private motor vehicle escort service for hire. 
Official police officer's badge shall mean a badge of the size, type and design approved by the chief of police for the use of regular police officers. 
Private motor vehicle escort agency shall mean a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of furnishing private motor vehicle escorts for hire, which employs one or more persons as employees, assistants, clerks or motor vehicle escort guides. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § I, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-532. - License—Required. 
A person commits an offense if he engages in the business of furnishing a private motor vehicle escort for hire within the city without first obtaining an escort license; provided, that persons engaged in the business who are employed by a duly licensed private motor vehicle escort agency shall not be required to be individually licensed. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § II, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-533. - Same—Application; required information. 
A person desiring to conduct a private motor vehicle escort agency or business in the city shall file with the chief of police a written application on a form provided for the purpose, duly signed and verified, which shall state the full name, age, and residence of the licensee; shall specify the trade name and address or location from which the business or agency will operate and for which the escort license is desired; and other relevant facts as may be required by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § III, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-534. - Same—Approval of issuance by chief of police. 
The chief of police shall approve or disapprove issuance of an escort license to engage in the business of conducting private motor vehicle escorts. Upon the approval of issuance of an escort license, the applicant shall, upon the payment of the proper license fee, receive the proper license certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § IV, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-535. - Same—Refusal to issue or renew. 
The chief of police shall refuse to approve issuance or renewal of an escort license for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The making of a false statement as to a material matter in an application for an escort license or renewal; 
(2)  Revocation of a license, pursuant to this division, of the applicant or any proprietor, partner or corporate officer therein, within one year preceding application; 
(3)  Failure of the applicant to comply with the insurance requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § V, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-536. - Same—Revocation. 
(a)  An escort license shall be revoked by the chief of police for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The making of a false statement as to a material matter in an application for a license, renewal, or a hearing concerning the license; 
(2)  Failure of the licensee to comply with the insurance requirements of this division. 
(b)  Written notice of revocation shall be sent by the chief of police to the licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, setting forth the reasons for the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § VI, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-537. - Same—Appeal in cases of refusal or revocation. 
If the chief of police refuses to issue a license to an applicant or revokes the license of a licensee, the action of the chief of police shall be final unless the applicant or licensee files a written appeal to the city council within 20 days from the date notice of denial or revocation is given by the chief of police. If an appeal is timely perfected, the decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § VII, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-538. - Same—Insurance required. 
(a)  Before an escort license is issued to the owner or operator of a private motor vehicle escort agency, or before the renewal of an escort license is granted, the applicant shall file with the chief of police a standard policy of public liability and property damage insurance, to be executed by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, which is approved by the city manager or his designee, insuring the general public against loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of the motor vehicle escort service. 
(b)  The insurance policy shall insure each vehicle operated by the motor vehicle escort agency and shall have limits of not less than $250,000.00 for injury to one person, $500,000.00 for injuries to two or more persons resulting from one accident, and $100,000.00 for damage to property resulting from one accident. The insurance shall be for the protection of passengers riding in a funeral cortege being escorted and for protection of the public, but not for personal injuries sustained by the servants, agents or employees of the motor vehicle escort agency. The policy of insurance shall be for a period of one year and the date of the policy shall coincide with the date of the license issued under this division and shall contain a provision for a continuing liability up to the full amount, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. 
(c)  If a policy is cancelled upon the request of the insurer and no new policy is filed by the licensee before the cancellation of the original insurance, then the license to operate a motor vehicle escort service issued to the licensee shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § VIII, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-539. - Same—Term. 
An escort license is valid for a term of one year unless revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § IX, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-540. - Same—Annual fee; nontransferable. 
The annual fee for an escort license is $75.00, to be paid before the license is issued. An escort license is not transferable or assignable. No refund of fees shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § X, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-541. - Same—Posting and display. 
Immediately upon the receipt of an escort license issued by the city, the licensee named shall post the license and at all times display the license in a conspicuous place in the office or location given as the business address in the application. A licensee shall not post the license or permit the license to be posted upon premises other than those described in the application. A person commits an offense if he alters, defaces or destroys a valid escort license. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § XI, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-542. - Responsibility of owner to employ qualified operators. 
The owner of a private motor vehicle escort agency shall employ as escort guides only those persons who are physically and mentally capable to operate a motorcycle for hire and who are 18 years of age or over. It shall be the responsibility of the private motor vehicle escort agency to select competent operators for escort vehicles. An owner of an escort agency shall not employ any person as a motor vehicle escort guide who does not hold a valid Texas operator's license with motorcycle endorsement. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § XII, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-543. - Officers or deputies to provide escorts when assigned as official duty. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed to prohibit regularly employed officers or deputies of the department of public safety, county sheriff [department], or police department from escorting funeral corteges or oversized, overlength, or overwidth vehicles upon the streets and roadways of the city, when assigned as an official duty by their respective departments. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § XIII, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-544. - Funeral processions—Escorts not required. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed as requiring funeral directors or any other person conducting funerals to contract, hire, or employ a private motor vehicle escort service to guide or escort a funeral cortege in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § XIV, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-545. - Same—Operating procedures. 
(a)  A motor vehicle escort guide shall not engage in a funeral escort service other than that of escorting a funeral procession, consisting of the hearse and cortege from the funeral home, the home of the deceased, or the home of the deceased's family to the place of service and from the place of service to the place of interment. If a funeral procession enters a roadway, expressway, or freeway which has a minimum posted speed limit, the motor vehicle escort guide shall cease the escort before the procession enters the roadway, expressway or freeway and resume the escort after the procession exits the roadway, expressway, or freeway. 
(b)  Funeral escort guides shall not stop traffic approaching from the opposite direction or force or direct traffic to move off the roadway; however, oncoming traffic may be stopped at intersections and other places to assist the cortege in making left turns. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § XV, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-546. - Advertising limitations. 
A person engaged in the business of furnishing private motor vehicle escorts for hire or an employee of a private motor vehicle escort agency shall not distribute, present, or give away cards, handbills, or printed matter of any kind which bear the words "police," "official," or "officer" in conjunction with advertising an escort service; nor shall any advertisement state, imply, or misrepresent that a private motor vehicle escort service is required by the police department, the city, or by any of its [the city's] ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § XVI, 9-11-95)  
Sec. 7-547. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such offense is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2053-9-95, § XVII, 9-11-95)  
Secs. 7-548—7-560. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 7-561. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of such residents if they have given reasonable notice that they do not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive handbills or advertising matter; 
(b)  To protect the people against the health and safety menace and the expense incident to the littering of streets and public places by the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and commercial and noncommercial handbills; and 
(c)  To preserve the people's constitutional right to receive and disseminate information. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-562. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, phrases, when used in this article, have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning; 
Commercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sales; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibitions, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken upon for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be derived to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind without a permit, where such permit is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)  Which while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially and advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Handbill distributor shall mean and include any person, firm or corporation engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing handbills, other than distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such handbills. 
Handbill sponsor shall mean and include any person, firm or corporation who utilizes handbills as a medium of advertising or spreading a message. 
Newspaper shall mean and include any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill shall mean and include any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper booklet, or any other printed or reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or a newspaper. 
Obscene shall mean material which depicts or describes sexual conduct that is objectionable or offensive to accepted standards of decency which the average person, applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interests or material which depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law, which, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
Person shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association, cooperation, company or organization of any kind. 
Private premises shall mean and include any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited, uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or structure. 
Public place shall mean and include any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys or other public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98; Ord. No. 2925-04-2003, § 1, 4-7-03)  
Sec. 7-563. - Posting notice, placard, bill, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise affix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, or curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any public way or public place, or any lamp post, electric light, telegraph or telephone pole or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or upon the piers, columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any public bridge or viaduct, or other public structure or building except such as may be authorized or required by laws of the United States, or the State of Texas, and the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-564. - Throwing handbills in public places prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any public place within the city. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person willing to accept such handbill. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-565. - Placing handbills in or upon vehicles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any commercial or noncommercial handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle, who is willing to accept the same. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-566. - Distribution of handbills on uninhabited or vacant private premises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are uninhabited or vacant. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-567. - Distribution of handbills where prohibition properly posted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, handbill distributor, or handbill sponsor to distribute, or cause to be distributed, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill, or cause the same to be done, upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisements," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the ocucpants of said premises do not desire to be molested or to have the right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such commercial or noncommercial handbills left upon such premises. 
(b)  Defense to prosecution. A handbill sponsor shall have a defense to prosecution under this section upon proof of a written contract with a handbill distributor. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98; Ord. No. 2925-04-2003, § 2, 4-7-03)  
Sec. 7-568. - Distributing handbills at private premises; exceptions. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, that, except where the premises are posted as provided in this article or where anyone upon the premises requests otherwise, a person may place or deposit any such commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon such private premises, if such handbill is contained in a plastic bag ventilated with air holes throughout the surface of the bag, or unventilated plastic bag no greater than six inches in width, or if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of newspapers; except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-569. - Handbills depicting certain matter prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or transmit any sign, or any handbill: 
(a)  Which is reasonably likely to incite or to produce imminent lawless action; or 
(b)  Which is obscene or unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § II, 8-3-98)  
Sec. 7-570. - Residential dwelling restrictions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person distributing handbills or any solicitation literature whatsoever to get nearer to a window or door of a residential dwelling than 25 feet, unless such person is on a sidewalk, walkway or driveway approaching the residential dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2423-3-1999, § I, 3-15-99) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2423-3-1999, § I, adopted March 15, 1999, added a new section 7-557. The editor has determined that the provisions of this new section should be included under article XVI and has redesignated the provisions of said ordinance as section 7-570.  
ARTICLE XVII. - SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
Sec. 7-571. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
License means a license authorized by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
Permit means a permit authorized by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 3192-03-2005, § 1, 3-21-05)  
Sec. 7-572. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person, corporation or association shall sell alcoholic beverages within the city without first having applied for and been granted a valid permit issued by the city to sell alcoholic beverages. Upon the exhibition of a license or permit duly issued by the state to the applicant, the city secretary's office shall, in the name of the city, issue and deliver to the applicant a permit to engage in the business in the city of the character described in and authorized by the license or permit from the state held by the applicant. The license or permit so issued in the name of the city shall authorize the conduct of such business upon the premises described in a license or permit from the state and shall remain in force only so long as the license or permit from the state remains in force. 
(b)  [Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 3192-03-2005, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 3469-07-2007, § 4, 7-2-07)  
Sec. 7-573. - Business hours. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell or deliver any alcoholic beverage except within those hours as prescribed by state law. The holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit issued by the state (or any equivalent late hours permit/license issued by the state) may offer alcoholic beverages for sale on Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. and on any other day between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. in accordance with state law. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale beer or wine, except within those hours as prescribed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 3192-03-2005, § 1, 3-21-05; Ord. No. 3475-08-2007, § 1, 8-6-07)  
Sec. 7-574. - Violation; penalty. 
A permittee or licensee who sells an alcoholic beverage without first having paid a fee levied in this article commits a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by fine of not less than one dollar nor more than $200.00. In addition to any other penalty imposed in this article or by state law, the city may revoke or suspend any license or permit granted under the provisions of this article, or may cause the state alcoholic beverage commission to revoke or suspend any other license or permit issued under the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. The remedies provided herein shall be deemed to be cumulative of all other remedies. 
(Ord. No. 3192-03-2005, § 1, 3-21-05)  
Secs. 7-575—7-600. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - OIL AND GAS DRILLING AND PRODUCTION[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, adopted May 4, 2009, repealed the former Art. XVIII, §§ 7-601—7-619, and enacted a new Art. XVIII as set out herein. The former Art. XVIII pertained to oil and gas drilling and production and derived from Ord. No. 3601-09-2008, § 1, 9-8-08. 
 
Sec. 7-601. - Purpose. 
The exploration, development, and production of oil and gas in the city is an activity which necessitates reasonable regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and regulations for present and future operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing of oil and gas and other substances produced in association with oil and gas within the city to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public; minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral resources. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-602. - Definitions. 
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of oil and gas wells not specifically defined in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable oil and gas industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandonment means "abandonment" as defined by the Texas Railroad Commission and includes the plugging of the well and the restoration of any well site as required by this article. 
Ambient noise level means the all encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location. 
Blowout preventer means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts. 
Building or habitable building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or portions thereof." 
Cathodic protection means an electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current to the structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential in the immunity region. The required cathodic protection current is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an impressed current system. 
City means the City of Lewisville. 
City Code means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville. 
City attorney means the City Attorney of the City of Lewisville. 
Closed loop mud system means a system utilized while drilling so that reserve pits are not used and instead steel bins are used to collect all drilling waste. 
Commission means the Texas Railroad Commission. 
Completion of drilling, redrilling and reworking means the date the work is completed for the drilling, redrilling or reworking and the crew is released by completing their work or contract or by their employer. 
Compressor station means a site and associated buildings and equipment utilized to increase the pressure of natural gas for delivery into a transportation system or other use. 
Daytime means the period from 7:00 am to 7:00 pm. 
Decibel (db) means a unit for measuring the intensity of a sound/noise and is equal to ten times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the measured sound pressure squared to a reference pressure which is 20 micropascals. 
Derrick means any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure which is required or used in connection with drilling or reworking a well for the production of oil and gas. 
Drilling means digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil, gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
Drilling equipment means the derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling. 
Drilling operations means drilling with drill pipe and bit, running casing, circulating mud and fluids, tripping tools and setting production casing/tubing. 
Drill site means the premises used during the drilling or reworking of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of a well or wells or any associated operation. 
Exploration means geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for oil, gas or other subsurface hydrocarbons. 
Fire code means the currently adopted International Fire Code with approved local amendments. 
Fire department means the Fire Department of the City of Lewisville. 
Flowback means the process of flowing a completed/fractured well for the purpose of recovering water and residual sand from the gas stream prior to sending gas down a sales line. 
Fracture or fracturing means the process of fracture stimulation of a rock formation. 
Gas means any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. 
Gas production facility means a site, building, structure, or facility, including gas pads and wells, related to the production, processing, or transportation of natural gas. 
Gas stream analysis report means a report listing all compounds detected and at what levels, all compounds issued from a gas well. 
Inspector means the oil and gas inspector or inspectors designated by the City Manager of Lewisville, including city staff or technical advisory consultants. 
Nighttime, or non-daylight time, means the period between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
Oil and gas well means any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil or natural gas. The terms "oil" or "gas" used in this article shall be interchangeable and shall mean either an oil well or gas well operation. 
Operator means, for each well, the person listed on the railroad commission form W-1 or form P-4 for an oil or gas well that is, or will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under an oil or gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no oil or gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator. 
Operation site means the area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with oil or gas after drilling activities are complete. 
Pad site means the fenced operations area containing the well or wells and accessory buildings and equipment. 
Park means any land area owned by the city, state, federal government or home owners association dedicated for traditional park-like recreational purposes. 
Permit means the permit required by the City of Lewisville for any proposed well. 
Person means both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind. 
Protected use means a habitable building, including but not limited to a residence, retail building, office, warehouse, religious institution, public building, hospital building, or school. Structures such as equipment buildings, pump houses and agricultural barns that are occupied on a daily basis for less than four hours each day shall not be considered a protected use. All parks shall be considered a protected use. 
Public building means all buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants, hospitals. 
Redrill means recompletion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore. 
Religious institution means any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
Residence means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or other building designed for dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for an oil or gas well permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
Reworking means recompletion or reentry of existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners or casings. 
Right-of-way means public rights-of-way including streets, easements and other property within the city and which is dedicated to the use and benefit of the public. 
School means any public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up through and including the twelfth grade level and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the State of Texas or by the City of Lewisville that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours per day. 
Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way. 
Tank means a container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids. 
Technical advisor means such person(s) familiar with and educated in the oil or gas industry or the law as it relates to oil or gas matters who may be retained from time to time by the city. 
Well means a hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose of producing oil, gas, or liquid hydrocarbon. 
Workover operation means work performed on or in a well after its completion in an effort to secure production where there has been none, restore production that has ceased or increase production. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 3869-06-2011 , § 1, 6-6-11)  
Sec. 7-603. - Oil and gas inspector. 
(a)  The city manager shall designate an oil and gas inspector who shall enforce the provisions of this article. The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive shall constitute a violation of this article. The oil and gas inspector may be a city staff member or may be provided or supplemented by an agent for the city. 
(b)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state. Failure of any person to permit access to the oil and gas inspector shall constitute a violation of this article. The oil and gas inspector shall conduct periodic inspections at least once a year of all permitted wells in the city to determine that the wells are operating in accordance within proper safety parameters as set out in this article and all regulations of the commission. 
(c)  The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any records sent to the commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to establish and determine compliance with the applicable oil or gas well permit. Failure of any person to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-604. - Operator's agent. 
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the State of Texas, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten days notify the oil and gas inspector in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-605. - Oil or gas well permit required. 
(a)  A person wanting to engage in and operate in oil or gas production activities shall apply for and obtain an oil or gas well permit from the city. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, reworking, fracturing or operation of any such well or to conduct any activity related to the production of oil or gas without first obtaining an oil or gas well permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to reworking, initial site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing. A permit shall be required for seismic surveys. 
(b)  The operator must apply for and obtain an oil or gas well permit for the drilling, redrilling, deepening, reentering, activating or converting of each well. 
(c)  An oil or gas well permit shall not constitute authority for the reentering and drilling of an existing or abandoned well. An operator shall obtain a new oil or gas well permit in accordance with the provisions of this article if the operator is reentering and drilling an abandoned well. 
(d)  When an oil or gas well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, redrilling, deepening, reentering, activating or converting of a well, such oil or gas well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well, provided, however, that a new or supplemental permit shall be obtained before such well may be reworked for purposes of redrilling, deepening or converting such well to a depth or use other than that set forth in the then current permit for such well. 
(e)  Any person who intends to rework a permitted well using a drilling rig, to fracture stimulate a permitted well after initial completion or to conduct seismic surveys or other exploration activities shall give written notice to the oil and gas inspector no less than 15 days before the activities begin. The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail, including whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be conducted. The notice must also provide the address and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. A sign will also be posted on the property giving the public notice of the activities, including the name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities. Information on the sign shall be legible from the nearest roadway. 
The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation operations performed on a well within 800 feet of residence protected use: 
(1)  At least 48 hours before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign at the entrance of the well site advising the public of the date the operations will commence; 
(2)  "Flowback" operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be exempt from work hour restrictions, but shall be subject to compliance with noise restrictions contained in this article; 
(3)  A watchman shall be required at all times during such operations; and 
(4)  At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank. 
(f)  An oil or gas well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within 180 days from the date of the issuance of the oil or gas well permit. Drilling must commence within 180 days from the date of the issuance of the oil or gas well permit in order to maintain the validity of the oil or gas well permit. An oil or gas well permit may be extended by the oil and gas inspector for an additional 180 days upon request by the operator and proof that the engineering site plan for the requested oil or gas well permit for such location has not changed. 
(g)  The oil or gas well permits required by this article are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit which may be required by any other provision of this Code or by any other governmental agency. 
(h)  No additional oil or gas well permit or filing fees shall be required for: 
(1)  Any wells, existing, previously permitted or approved by the city, within the corporate limits of the city on the effective date of this article; or 
(2)  Any wells which drilling has commenced on the effective date of this article; or 
(3)  Any wells in existence or on any wells on which drilling has commenced on land annexed into the city after the effective date of this article; or 
(4)  Any well that was planned for the land before the 90th day before the effective date of its annexation and one or more licenses, certificates, permits, approvals, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were required by law for such well and the completed application for the initial authorization was filed before the date the annexation proceedings were instituted. 
(i)  No oil or gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any floodway as defined by the most current FEMA map, without the prior consent of the city council. 
(j)  Oil and gas well permits may be issued on property located in a floodplain, provided that all water and drilling materials must be in steel containers except for the concrete pad. No reserve pits shall be allowed in the floodplain. An engineer's certificate shall be provided showing no negative impact on water flow in the floodplain. 
(k)  No oil or gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled on city owned property without the prior consent of the city council. 
(l)  By acceptance of any oil or gas well permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in any oil or gas well permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was set forth verbatim in such oil or gas well permit. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-606. - Oil or gas well permit application and filing fees. 
(a)  Every application for an oil or gas well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the City of Lewisville. 
(b)  Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of $10,000.00 per well. 
(c)  The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date of the application and type or types of oil or gas well permit requested. 
(2)  An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the oil or gas operation, the parcel and the production unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property recorded by plat should reference subdivision, block and lot numbers. 
(3)  Map showing proposed transportation route and road for equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by the oil or gas operation. 
(4)  Proposed well name. 
(5)  Surface owner names(s) and address(es) of the lease property. 
(6)  Mineral lessee name and address. 
(7)  Operator/applicant name and address and if the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners. 
(8)  Name and address of individual designated to receive notice. 
(9)  Name of representative with supervisory authority over all oil or gas operation site activities and a 24-hour phone number. 
(10)  Location and description of all improvements and structures within 800 feet of the well. 
(11)  Owner and address of each parcel of property within 800 feet of the proposed drill site. 
(12)  A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage sheds. The site plan shall include all existing utilities, public roadways, driveways, alleys and all public access points. 
(13)  The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be notified in case of an emergency. 
(14)  The exact and correct acreage and number of wells, if applicable, included in the oil or gas well permit application. 
(15)  Copies of all reports required by the commission. 
(16)  A signed road usage and damage remediation agreement to compensate the city for the allowed use of city roadways and rights-of-way, including reimbursement for reasonable anticipated maintenance and damage remediation of city roadways and/or rights-of-way caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production, and operation of oil or gas wells. 
(17)  A description of public utilities required during drilling and operation. 
(18)  A description of the water source to be used during drilling. 
(19)  Noise management plan. 
(20)  A copy of the approved commission permit to drill together with attachments and survey plats which are applicable to the drill and operation sites. 
(21)  A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by the environmental protection agency. A copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the city five days prior to the commencement of any onsite activity. 
(22)  A copy of the determination by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) of the depth of useable quality ground water. 
(23)  Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article. 
(24)  A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true and correct. 
(25)  All required application and oil or gas well permit fees. 
(26)  An emission control/reduction plan. 
(27)  A description of how water used during the operations will be stored, removed and disposed of. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 3809-10-2010 , § 1, 10-4-10)  
Sec. 7-607. - Oil or gas well permits; process. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  An oil or gas well permit shall be required for all proposed wells. 
(2)  A public hearing for an oil or gas well permit shall be required if the proposed well is to be located within 800 feet of a protected use. This provision applies to any protected building, including but not limited to, a residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector. In addition, a public hearing for an oil or gas well permit shall be required if the proposed well is to be located within 800 feet of a property line of a park. Oil or gas wells located more than 800 feet from such uses may be approved by the gas inspector without a public hearing. For the purpose of such an oil or gas well permit the measurement of the 800-foot distance shall be made from the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building or nearest park property line. 
(b)  Application requirements. An application for an oil or gas well permit shall include the following information: 
(1)  A detailed site plan that includes all the information required in section 1-6, but also includes specific details to the projected location of the major components of the drilling site, impacted vegetation, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent building and other structures and the measured distance from the well site to these buildings and structures, temporary and permanent fencing and landscaping. 
(c)  Permitting procedure. 
(1)  After a complete permit application is submitted, the oil and gas inspector shall evaluate the public impact of the proposed activity. The oil and gas inspector shall consider the proposed site and the proposed operations or drilling program and shall identify restrictions or conditions, including minimum separation distance for drilling or other operations, special safety equipment and procedures, noise reduction levels, screening and any other requirements the oil and gas inspector deems appropriate. If the proposed well or wells are located more than 800 feet from a protected use for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector, the Inspector may, consistent with state law, accept, reject or modify the application in the interest of securing compliance with this article, this Code and/or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. An applicant may appeal a decision of the oil and gas inspector to the city council. 
(2)  Applications for a proposed well or wells that are located 800 feet or less from a protected use as measured from the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk to a protected use, for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector, shall require a public hearing following a review by the inspector. Within 45 days of receipt of a complete application, the oil and gas inspector shall place the matter on the city council agenda for a public hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to the applicant and any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. The 45-day period shall not begin to run until the applicant/operator has provided the oil and gas inspector with a complete application package. 
a.  At least 15 days, and no more than 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing before the city council for an oil or gas well permit under this article, operator shall notify, at operator's expense, each surface owner of property, as shown by the current tax roll, within 800 feet of the proposed well use as measured from the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk to a protected use, not owned by or under surface lease to the operator and the hearing place, date and time. Such notice, as outlined below, shall be by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail. The operator shall file an affidavit with the oil and gas inspector showing the name and last known address, as identified by the current tax roll, of each owner of property to whom notice was mailed and the names of each owner of property to whom notice is required to be given, but whose address is unknown. 
b.  At least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing before the city council for an oil or gas well permit under this article the operator shall, at operator's expense, erect at least one sign, no less than three feet by three feet, upon the premises upon which an oil or gas well permit has been requested. Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property at a point or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such property. 
1.  The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that an oil or gas well permit to drill for oil or gas has been requested and that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the applicant/operator or the City of Lewisville at the numbers indicated on the sign. 
2.  The continued maintenance of any such sign(s) shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public hearing or to any other official action concerning this article. 
3.  Any sign(s) shall be removed within ten days of final action by the city council. 
c.  At least 15 days, and no more than 20 days prior to the date of the public hearing before city council for an oil or gas well permit under this article, operator shall publish a copy of the notice as outlined below, at operator's expense, in one issue of the legal newspaper of the city. An affidavit by the printer or publisher of the newspaper indicating publication of the notice shall be filed with the application and will be prima facie evidence of such publication. The notice shall read as follows: 
"Notice is hereby given that, acting under and pursuant to the Ordinances of the City of Lewisville, Texas, on the ________ day of, ___________, 20 ___, ___________, filed with the oil and gas inspector of the City of Lewisville, an application for an oil or gas well permit to drill, complete and operate a well for oil or gas upon property located at ___________, ________ County, Lewisville, Texas, more particularly shown on the map of record in Volume ___________, Page ________, Plat records of ___________ County, Texas or per Tax Tract Number ________, ________ County, Texas. The City Council will conduct a public hearing on the request for said permit on the ________ day of ___________, 20 ________ at _____ o'clock _____.m. in the City Council Chambers located at 151 West Church Street, Lewisville, Texas." 
d.  All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance with this section and are in addition to other notices which may otherwise be required. 
e.  After a permit application is submitted, the oil and gas inspector shall evaluate the public impact of the proposed activity. The oil and gas inspector shall consider the proposed site and the proposed operations or drilling program and shall draft recommended restrictions or conditions, including minimum separation distance for drilling or other operations, special safety equipment and procedures, recommended noise reduction levels, screening and any other requirements the oil and gas inspector deems appropriate. The recommendations shall be submitted to the city council for consideration prior to the public hearing. 
f.  Prior to the public hearing and before the city council considers the merits of the application and the recommendations of the gas inspector, the applicant/operator shall provide evidence of a certificate of publication establishing timely publication of the notice of the hearing, that timely actual notice of the hearing was given to all persons as required by this article and that the applicant/operator has otherwise complied with or satisfied all other requirements of this article, including full and complete compliance with the insurance and security requirements. 
g.  The burden of proof on all matters considered in the hearing shall be upon the applicant/operator. 
h.  The city council shall review the application and any other related information and shall consider the following in deciding whether to grant an oil or gas well permit: 
1.  Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area considering the particular location and the character of the improvements located there; 
2.  Whether the drilling of such wells would conflict with the orderly growth and development of the city; 
3.  Whether there are other alternative well site locations; 
4.  Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the public when and if conducted in accordance with the oil or gas well permit conditions to be imposed; 
5.  Whether there is sufficient access for the city fire personnel and firefighting equipment; and 
6.  The recommendations of the oil and gas inspector. 
7.  Whether the impact upon the adjacent property and the general public by operations conducted in compliance with the oil or gas well permit conditions are reasonable and justified, balancing the following factors: 
(i)  The right of the owners(s) of the mineral estate to explore, develop, and produce the minerals; and 
(ii)  The availability of alternative drill sites. 
i.  The city council may require an increase in the distance the well is set back from any protected use, or require any change in operation, plan, design, layout or any change in the on-site and technical regulations in this article, including fencing, screening, lighting, delivery times, noise levels, tank height, or any other matters reasonably required by public interest. 
j.  The city council may, consistent with state law, accept, reject or modify the application in the interest of securing compliance with this article, the City Code of Ordinances and/or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(d)  Setbacks. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to drill any well, where the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk to a protected use, at the surface of the ground, is located: 
(1)  Within 25 feet from any outer boundary line; or 
(2)  Within 25 feet from any storage tank, or source of ignition. Tanks must also be at least 100 feet from any protected use or combustible structure; or 
(3)  Within 75 feet of any public street, road, highway or future street, right-of-way, public property line, or railroad right-of-way; or 
(4)  Within 500 feet from any protected building used, or designed and intended to be used, for human occupancy; or 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to drill any well, where the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk is located within 500 feet of a protected use. This provision applies to any park property line or protected building, including but not limited to, a residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building or school for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector. For the purpose of an oil or gas well permit the measurement of the 500-foot distance shall be made from the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building or nearest park property line. 
This setback distance may be reduced by the city council to less than 500 feet, but not less than 300 feet, from a protected use only when there is the unanimous consent of the property owners with a protected use located within a 500-foot radius around said well and the affirmative vote of not less than three-fourths of all the members of the city council. For the purpose of and oil and gas well permit the measurement of the 500-foot distance shall be made from the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building or nearest park property line. For protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the city council may impose additional requirements for a reduction of such distance. 
(5)  Within 100 feet of any building accessory to, but not necessary to the operation of the well; or 
(6)  Within 300 feet to any state registered fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk to the fresh water well bore. 
It shall be unlawful to drill any oil or gas well, where the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk to a protected use, at the surface of the ground, is located within 300 feet of any existing fresh water well, except for fresh water wells used solely for operation of the oil or gas well operation. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk to the fresh water well bore. The reduction of the distance requirement, if requested, for fresh water wells is subject to the railroad commission regulations and any other state or federal requirements. 
The operator of an oil or gas well shall provide the oil and gas inspector with a "pre-drilling" and "post-drilling" water analysis from any fresh water well within 800 feet of the oil or gas well. 
Within 180 days of its completion date, each oil or gas well shall be equipped with a cathodic protection system to protect the production casing from external corrosion. The oil and gas inspector may approve an alternative method of protecting the production casing from external corrosion. 
(7)  No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the venting of gases into the atmosphere or the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or as permitted by the commission, then such vent or open flame shall not be located closer than 800 feet from any protected use building not used in operations on the drilling site and such vent or open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners. Venting operations shall be required to comply with the noise regulations contained in this article. 
Unless otherwise specifically stated, setback distances shall be calculated from the closest edge or plane of permanent equipment that could pose a health or safety risk, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any object listed in subsections (d)(1) through (7) above. 
(e)  Fencing for oil or gas well permit. 
(1)  Chain link fencing material of dark green color or black color shall surround the entire drill site area as determined by the oil and gas inspector with a minimum of eight feet but not to exceed ten feet in height and shall enclose all completed wells and tanks located within an oil or gas well permit area. The color of all fences shall be the same throughout the pad site. 
Gate and other fencing requirements as outlined in this article shall also be required. Access to all gates must be provided to the oil and gas inspector, such as providing the combination to the locks or using a lock provided by the city. 
(f)  Landscaping. A plan for landscaping and irrigation as well as a tree survey shall be provided with the drilling permit. Landscaping and irrigation shall be required as determined by the oil and gas inspector along all sides of the well site with suitable screening done via a combination of trees and shrubs that complement the natural character of the surrounding neighborhood. Measures should be in place to cease irrigation once the trees and shrubs are established and shall not be less than two years The landscaping, within two years should characterize a natural visual effect and combined, provide screening of the pad site at line of site within 100 feet. 
All landscaping shall be installed within 30 days of the beginning of the pad site construction; provided however, that this time may be extended when necessary, as determined by the city, but the extension shall not exceed 12 months from date of permit issuance. Moreover, when, in the opinion of the city, a site is remote from public view and/or protected uses and the landscape buffer is not needed for visual screening, a contribution to the city's beautification fund in the amount of the cost of the landscape buffer may be made in lieu of installation of the landscape buffer. 
The following tree preservation and planting measures are required: 
(1)  The minimum 30-foot landscape buffer outside the pad site shall contain a tree canopy and shrubbery combination equal to no less than 35 percent of the area (square footage) of the pad site. Existing trees within the buffer may be included as part of the required canopy except for mesquite trees. The following requirements apply to all oil and gas permits. 
a.  A minimum retention of 75 percent of the existing trees will be required within the landscape buffer unless removal is necessary for location of equipment as determined by the gas inspector. No more than 25 percent of the existing tree canopy may be removed from the landscape buffer. The fees for removal of protected trees shall not apply to trees removed as part of this 25 percent maximum. 
b.  No more than 25 percent of the same species may be planted at one site. 
c.  A minimum of 25 percent of the planted trees must be an evergreen species; and 
d.  The 35 percent canopy coverage is established by the actual canopy coverage area retained, except for mesquite trees, and the typical mature canopy of newly planted trees. 
e.  The minimum size of tree planted will be three inches in diameter measured one foot above ground level. If the tree is multi trunk, the main stem will be given full credit for its diameter and all other stems will receive one-half credit. The total of all must be three inches or greater. All planted trees will be credited its canopy coverage at normal grow out. 
f.  All trees that die within two years of the date of project completion will be replaced by another replacement tree. The replacement tree carries the same two-year replacement requirement. A replacement of any tree that dies within two years of planting will be replaced by the operator or agent and new two-year guarantee will begin at the time of replacement. 
(g)  All other interpretations of the tree canopy coverage and regulations will be made by the city. 
(1)  The following list of trees is considered desirable and adapted trees for the Lewisville area. Planting of trees from this list is acceptable. Other trees will be considered by the city and granted on a case-by-case basis. The approval of additional species will be judged on adaptability, long-term health and growing characteristic of the tree type. 
Common Name 	Scientific Name 	Canopy Size 
Redbud 	Cercis Canadensis 	Small 
Mexican Plum 	Prunus Mexicana 	Small 
Cherry Laurel 	Prunus Caroliniana 	Medium 
Eve's Necklace 	Sophora Affinis 	Medium 
Crab Apple 	Malus Angustifolia 	Medium 
Bradford Pear 	Pyrus Calleryana var. Bradford 	Medium 
Golden Raintree 	Koelrueteria Paniculata 	Medium 
Cado Maple 	Acer Saccharum 	Large 
Red Maple 	Acer Rubrum 	Large 
Bigtooth Maple 	Aces Grandidentatum 	Large 
Bur Oak 	Quercus Macrocrapa 	Large 
Chinquapin Oak 	Quercus Muhlenbergii 	Large 
Live Oak 	Quercus Virginiana 	Large 
Shumard Red Oak 	Quercus Shumardii 	Large 
Texas Red Oak 	Quercus Texana 	Large 
Post Oak 	Quercus Stallata 	Large 
Blackjack Oak 	Quercus Marilandica 	Large 
Pecan 	Carya Illinoensis 	Large 
Lacebark Elm 	Ulmas Parvifolia 	Large 
Cedar Elm 	Ulma Crassifolia 	Large 
American Elm 	Ulmas Americana 	Large 
Bald Cypress 	Taxodium Distichum 	Large 
Black Walnut 	Carya Nigra 	Large 
Green Ash 	Fraxinus Pennsylvanica 	Large 
Texas Ash 	Fraxinus 	Large 
Southern Magnolia 	Magnolia Grandiflora 	Large 
 
(2)  The clear cutting of trees is prohibited within the city. Cutting of trees, grading and land clearing may be done, for oil and gas well drilling pad sites, in accordance with the approved site plan. The existing natural landscape character of the pad site shall be preserved to the exterior perimeter as outlined in the landscaping requirements of this section. 
Only trees from the list provided in this section will be considered to meet the requirement of this article. Tree caliper shall be measured one-foot from the base of the tree. Multi-trunk trees shall count as one tree. Multi-trunk measurements shall be considered as an aggregate total of each trunks individual diameter. 
Protected Tree List 
Only trees from the list provided in this section will be considered to meet the requirement of a protected tree for this article. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Minimum Caliper 
Fraxenis Texensis 	Texas Ash 	5" 
Quercus Macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 	5" 
Quercus Virginiana 	Live Oak 	5" 
Quercus Shumardii 	Shumard Red Oak 
(aka Texana) (aka Texas Red Oak) 	5" 
Quercus Muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 	5" 
Carya Illinoinensis 	Pecan 	5" 
Quercus Accutissima 	Sawtooth Oak 	5" 
Quercus Stellata 	Post Oak 	5" 
Quercus Marilandica 	Black Jack Oak 	5" 
Ulmus Crassifolia 	Cedar Elm 	5" 
 
Removal of protected trees. If protected trees are removed from the pad site, fees for removal shall be paid according to the tree removal provisions of the city general development ordinance. Payment for tree removal shall be due prior to issuance of a drilling permit. Funds received for tree removal shall be designated to a general beautification fund as determined by the city. 
(g)  Vehicle routes for oil or gas well permit. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to such streets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by this Code wherever capable of being used. The vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof. 
A signed road usage and damage remediation agreement will be required for any gas or oil well drilling operation that uses city maintained streets for access to their well site, whether the wells are within the city limits or outside the city limits. 
(h)  Work hours for oil or gas well permit. Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling or production. All formation fracture stimulation operations shall be conducted during daylight hours as defined by this article. "Flowback" operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be exempt from work hour restrictions, but are subject to compliance with noise restrictions contained in this article. All workover operations shall be restricted to daytime hours. 
(i)  Noise restrictions for oil or gas well permit. 
(1)  In no case shall any drilling, producing or other operations produce a sound level greater than 78 dB(a) when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the production equipment in question. If the ambient noise level exceeds 78 dB(a), that ambient level will be the maximum allowable noise level under all circumstances.Prior to the issuance of an oil or gas well permit and the commencement of operations, the operator shall submit a noise management plan, approved by the city, detailing how the equipment used in the drilling, completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible noise levels of this section. The noise management plan must: 
a.  Identify operation noise impacts; 
b.  Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior to construction of any wellhead, compressor or compression facility; and 
c.  Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall be considered, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and type; 
2.  Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions; 
3.  Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; and 
4.  Topography. 
The operator shall be responsible for verifying compliance with this section and the noise management plan after the installation of the noise generation equipment. 
(2)  No well shall be drilled, redrilled or any equipment operated at any location within the city in such a manner so as to create any noise which causes the exterior noise level when measured at the protected use receiver's/receptor's property line or from the closest exterior point of the protected use structure or inside the protected use structure if access to the property is granted by the receiver/receptor, that: 
a.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than five decibels during daytime hours and more than three decibels during nighttime hours; 
b.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than ten decibels over the daytime average ambient noise level during fracturing operations during daytime hours. No fracturing shall be allowed during nighttime hours except for flowback operations related to fracturing as provided in c. below; 
c.  Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three decibels during flowback operations during nighttime hours; 
d.  Creates pure tones where one-third octave band sound-pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound-pressure levels of two contiguous one-third octave bands by five dB for center frequencies of 500 Hertz and above, and by eight dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hertz, and by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hertz; or 
e.  Creates low-frequency outdoor noise levels that exceed the following dB levels: 
16 Hz octave band: 65 dB 
32 Hz octave band: 65 dB 
64 Hz octave band: 65 dB 
(3)  The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to the city a continuous 72-hour predrilling ambient noise level prior to the issuance of an oil or gas well permit. The 72-hour time span shall include at least one 24-hour reading during either a Saturday or Sunday. The operator shall use the prior established ambient noise level for the installation of any new noise generation equipment unless the operator can demonstrate that the increase in the ambient noise level is not associated with drilling and production activities located either on or offsite. 
(4)  Adjustments to the noise standards as set forth above in subsection (i)(1) a., b. and c. of this section may be permitted intermittently in accordance with the following: 
Permitted Increase       Duration of Increase 
(dBA)       (minutes)* 
10 ..... 5 
15 ..... 1 
20 ..... less than 1 
*Cumulative minutes during any one hour 
 
(5)  All workover operations shall be restricted to daytime hours. 
(6)  The exterior noise level generated by the drilling, redrilling or other operations of all gas wells located within 800 feet of a protected use shall be continuously monitored, to ensure compliance. The cost of such monitoring shall be borne by the operator. If a complaint is received by either the operator or the city from a protected use, the operator shall, within 24-hours of notice of the complaint, continuously monitor for a 72-hour period the exterior noise level generated by the drilling, redrilling or other operations to ensure compliance. At the request of the gas inspector, the operator shall monitor the exterior noise level at the source of the complaint. 
(7)  Acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative methods as approved by the gas inspector may be used to ensure compliance. All soundproofing shall comply with accepted industry standards and be subject to approval by the city. 
(8)  The sound level meter used in conducting noise evaluations shall meet the American National Standard Institute's standard for sound meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
(9)  A citation may be immediately issued for failure to comply with the provisions of this section. However, if the operator is in compliance with the approved noise management plan, and a violation still occurs, the operator will be given 24 hours from notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of the 24-hour period may be granted in the event that the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator. 
(j)  Tank specifications for an oil or gas well permit. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the city. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than eight feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks. All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the International Fire Code, but in all cases, shall be at least 25 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
(k)  All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 3809-10-2010 , §§ 2—4, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 3849-04-2011 , §§ 1—3, 4-4-11)  
Sec. 7-608. - Issuance of oil or gas well permits. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the oil and gas inspector to review and approve or disapprove based on the criteria established by this article all applications for oil or gas well drilling permits for wells located more than 800 feet from a protected use for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector. The issuance of an oil or gas well permit for wells located 800 feet or less from such a protected use is subject to approval by the city council. The oil and gas inspector, within 30 days of the receipt of a complete application, or after the approval by the city council and remittance of all fees, insurance and security per the requirements of this article for an oil or gas well permit, shall issue an oil or gas well permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities applied for. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to any dwellings or buildings for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on the date the application for an oil or gas well permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector. 
(c)  If the oil and gas inspector denies an oil or gas well permit application, he shall notify the operator in writing of such denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the oil and gas inspector to deny the oil or gas well permit, the operator may: 
(1)  Cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the oil and gas inspector for approval and issuance of the oil or gas well permit; or 
(2)  File an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-609. - Amended oil or gas well permits. 
(a)  An operator may submit an application to the oil and gas inspector to amend an existing oil or gas well permit to commence drilling from a new drill site that is not shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing oil or gas well permit, to relocate a drill site or operation site that is shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing oil or gas well permit, or to otherwise amend the existing oil or gas well permit. 
(b)  Applications for amended oil or gas well permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The application fee as set forth herein; 
(2)  A description of the proposed amendments; 
(3)  Any changes to the information submitted with the application for the existing oil or gas well permit (if such information has not previously been provided to the city); 
(4)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the oil and gas inspector to demonstrate compliance with the applicable oil or gas well permit; and 
(5)  Such additional information as is reasonably required by the oil and gas inspector to prevent imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. 
(c)  All applications for amended oil or gas well permits shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector for review. Incomplete applications may be returned to the applicant, in which case the city shall provide a written explanation of the deficiencies; however, the city shall retain the application fee. The city may return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the railroad commission regarding the determination of the operator. 
(d)  If the activities proposed by the amendment are generally consistent with the activities covered by the existing oil or gas well permit, and if the proposed activities are in conformance with the applicable oil or gas well permit, then the oil and gas inspector shall approve the amendment within ten days after the application is filed. 
(e)  If the activities proposed by the amendment are materially different from the activities covered by the existing oil or gas well permit, the operator shall submit a new application. The process will then proceed through the same review and hearing requirements outlined above for a new well. 
(f)  The failure of the oil and gas inspector to review and issue an amended oil or gas well permit within the time limits specified above shall not cause the application for the amended oil or gas well permit to be deemed approved. 
(g)  The decision of the oil and gas inspector to deny an amendment to an oil or gas well permit shall be provided to the operator in writing within ten days after the decision, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. The operator may: 
(1)  Cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the oil and gas inspector for approval and issuance of the oil or gas well permit; or 
(2)  File an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-610. - Suspension or revocation of oil or gas well permit; effect. 
(a)  If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of an oil or gas well permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the oil or gas well permit), the oil and gas inspector shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than ten days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. 
(b)  If, the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within ten days from the date of the notice, the oil and gas inspector may suspend or revoke the oil or gas well permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the oil or gas well permit issued under this article during any period of any oil or gas well permit suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of the city in suspending or revoking the oil or gas well permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the oil or gas well permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the commission. 
(d)  If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the oil and gas inspector, upon written notice to the operator, may notify the commission and request that the commission take any appropriate action. 
(e)  Operator may, within 30 days of the date of the decision of the oil and gas inspector in writing to suspend or revoke an oil or gas well permit, file an appeal to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to this article. 
(f)  If an application for an oil or gas well permit is denied by the oil and gas inspector, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new permit application from being submitted to the oil and gas inspector for the same well. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-611. - Periodic reports. 
(a)  The operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector of any changes to the following information within one business week after the change occurs: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number of the operator; 
(2)  The name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the city (which person must [be] a resident of Texas that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail); and 
(3)  The operator's emergency action response plan (including "drive-to-maps" from public rights-of-way to each drill site). 
(b)  The operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector of any change to the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one business day. 
(c)  The operator shall provide a copy of any "incident reports" or written complaints submitted to the railroad commission within 30 days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints. 
(d)  Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31 thereafter until the operator notifies the oil and gas inspector that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the oil and inspector identifying any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable oil or gas well permit that have not been previously reported to the city. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-612. - Bond, letters of credit, indemnity, insurance. 
(a)  General requirements. The operator shall be required to: 
(1)  Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the oil or gas well permit issued hereunder. 
(2)  Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations. 
(3)  Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits and liability of every kind, including all expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person or for damage to any property arising out of or in connection with the work done by operator under an oil or gas well permit: 
a.  Where such injuries, death or damages are caused by operator's sole negligence or the joint negligence of operator and any other person or entity; and 
b.  Regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused in whole or in part by the negligence of operator. 
(4)  Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any terms of the oil or gas well permit. 
(5)  Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the oil or gas operation. 
(b)  Bond. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of an oil or gas well permit the operator shall provide the oil and inspector with a security instrument in the form of a bond as follows: 
a.  Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the oil or gas well permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration of the oil or gas well permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs first. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the city. The original bond shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector. 
b.  The principal amount of any security instrument shall be $50,000.00 for any single well. If, after completion of a well, the applicant/operator, who initially posted a $50,000.00 bond, has complied with all of the provisions of this article and whose well in the producing stage and all drilling operations have ceased, may submit a request to the oil and [gas] inspector to reduce the existing bond to $10,000.00 for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the bond or letter of credit shall be maintained at $50,000.00. 
An operator drilling or reworking between one and five wells at any given time may elect to provide a blanket bond in the principal minimum amount of $150,000.00. If the operator drills or reworks more than five wells at a time, the blanket bond shall be increased in increments of $50,000.00 per each additional well. Once the wells are in the producing stage and all drilling operations have ceased, the operator may elect to provide a blanket bond for the remainder of the time the well produces, without reworking, as follows: 
Number of Producing Wells 	Blanket Bond Amount Required 
Up to 75 wells 	$100,000.00 
75 to 150 wells 	$150,000.00 
More than 150 wells 	$200,000.00 
 
If at any time after no less than a 15-day written notice to the operator and a public hearing, the city council shall deem any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, it may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter of credit up to a maximum of $250,000.00 per well. 
c.  Whenever the oil and gas inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work to be done and the period of time deemed by the oil and gas inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator shall provide the estimated cost and, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city 125 percent of the estimated cost of doing the work. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than 30 days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article. The maximum cure period shall not exceed 45 days. The city shall be authorized to draw against any bond to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission, such additional money may be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
d.  In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the city against the bond the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both such methods. 
e.  When the well or wells covered by said bond have been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled. 
(c)  Insurance. In addition to the bond required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in Texas. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the oil or gas well permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such oil or gas well permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as provided herein. 
(1)  General requirements applicable to all policies. 
a.  The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an "additional insured" to all policies except employers liability coverage under the operator's workers compensation policy. 
b.  All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a claims-made basis. 
c.  All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most current version of the A. M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the city. 
d.  Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a "per occurrence" basis unless otherwise stipulated herein. 
e.  Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City of Lewisville 151 West Church Street, Lewisville, Texas 75057, evidencing all the required coverages, including endorsements, prior to the issuance of an oil or gas well permit. 
f.  All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the city. 
g.  Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein. 
h.  Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum 30-day notice of cancellation, non-renewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten days notice shall be acceptable in the event of non-payment of premium. 
i.  During the term of the oil or gas well permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the oil and gas inspector any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss. 
j.  Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city. 
(2)  Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage, independent contractors' protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
(3)  Excess or umbrella liability. 
$5,000,000.00 excess, if the operator has a stand-alone environmental pollution liability (EPL) policy. 
$10,000,000.00 excess, if the operator does not have a stand-alone EPL policy. 
Coverage must include an endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If seepage and pollution coverage is written on a "claims made" basis, the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. 
(4)  Environmental pollution liability coverage. 
a.  Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the oil or gas well permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least $1,000,000.00 per loss, with an annual aggregate of at least $10,000,000.00. 
b.  Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. 
c.  The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the city. 
(5)  Control of well. The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, redrilling or restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of residents. 
$5,000,000.00 per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of $10,000,000.00. 
$500,000.00 sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control. 
(6)  Workers compensation and employers liability insurance. 
a.  Workers compensation benefits shall be Texas statutory limits. 
b.  Employers liability shall be a minimum of $500,000.00 per accident. 
c.  Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal laws. 
(7)  Automobile liability insurance. 
a.  Combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
b.  Coverage must include all owned, hired and not-owned automobiles. 
(8)  Certificates of insurance. 
a.  The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the State of Texas, unless the coverage is written by a surplus lines insurer. 
b.  The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved by the Texas State Board of Insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage. 
c.  Sets forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained herein. 
d.  Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read: 
"THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NON-RENEWED WITHOUT 30 DAYS ADVANCED WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE 10 DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED". 
e.  Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the certificates of insurance. 
(d)  Indemnification and express negligence provisions. 
(1)  Each oil or gas well permit issued by the oil and gas inspector shall include the following language: 
Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have, against the City of Lewisville, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under an oil or gas well permit. The Operator shall fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Lewisville, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against each and every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations, judgments, losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in defense of the City of Lewisville, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by Operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under an oil or gas well permit. The Operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Lewisville, Texas, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from any liabilities or damages suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs, or judgments against the City, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, or employees, created by, or arising out of the acts or omissions of the City of Lewisville occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting the Oil or Gas wells INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS AND DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF LEWISVILLE OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE OIL OR GAS WELLS. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE CITY OF LEWISVILLE, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF LEWISVILLE, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH, AND/OR DAMAGE. 
(e)  Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of Texas upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator shall within ten days notify the oil and gas inspector in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued and abandonment is complete. 
(f)  Acceptance and indemnity agreement. The operator who has a net worth of not less than $25,000,000.00, as shown in such owner's or operator's most recent audited financial statements, may substitute an acceptance and indemnity agreement in lieu of the bond and insurance requirements set forth in this article, provided that such acceptance and indemnity agreement shall be in a form acceptable to, and approved by, the city attorney. The oil and gas inspector may request an annual review of the operator's most recent audited financial statements to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-613. - Technical regulations. 
(a)  Onsite requirements. 
(1)  Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission; however, all well casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least three feet below the surface unless the surface owner submits a written agreement otherwise. Three feet shall be the minimum depth. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well. 
(2)  Blowout prevention. In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over or in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during oil or gas operations as required by and in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventors, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the commission. 
(3)  Compliance. Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements. 
(4)  Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any oil or gas operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any oil or gas operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, pit, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or any body of water or water course that may ultimately enter into waters of the city, state or United States. 
(5)  Drill stem testing. All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours. Drill stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an adequate gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe. The material flushed shall be secured and contained without release into the environment. 
(6)  Dust, vibration, odors, debris on roadways. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that, vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor. No operation at a pad site shall cause mud, dirt, debris, etc. to be deposited onto public roadways. 
(7)  Electric lines. All operations on the site shall be powered by underground electric lines when sufficient power is available within 800 feet of the pad site. When electric utility lines are located within 800 feet of the pad site and are determined to be sufficient for operations, the operator may use fuel powered generators only as a backup in the event of a power failure. When such electric utility lines are not located within 800 feet of the pad site the operator may use fuel powered generators. 
(8)  Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells. No electric power shall be generated on location except for thermal electric generators. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the city ordinances and the appropriate national codes. 
(9)  Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of any oil, gas or other hydrocarbons production activities, operator shall submit to the oil and gas inspector an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of oil or gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Department of Transportation and/or the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(10)  Equipment painted. All production equipment on the site shall be painted a light tan color and be maintained at all times, including pumping units, storage tanks, buildings and structures. 
(11)  Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line. 
(12)  Fresh water wells. It shall be unlawful to drill any oil or gas well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located within 300 feet of any existing fresh water well, except for fresh water wells used solely for operation of the oil or gas well operation. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. 
The operator of an oil or gas well shall provide the oil and gas inspector with a "pre-drilling" and "post-drilling" water analysis from any fresh water well within 800 feet of the oil or gas well. 
Within 180 days of its completion date, each oil or gas well shall be equipped with a cathodic protection system to protect the production casing from external corrosion. The oil and gas inspector may approve an alternative method of protecting the production casing from external corrosion. 
(13)  Grass, weeds, trash. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and trash. All landscaping shall be continuously maintained in an acceptable manner. 
(14)  Hazardous plan. A hazardous materials management plan shall be on file with the fire marshal and the oil and gas inspector. 
(15)  Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the operation site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within 500 feet. Except as may otherwise be required by the state railroad commission, all lighting shall comply with city codes regulating lighting. 
(16)  Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or ignited carbon or soot. 
All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the operator has notified the oil and gas inspector that fracing will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements. 
(17)  Closed loop mud systems. A closed loop mud system shall be used in conjunction with all drilling and reworking operations for all gas well permits, unless specifically waived by the city council. 
(18)  Private roads and drill sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the operation site itself shall comply with fire access lane requirements contained in the Fire Code except that the minimum unobstructed width shall be at least 12 feet wide, have an overhead clearance of 14 feet and shall be paved with asphalt or concrete capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds. Said roadway shall be maintained by the operator in proper repair for the life of the well. In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the oil and gas inspector after consideration of all circumstances including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation; the purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind. 
(19)  Salt water wells. No salt water wells, injection wells or disposal wells shall be located within the city. 
(20)  Signs. 
a.  A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed adjacent to the public right-of-way at the gate on the temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to this article. Such sign shall be durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two square feet nor more than four square feet and shall be lettered with the following: 
1.  Well name and number; 
2.  Name of operator; 
3.  The emergency 911 number; and 
4.  Telephone numbers of two persons responsible for the well who may be contacted in case of emergency. 
b.  Permanent weatherproof signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED" shall be posted immediately upon completion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other location approved or designated by the fire marshal of the city. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the fire department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the commission. 
(21)  Storage of equipment. Onsite storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being conducted on the site. 
No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any driveway, alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment which is necessary for drilling or production operations on the site. The fire department shall be the entity that determines whether equipment on the site shall constitute a fire hazard. 
No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. This shall not be deemed to exclude a conventional gas separator or dehydrator. 
(22)  Storage tanks. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the city. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondary containment system including lining with an impervious material. The secondary containment system shall be a minimum of three feet in height and one and one-half times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the fire code, and buried at least one foot below the surface. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to contain the liquids from the storage tank. All tanks permanently stored on site shall be painted the same light tan color as other permanent equipment unless an alternative color is deemed acceptable by the oil and gas inspector. 
All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the International Fire Code, but in all cases, shall be at least 25 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank. 
No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground facilities, other than the well head and flow lines, shall be placed in a floodway. 
(23)  Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system. 
(24)  Surface casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the commission. 
(25)  Valves. All gas well sites shall be equipped with a manual shut off valve or device in order for the city to terminate the well's production in the event of an emergency. The location of the valve shall be determined by the oil and gas inspector. 
(26)  Bradenhead gauge. Operators shall be required to install a bradenhead gauge on all gas wells. The bradenhead gauge shall be subject to inspection by the city at all times. Pressure readings shall be provided to the gas well inspector upon request. 
(27)  Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the following: 
Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet the American Petroleum Institute standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit classification. No tank battery shall be within 100 feet of any dwelling or other combustible structure. 
Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling, reworking or deepening of any well shall be processed through a closed loop mud system. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency. 
Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the site and transported to an offsite disposal facility not less often than every 30 days. Water stored in onsite tanks shall be removed as necessary. 
All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control regulations of the state, this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city. 
(28)  Watchman. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on site during the drilling or reworking of a well when other workmen are not on the premises. 
(29)  Painting. All production equipment shall be painted light tan in color and be maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks and secondary containment. When requiring painting of such facilities, the gas inspector shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. The color of all tanks, fixed equipment and painted surfaces shall be the same throughout the pad site. 
(30)  Driveway. A driveway shall be constructed, conforming to the detail titled Commercial and Industrial Driveway Layout—Truck Entrances as contained in the city's general development ordinance, at the entrance to a gas well or related site to a public road, and extending from the right-of-way to the pad site conforming to all applicable city ordinances. 
(b)  Installation of pipelines on, under or across public property. The operator shall apply to the city for a franchise agreement on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city property for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines so long as production or operations may be continued under any oil or gas well permit issued pursuant to this article. operator shall: 
(1)  Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities located on, under or across the course of such rights-of-way. 
(2)  Furnish to the oil and gas inspector of the city a plat showing the location of such pipelines. 
(3)  Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations properly cased and vented if under a street. 
(4)  Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced. 
No oil or gas well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of the city and/or projected streets or alleys shown by the current thoroughfare plan of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless prior consent is obtained from the oil and gas inspector. Any consent from the oil and gas inspector shall be temporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or days that any street or alley may be blocked, encumbered or closed. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 3809-10-2010 , §§ 5—10, 10-4-10; Ord. No. 3849-04-2011 , §§ 4—7, 4-4-11)  
Sec. 7-614. - Fences, walls, screening. 
(a)  Fences/walls. Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial drilling, completion or reworking operations as long as 24-hour onsite supervision is provided. A secured entrance gate shall be required. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or his employees are not within the enclosure. 
(1)  All walls used to enclose in whole or in part any drilling or production site shall be constructed in accordance with standard engineering practices and shall be of a design compatible with the facilities, buildings and structures on and adjacent to the site; and shall be at least eight feet in height. 
(b)  Gate specifications. The gate shall meet the following specifications: 
(1)  Each gate shall be not less than 12 feet wide and be composed of two gates, each of which is not less than six feet wide, or one sliding gate not less than 12 feet wide. If two gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span; 
(2)  The gates shall be of metal frame and wooden veneer construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of other approved material; 
(3)  The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a combination padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site; and 
(4)  Operator must provide the oil and gas inspector with the padlock combination. 
(5)  Operator must provide the city with a "Knox Padlock" or "Knox Box with a key" to access the well site to be used only in case of an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-615. - Cleanup and maintenance. 
(a)  Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations within 60 days. 
(b)  Cleanup after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the oil and gas inspector all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Clean-up operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site clean-up within 24 hours, the city shall have the right to contact the commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. 
(c)  Free from debris. The property on which a well site is located shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material. 
(d)  Painting. All production equipment shall be painted light tan in color and be maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the oil and gas inspector shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. The color of all tanks, fixed equipment and painted surfaces shall be the same throughout the pad site. 
(e)  Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the oil and gas inspector as soon as practicable. The oil and gas inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the city manager. If the oil and gas inspector, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the oil and gas inspector may then employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the oil and gas inspector deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the oil and gas inspector in gaining control of said well. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 3809-10-2010 , § 11, 10-4-10)  
Sec. 7-616. - Plugged and abandoned wells. 
(a)  Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(b)  Abandonment shall be approved by the oil and gas inspector after restoration of the drill site has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the oil and gas inspector: 
(1)  The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from drill site; 
(2)  All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site; 
(3)  All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the commission; 
(4)  All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil; 
(5)  All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site; and 
(6)  During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article. 
(c)  Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following at the discretion of the oil and gas inspector: 
(1)  A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under the state law; and 
(2)  A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated. 
(d)  Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09)  
Sec. 7-617. - Technical advisor. 
The city shall employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the oil or gas industry or the law as it pertains to oil or gas matters. Such technical advisor shall possess at a minimum, a degree in petroleum engineering with a background in drilling and production or demonstrate a proven background in the drilling, production, and operation of oil and gas wells. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the city on such matters relating to oil or gas operations within the city as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the city. In the event such technical advisor(s) is employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article, then the cost for such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed against and paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article, including an annual inspection of all wells. Prior to the employment of a technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and expenses. 
(Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09; Ord. No. 3745-02-2010 , § 1, 2-15-10)  
Sec. 7-618. - Emissions control/reduction. 
(a)  Emissions control/reduction plan. An emission control/reduction plan shall be submitted to the city as part of the application package. The plan shall outline policies, practices, procedures, and equipment in sufficient detail to illustrate compliance with any federal, state, or local law or ordinance, and industry best management practices regarding air quality. At a minimum, the plan shall include the following: 
(1)  Name, location, and operator of well. 
(2)  A detailed description of the operational steps used to ensure compliance with best management practices. 
(3)  A detailed description of the maintenance program of equipment utilized at the well site. 
(4)  Description of the emission monitoring program or voluntary leak detection program. 
(b)  Gas stream analysis report. Submit to the city a quarterly gas stream analysis report for review. Should levels of volatile compounds found in the report pose a significant health risk in the event of an emission leak, the city can require additional air quality monitoring at the operator's expense. 
(c)  Release reporting. If the city responds to a reported emission leak and verifies a leak has or is occurring, the operator shall submit to the city an after-action report outlining, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Location and date of the incident. 
(2)  Cause of the incident and equipment involved. 
(3)  Analysis of the quantity of emissions released by compound. 
(4)  Repair/remediation efforts taken to minimize the potential of similar incidents. 
(d)  Air sampling inspections. The city may retain an independent air quality monitoring company to provide semi-annual inspections of all gas related sites to develop air sampling reports. These reports shall be reviewed by the city and/or a technical expert to determine whether the levels of compounds found in the report pose a health risk. If so, the city can impose measures upon the facility to rectify the situation. 
(e)  Shut-off valve. All gas well sites shall be equipped with a manual shut-off valve or device in order for the city to terminate the well's production in the event of an emergency. The location of the valve shall be determined by the oil and gas inspector. 
(Ord. No. 3849-04-2011 , § 8, 4-4-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3849-04-2011 , § 8, adopted Apr. 4, 2011, deleted the former § 7-618 and enacted a new § 7-618 as set out herein. The former § 7-618 pertained to appeals and derived from Ord. No. 3673-05-2009 , § 1, 5-4-09.  
Sec. 7-619. - Permit to operate a gas production facility required. 
(a)  An annual permit shall be required to operate a gas production facility. 
(b)  The permit fee shall be in accordance with the currently adopted fee ordinance. 
(c)  The permit feel shall be due on January 1 of each year. The permit holder shall, within 45 days after fee invoice, deliver to the city the permit fee. Failure by permit holder to pay the annual permit fee within the prescribed time, shall, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day that such permit holder fails to deliver payment shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  No gas production facility may continue to operate without a valid permit. No permit shall be valid until the permit fee has been paid. 
(e)  A permit to operate a gas production facility may be suspended or revoked when it is determined, after a hearing by the director of community development, that: 
(1)  It is used by a person other than the person to whom the permit was issued; 
(2)  It is used for a gas production facility other than that for which it was issued; 
(3)  Any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit have been violated; 
(4)  The permit holder fails, refuses, or neglects to comply with any order or notice served upon him within the time period provided therein; 
(5)  There has been any false statement or misrepresentations as to a material fact in the plans, specifications, or documentation upon which the permit was based; 
(6)  Whenever a change in ownership or operator occurs, the existing permit shall be automatically revoked and a new permit shall be required; 
(7)  The permit holder is in violation of any provision of this article, including, but not limited to, failure to pay the permit or re-inspection fee; or 
(8)  When, in the opinion of the director of community development, a gas production facility operates the facility in such a manner as to cause repetitive violations or create undue risk to the health, safety or welfare of the city. 
(f)  The permit holder shall, as a condition of issuance of the permit to operate a gas production facility, allow the city's oil and gas inspector to make inspections of the gas production facility when needed, but no less frequently than quarterly, to ensure compliance with this article. All federal, state, and city laws, codes and ordinances shall be complied with at all times. 
(g)  A re-inspection fee for each re-inspection of a noted violation shall be assessed for inspections that are required to verify that a violation has been repaired or corrected. The re-inspection fee shall be in accordance with the currently adopted fee ordinance. 
(h)  The permit holder shall consent to semi-annual air sampling tests at their sites. Costs of this testing shall be billed to and directly paid by the permit holder to the city-specified testing company. Reports generated from these inspections shall be reviewed by the city and/or its technical advisor. Should, in the city's opinion, levels of compounds detected pose a health risk, the city may impose additional measures upon the facility to rectify the situation. 
(i)  The permit holder shall submit to the city a quarterly gas stream analysis report for review. Costs of such report and the city's review shall be borne by the permit holder. Should, in the city's opinion, levels of volatile compounds found in the report pose a health risk in the event of an emission leak, the city may require additional air quality monitoring at the permit holder's expense. 
(Ord. No. 3869-06-2011 , § 2, 6-6-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3869-06-2011 , § 2, adopted June 6, 2011, deleted the former § 7-619 and enacted a new § 7-619 as set out herein. The former § 7-619 pertained to permit required and derived from Ord. No. 3849-04-2011 , § 9, 4-4-11.  
Sec. 7-620. - Water restrictions. 
The city manager may restrict water supply for hydraulic fracturing operations in the following situations: 
(1)  A "Stage 3: Water Crisis Mandatory Restrictions" is declared pursuant to the city's emergency water management plan; or 
(2)  If, by providing water for hydraulic fracturing operations, the city is exposed to increased water supply demand charges. 
(Ord. No. 3993-05-2013 , § 1, 5-6-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3993-05-2013 , §§ 1, 2, adopted May 6, 2013, amended §§ 7-620 and 7-621 in their entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, §§ 7-620 and 7-621 pertained to appeals and penalty, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 3849-04-2011 , §§ 10, adopted April 4, 2011. 
 For current provisions pertaining to appeals and penalty, the user's attention is directed to §§ 7-622 and 7-623.  
Sec. 7-621. - Oil and gas advisory board. 
(a)  The purpose of this board is to provide input regarding the city's oil and gas drilling and production ordinance. This board shall be only advisory in nature and shall not have the power or authority to authorize changes to said ordinance. 
(b)  Establishment. 
(1)  The board shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council and must be composed of four members who are residents of the city and three members from the oil and gas industry. 
(2)  Members shall be appointed by places numbered 1 through 7. 
(3)  Places 1, 3, 5 and 7 shall be appointed in odd-numbered years, and places 2, 4 and 6 shall be appointed in even-numbered years so the membership will be staggered. 
(4)  Terms of office will be for a period of two years with terms expiring on June 30th. 
(5)  Initially, places 2, 4, and 6 will be appointed for the full two-year term; and places 1, 3, 5 and 7 will be appointed for a one-year term to maintain staggered positions. 
(6)  The board shall meet at the request of either the city council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 3993-05-2013 , § 2, 5-6-13) 
Note— See editor's note at § 7-620.  
Sec. 7-622. - Appeals. 
The city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the issuance of an oil or gas well permit or the revocation or suspension of any oil or gas well permit issued hereunder as provided by this article. Any person or entity whose application is denied by the oil and gas inspector or whose oil or gas well permit is suspended or revoked or whose well or equipment is deemed by the oil and gas inspector to be abandoned may, within 30 days of the date of the written decision of the oil and gas inspector file an appeal to the city council in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with the city secretary. The grounds for appeal must be set forth specifically, and the error described, by the appellant. 
(2)  Within 30 days of receipt of the records, the city secretary shall transmit all papers involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city council agenda for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. No other notice need be given. 
(Ord. No. 3993-05-2013 , § 3, 5-6-13)  
Sec. 7-623. - Penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following: 
(1)  Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of an oil or gas well permit issued under this article; 
(2)  Fail to comply with any condition set forth in an oil or gas well permit issued under this article; or 
(3)  Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3993-05-2013 , § 4, 5-6-13)  
Chapter 8 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal court, § 2-111 et seq.; arson reward, § 5-2; fireworks declared unlawful, § 5-149. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Control of weapons. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City building shall mean any building or portion of a building owned, occupied, leased, or controlled by the city for city activities and operations. The term does not include any public or private driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, or other parking area. 
Facsimile firearm shall mean any device that so closely appears to be a firearm in size, shape, color, or design that it: 
(1)  Can only be differentiated from a firearm through close inspection; or 
(2)  Is likely to cause alarm by the general public. 
Firearm shall mean any device designed, made, or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use. 
Public place shall mean any place where the general public may gather, whether publicly or privately owned, including but not limited to streets, alleys, easements, public facilities, stadiums, retail stores, office buildings, government offices, parks, playgrounds, school facilities, parking lots and other similar property. 
(b)  Unlawful uses: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the corporate limits of the city, save and except that air rifles, air pistols and bows and arrows may be discharged on one's property; provided, that pellets, shots, arrows or any projectiles do not cross a public alley or street or a neighbor's property line; 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display or brandish a facsimile firearm in a manner that alarms or could alarm a reasonable person in a public place within the corporate limits of the city; 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer, to carry a firearm in any city building unless authorized to do so by local, state or federal law. 
(c)  Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the actor was engaged in any of the following: 
(1)  The protection of persons or property as authorized by state law; 
(2)  The enforcement of any local, state, or federal law by a legally licensed or certified peace officer; 
(3)  An activity or use authorized by the comprehensive zoning ordinances; 
(4)  An event, performance, demonstration or ceremony authorized by the city wherein the firearm or facsimile firearm is significant to the activity; or 
(5)  An event, performance, demonstration or ceremony sponsored and conducted by a subdivision of the local, state or federal government or by the school district wherein the firearm or facsimile firearm is significant to the activity. 
(d)  Enforcement. For evidentiary purposes, any police officer of the city is hereby authorized to pick up or otherwise take possession of any firearm or facsimile firearm used in violation of this section. 
(Code 1990, §§ 5-3-1—5-3-3; Ord. No. 3500-10-2007, § 1, 10-1-07)  
Sec. 8-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3500-10-2007, § 2, adopted Oct. 1, 2007, repealed § 8-2, which pertained to firearms in city buildings and derived from Ord. No. 2088-2-96, adopted Feb. 5, 1996.  
Sec. 8-3. - Skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, scooters and similar devices, use and prohibition. 
(a)  General prohibition. No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or similar device anywhere in the city without complying with the terms of this section. As used herein, to roller skate shall mean to roller skate on any type of roller skates or street skates. 
(b)  Due care for safety. No person shall operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or similar device in a reckless manner, and without exercising due care for the safety of other persons and property, within the city. 
(c)  Traffic rules: 
(1)  All on-street operation of skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, scooters and similar devices shall be conducted as far to the right of the traffic lane as possible in a single file and flowing with traffic; 
(2)  All operations of skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, scooters and similar devices shall be during daylight hours, unless the operator has reflective clothing or reflective strips on his/her clothing which can be seen at night from a distance of 500 feet to the rear and side; 
(3)  No person operating or riding a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or similar device shall attach himself/herself to any vehicle on any roadway; 
(4)  All persons operating the devices described in this section shall yield the right-of-way to other pedestrians using public sidewalks, parking lots, and streets and shall not otherwise endanger or interfere with traffic; 
(5)  All operations of the devices described in this section shall be consistent with the rules of a road established for bicycles. 
(d)  Prohibition of skating at certain times and in certain designated areas: 
(1)  Private property. No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or similar device on private property without first obtaining permission from the owner, agent of the owner, or other person authorized to give permission; 
(2)  Business district. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or similar device in the business district. For all purposes of this section, "business district" is defined as an area bounded by Walters Street, Mill Street, Charles Street and Elm Street and an area bounded by Charles Street, Church Street, Herod Street and Main Street. 
(3)  Hospital district. It shall be unlawful to operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or similar device in the Hospital District. For the purpose of this section, "hospital district" is defined as the Medical Center of Lewisville area bounded by West Main Street, South Edna Street, West Elm Street, and the northbound service road of Interstate 35E; 
(4)  Parks and recreational areas, signs; 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or similar device in a public park or recreational area in the city in violation of a sign prohibiting the usage of same in such areas; 
b.  Erection of signs. The city manager, or his designee, is authorized to erect legible signs of uniform size and design in the public parks and recreation areas of the city advising the public of the regulations set forth in subsection a. above; 
c.  Enforcement. A police officer, or the park director or his designee, of the city is authorized to issue citations for offenses in violation of this subsection; 
(5)  City-owned property. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or ride a skateboard, roller skates, roller blades, scooter or similar device: 
a.  On city-owned steps, walls, railings, courtyards, concession areas, pavilions, restroom areas, covered structures, park benches, or picnic tables anywhere in the city; or 
b.  Within the property line of city-owned buildings. 
(e)  Parental responsibility. The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Enforcement. A police officer of the city, is authorized to issue citations for offenses in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 3167-02-2005, § 1, 2-7-05; Ord. No. 3957-08-2012 , §§ 1, 2, 8-20-12)  
Sec. 8-4. - Illegal smoking products. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits of the City of Lewisville. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
Illegal smoking product shall mean any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following chemicals: 
(1)  Salvia divinorum or Salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylocatan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chormen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol); 
(4)  1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-018); or 
(5)  1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-073) 
(6)  1-pentyl-3-(4-methocynaphthoyl)indole (also known as JWH-081). 
Ingestion device shall mean equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including: 
(1)  A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl; 
(2)  A water pipe; 
(3)  A carburetion tube or device; 
(4)  A smoking or carburetion mask; 
(5)  A chamber pipe; 
(6)  A carburetor pipe; 
(7)  An electric pipe; 
(8)  An air-driven pipe; 
(9)  A chillum; 
(10)  A bong; or 
(11)  An ice pipe or chiller. 
(c)  Unlawful uses. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess with intent to use an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an illegal smoking product. 
(d)  Defense. It shall be a defense to a violation of this section that any act described in this article is under and pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. 
(Ord. No. 3807-09-2010 , § 1, 8-16-10)  
Sec. 8-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4284-06-2016 , § 1, adopted June 6, 2016, repealed § 8-5 entitled "E-cigarette regulations", which derived from Ord. No. 4046-01-2014 , § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2014.  
Secs. 8-6—8-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CURFEW[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1970-9-94, § I, adopted Sept. 12, 1994, amended art. II to read as set forth herein. Former art. II, §§ 8-26—8-34 pertained to curfew and derived from §§ 5-4-1—5-4-9 of the 1990 Code. 
 
Sec. 8-26. - Hours for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
(1)  Curfew hours shall mean: 
a.  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
b.  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
(2)  Emergency shall mean an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
(3)  Establishment shall mean any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(4)  Guardian shall mean: 
a.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
b.  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
(5)  Minor shall mean any person under 17 years of age. 
(6)  Operator shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
(7)  Parent shall mean a person who is: 
a.  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or 
b.  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
(8)  Public place shall mean any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
(9)  Remain shall mean to: 
a.  Linger or stay; or 
b.  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
(10)  Serious bodily injury shall mean bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that the minor was: 
a.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
b.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
c.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
d.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
e.  Involved in an emergency; 
f.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
g.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
h.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
i.  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code ch. 31. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) is present. 
(e)  Penalties. 
(1)  A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(2)  When required by Section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection (b)(1) of this section and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 1970-9-94, § I, 9-12-94)  
Secs. 8-27—8-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY 
 
Sec. 8-41. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, words and the derivations thereof shall have the meanings given below: 
Day care center. A facility providing care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for 13 or more children for less than 24 hours a day. 
Minor. Any person younger than 17 years of age. 
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Premises where children commonly gather. Includes all improved and unimproved areas on the lot where a public park, public playground, private or public school, public or semi-public swimming pool, public or non-profit recreational facility, day care center or video arcade facility is located, as those terms are or may be defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.134, as amended. For purposes of this article, landscaped street medians are not public parks. 
Temporary residences. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year, and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in a month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 3533-01-2008, § II, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-42. - Offenses. 
It is unlawful for a person to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 1,500 feet of any premises where children commonly gather if the person is required to register on the state department of public safety's sex offender database because of a conviction(s) involving a minor. 
(Ord. No. 3533-01-2008, § II, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-43. - Evidentiary matters; measurements. 
(a)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was a minor as defined herein. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein above, or, in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. 
(c)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the city. Said map will be available to the public for inspection at the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 3533-01-2008, § II, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-44. - Culpable mental state not required. 
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of any offense defined by this article. 
(Ord. No. 3533-01-2008, § II, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-45. - Affirmative defenses. 
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date of the adoption of this article. 
(2)  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person required to register on the database is a minor. 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,500 feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all state sex offender registration laws. 
(5)  The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this article would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
(6)  The person was at the time of the violation subject to community services supervision pursuant to section 13B of article 42.12 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, and the court reduced or waived the 1,000-foot restriction for a child free zone under section 13B(a)(1)(B) of article 42.12 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, as it applies to the person's residence. 
(Ord. No. 3533-01-2008, § II, 1-28-08)  
Sec. 8-46. - Penalty. 
A person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and each and every violation or day such violation shall continue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 3533-01-2008, § II, 1-28-08)  
Secs. 8-47—8-70. - Reserved.  
Chapter 9 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances created by animals, § 3-2; fireworks declared a nuisance, § 5-153. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 341.001 through 344.007 and 365.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved sound-level meter: An instrument sensitive to pressure fluctuations that provides a digital decibel reading indicating the level of sound based on a reference of zero dB (0.002 micro bar). The instrument must also be capable of taking measurements on the A-weighted scale. 
A-weighted sound pressure level. The sound pressure level as measured on an approved sound-level meter using the a-weighting scale. The A-weighted scale (dBA) is used because it most closely represents the hearing ear's sensitivity to noise pressure. 
Brush shall mean scrub vegetation or dense undergrowth. 
Carrion shall mean the dead and putrefying flesh of any animal, fowl or fish. 
City shall mean the City of Lewisville. 
Clearly audible shall mean sound that can be heard without the assistance of any device. 
Daytime shall mean from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Monday through Thursday; from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Friday; from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Saturday; and from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Sunday. 
Decibel (dB). A unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter), denoted as dB. 
Developed property shall mean tracts of land with structures on them. 
Director means the director of the department of community development or his designee or another employee of the city designated by the city manager. 
Filth shall mean any matter in a putrescent state. 
Garbage shall mean all decayable wastes. 
Graffiti means markings, including inscriptions, slogans, drawings, or paintings, on the tangible property of the owner with aerosol paint, an indelible marker, or an etching or engraving device and which is visible from any public property or the public right-of-way, or from any private property other than the property on which the graffiti exists, including, by way of example only and without limitation, fencing surrounding sites. 
Impure or unwholesome matter shall mean any putrescible or nonputrescible condition, object or matter which tends, may, or could produce injury, death, or disease to human beings. 
Junk shall mean all worn out, worthless, or discarded material, including, but not limited to, odds and ends, old iron or other metal, glass and cordage. 
Nighttime shall mean from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on Monday through Thursday; from 11:00 p.m. on Friday to 9:00 a.m. on Saturday; from 11:00 p.m. on Saturday to 9:00 a.m. on Sunday; and from 10:00 p.m. on Sunday to 7:00 a.m. on Monday. 
Nuisance shall mean anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or indecent or offensive to the sense or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property. 
Objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter shall mean any matter, condition or object which is or should be objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary to a person of ordinary sensitivities. 
Old Town Entertainment district. The Old Town Entertainment district is defined as all land located within the area bounded by the following: all land located within the area bounded by the following: Beginning at the intersection of the northeast corner of West Walters Street and Herod Street, running east along Walters Street and turning north at the northwest corner of the intersection of Charles Street and West Walters Street, then running north along Charles Street and turning east at the mid-block of Charles Street between West Walters Street and West College Street to the mid-block of North Kealy Avenue between East Walters Street and East College Street and running south along the eastern right-of-way of North Kealy Avenue, then turning east at the northeast corner of the intersection of East Church Street and North Kealy Avenue, running east along East Church Street to the northeast corner of the intersection of East Church Street and Henrietta Street, then running south along Henrietta Street to the southeast corner of the intersection of Henrietta Street and East Main Street, then running west along East Main Street for approximately 200 feet and turning south, then running south to the southeastern corner of Block 12, Lot 1 of the Kealy Addition and turning west, running west to the intersection of the eastern right-of-way for South Kealy Avenue, then running south along South Kealy Avenue to the southwest corner of Block B, Lot I of the Christian Community Action Center II Addition, then running west to the intersection at the southwest corner of Samuel Street and Charles Street, running north along Charles Street to the intersection at the southwest corner of Charles Street and West Main Street, running west along West Main Street to the southeast corner of the intersection of West Main Street and Herod Street, then running north along Herod Street to the point of beginning. 
Outdoor music festival. Any form of musical entertainment provided by live performances if: 
(1)  More than 200 persons are in attendance at any one performance; or 
(2)  The event requires paid admission and any of the performers or performances are not within a permanent, enclosed structure; or 
(3)  The event requires paid admission and any of the performances involve the use of amplified sound. 
Owner shall mean the owner of record of the real property as set forth in the records of the Denton County Appraisal District. 
Refuse shall mean a heterogeneous accumulation of worn out, used, broken, rejected or worthless materials, and includes garbage, rubbish, paper or litter, and other decayable or nondecayable waste. 
Rubbish shall mean trash, debris, rubble, stone, useless fragments of building materials or other miscellaneous useless waste or rejected matter. 
Sound measurement criteria. For purposes of this ordinance, sound measurements will be made using the A-weighting scale on an approved sound-level meter, based on the reference sound pressure (0 dBA). Measurement times will be no less than two minutes in length, and violations will be determined based on the highest registered reading in that measurement period. All measurement levels will be inclusive of any ambient noise that exists at the time of the measurement. 
Undeveloped property, Type A, shall mean tracts of land, with no structures, that are one acre or less. 
Undeveloped property, Type B, shall mean acreage or platted lots larger than one acre without structures. 
Undeveloped property, Type C, shall mean acreage or platted lots larger than one acre where structures adjoin or where there is a structure on the property. 
Vegetative growth shall mean any grass, weeds, shrubs, trees, brush, bushes or vines. 
Weeds shall mean vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary, but excluding: 
(1)  Shrubs, bushes and trees; 
(2)  Cultivated flowers; and 
(3)  Cultivated crops. 
Any word not defined herein shall be construed in the context used and by ordinary interpretation, not as a word of art. 
(Code 1990, § 5-1-31; Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § II(7-1-1), 7-1-91; Ord. No. 3028-02-2004, § 1, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 3360-07-2006, § 1, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 3741-02-2010 , §§ 1, 2, 2-1-10; Ord. No. 3937-05-2012 , § 1, 5-7-12; Ord. No. 3965-10-2012 , § 1, 10-15-12) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 9-2. - Statutory enforcement. 
In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided in section 1-15, the city may enforce this chapter pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § IV, 7-1-91)  
Sec. 9-3. - Lighting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to locate on his property and use any visible source of illumination which produces intense glare or direct illumination across any bounding property line. 
(1)  No such light shall be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the normal use and enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a nuisance is defined as 0.4 of one foot-candle of light measured at the property line. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have LED strip lighting, LED module lighting, or rope lighting outlining any of the following: 
(1)  Windows or doors; 
(2)  An individual occupancy of a multi-tenant building; or 
(3)  Any architectural feature of a building other than the roofline of an entire building. 
It shall be a defense to prosecution if the LED strip lighting, LED modular lighting, or rope lighting is installed on the interior of a building and the source of the light is not visible from the exterior of the building. In the event of a conflict, temporary holiday lights shall be governed by section 11-13 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances. 
For purposes of this section, LED strip lighting means a flexible circuit board populated by surface-mounted light-emitting diodes and other components that usually come with an adhesive backing. LED module lighting means a string of lights where a number of LED chips are set into a small enclosure unit and that unit is then linked to the next by a wire. Rope lighting means a string of lights that are encased in a flexible translucent/semi-translucent jacket or tube. 
(Code 1990, § 7-1-6; 0121-19-ORD , § I, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 9-4. - Water flowing upon streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare. 
(Code 1990, § 5-1-46) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways and property, ch. 13.  
Sec. 9-4.5. - Use of water causing ice to form on public ways. 
(a)  No person, firm, or corporation shall use water or allow the use of water under one's control in a manner that causes water to collect on any public roadway, street, thoroughfare, sidewalk, or alley and form ice. 
(b)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this section shall: 
(1)  Be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense. Each day such offense is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
(2)  Be civilly liable to the city for all costs incurred by the city in removing or covering the ice on any public roadway, street, thoroughfare, sidewalk or alley, including, but not limited to, the costs of labor, equipment, and ashes, sand, sawdust, or other material used to cover the ice. 
(Ord. No. 2188-1-97, §§ I, II, 1-23-97) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2188-1-97, adopted January 23, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ I, II of said ordinance as § 9-4.5 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 9-5. - Noise prohibited. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to allow, make or cause to be made any excessive or unnecessary noise of a volume, intensity, repetitiveness or duration that is clearly audible and that is offensive to a reasonable and prudent adult person within 100 feet of the noise source, or any area within the property line of the parcel or lot upon which the source of noise is emanating, whichever is the greater distance from the noise source. Such noise shall be a violation of this article unless otherwise allowed in this section. 
(b)  The following acts are declared to create excessive or unnecessary noise in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive: 
(1)  Radios, televisions, musical instruments, loud speaking amplifiers and similar devices. 
a.  The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noises to any performance, show, sale or display of merchandise as to attract customers to any place of business, except that said use is allowed in the Old Town Entertainment district from noon to 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and from noon to 11:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
b.  The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles for the purpose of advertising any show, sale or display of merchandise, or any other purpose. 
c.  For any vehicle to be equipped with, or for any person to use upon any vehicle, any bell, siren, compression horn or exhaust whistle, except that vehicles operated in the performance of duty by law enforcement officers, fire departments and ambulances may attach and use a bell, siren, compression horn or exhaust whistle. 
d.  To operate or permit to be operated any loudspeaker or sound amplifying equipment in a fixed or movable position mounted on or in any vehicle in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public property so that the sound is clearly audible for 50 feet from its source. 
e.  The playing of any loudspeaker, sound amplifying equipment, television, radio, or any musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, so as to be clearly audible to a person in his residence; and 
1.  During the daytime or nighttime, in a single-family residence, measures more than 65 dBA on the A-weighting scale on an approved sound-level meter. 
2.  During the daytime, in a multi-family dwelling, measures more than 65 dBA on the A-weighting scale on an approved sound-level meter in any adjacent unit; or 
3.  During the nighttime, in a multi-family dwelling, be clearly audible within any unit that is not the source of the sound. 
Exception: Said playing is allowed in the Old Town Entertainment district from noon to 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and from noon to 11:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
f.  Operate or cause to be operated any mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus, or instrument that will intensify, amplify or reproduce the human voice or any other sound whereby the sound is clearly audible for 50 feet onto public property, except that said use is allowed in the Old Town Entertainment district from noon to 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and from noon to 11:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
g.  The operation of any radio, stereo receiver or amplifier, sound amplifying equipment, musical instrument, television set, machine, sound speakers or similar device in such a manner as to be clearly audible at the distance of 50 feet, or in such a manner that the vibration accompanying the sound from the device can be plainly felt at the distance of 50 feet from its source, except that said use is allowed in the Old Town Entertainment district from noon to 11:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and from noon to 11:30 p.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  Power equipment. Operate or permit to be operated any power or pneumatic equipment outdoors in a residential zone or within 150 feet of the boundary line of a residence during the nighttime. Motorized electric or fuel powered equipment including but not limited to tractors, lawnmowers and other similar devices or equipment shall be considered power equipment. 
(3)  Powered model mechanical devices. Flying or operating of model aircraft or other model vehicles powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or not, or the flying or operating of model rocket vehicles or similar noise-producing devices, in a residential area during the nighttime. 
(4)  Construction work. The erection, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair work on any building at anytime other than between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. Monday through Friday from June 1 to September 30; between 7:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. Monday through Friday from October 1 to May 31; between 8:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. on Saturday; and between 10:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. on Sunday; provided, however, that the city building official may issue special permits for such work at other hours in case of urgent necessity and in the interest of public safety and convenience. 
(5)  Collection of garbage, waste, refuse or recycled materials. The collection of garbage, waste, refuse or recycled materials between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any area zoned residential or within 500 feet of an area zoned residential. 
(6)  Vibration. Using or causing the use of any device that creates any ground vibration which is perceptible without instruments at any point on or beyond the property boundary of the source if on private property or at 50 feet from the source if on public property; or the creation of vibration or bass reverberations at any time if it is perceptible inside a complaining person's residence, through the sense of touch or through visual observation of moving objects, or through the sense of hearing. 
(7)  Outdoor music festival. At any outdoor music festival, it shall be unlawful for any person or group sponsoring the event to make, cause, allow, or permit any noise that exceeds 70 dBA on an approved sound-level meter when measured at the established perimeter of the event. 
(Code 1990, § 5-1-27; Ord. No. 3028-02-2004, § 1, 2-2-04; Ord. No. 3741-02-2010 , § 3, 2-1-10; Ord. No. 3937-05-2012 , § 2, 3, 5-7-12) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 7.  
Sec. 9-6. - Exemptions. 
The following sources of potential noise violations shall be exempt from the regulations of this article: 
(1)  Noise created by power equipment being operated by city employees or utility company employees, during normal performance of duties; 
(2)  Sound caused by emergency or public service work, including police, fire and public utility operations, when the sound is associated with the performance of lawful duties to protect the health, safety or welfare of the community; 
(3)  Horns or other warning devices required by law; 
(4)  Bells and music boxes used on vehicles of ice cream vendors and similar vendors to attract children as patrons; provided however, that when used, the bells and music boxes are not operated so loudly as to be offensive to a reasonable and prudent adult person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(5)  City-operated or city-sponsored events; or 
(6)  Athletic events conducted by the city independent school district. 
(Ord. No. 3741-02-2010 , § 4, 2-1-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3741-02-2010 , § 4, adopted Feb. 1, 2010, deleted the former § 9-6, and enacted a new § 9-6 as set out herein. The former § 9-6 pertained to acts creating unlawful noises and derived from Ord. No. 3028-02-2004, § 1, 2-2-04.  
Sec. 9-7. - Variances. 
The city council may authorize a variance to any noise restriction set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3741-02-2010 , § 5, 2-1-10)  
Secs. 9-8—9-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNSANITARY, UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; land development regulations, ch. 6. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 9-31—9-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 9-41. - Notice of noncompliance. 
In the event that any person fails to comply with the provisions of this article, the city manager, or his designee, shall give notice to such person setting forth the noncompliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § II(7-1-5), 7-1-91)  
Sec. 9-42. - Service of notice. 
The notice of noncompliance with this article shall be in writing and may be served upon the person in noncompliance as follows: 
(1)  Personal delivery to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's post office address is unknown: 
a.  By publication at least twice within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation within the city; 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  By posting the notice on the placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates if the property contains no building; or 
(4)  Any other notice provided by Chapter 342 of the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, § 342.006, as it now exists or is hereafter amended. 
Once notice of compliance has been served upon the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, if another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety occurs on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city may, without further notice, correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. 
(Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § II(7-1-5), 7-1-91; Ord. No. 1992-12-94, § I, 12-19-94)  
Sec. 9-43. - Performance of work by city, computation of charges. 
If any person fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance contained in the notice within ten days of the date of delivery of such notice or publication, the city may do such work or cause such work to be done to bring the real property into compliance with this article. The costs, charges, and expenses incurred in doing or having such work done or improvements made to the real property shall be a charge to, and personal liability of, such person. Such charges shall also include an automatic administrative fee in the sum of $250.00 for city processing expenses. 
(Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § II(7-1-5), 7-1-91)  
Sec. 9-44. - Enforcement of lien. 
(a)  If a notice provided for in this division is delivered to the owner of such real property, and he fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance within the applicable time period as herein provided, the costs, charges and expenses shall be in addition to a charge to, and personal liability of, the owner, a privileged lien upon and against such real property, including all fixtures and improvements thereon. 
(b)  In order to perfect such lien, the city manager, or his designee, shall first give such owner written notice of demand for payment of such charges. Such written notice may be given by any one of the methods providing for the initial notice requiring compliance. 
(c)  If the owner fails or refuses to make complete payment of the charges within 20 days of the delivery of the notice, the city manager, or his designee, shall file a written statement of such charges with the county clerk of the county in which the real property is located, for filing in the county real property records. The statement shall be sufficient if it contains the following: 
(1)  The name of the owner; 
(2)  A description of the real property; 
(3)  The amount of the charges, including interest thereon; 
(4)  A statement that all prerequisites required by this article for the imposition of the charges and the affixing of the lien have been met; and 
(5)  The signature of the city manager, or his designee, under oath, that the statements made therein are true and correct. 
The statement may also contain such other information deemed appropriate by the city manager, or his designee. 
(d)  All charges shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per annum from the date the city incurs the expense. The city may bring suit to collect the charges, institute foreclosure proceedings, or both. The statement, as provided herein, or certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the city's claim for charges or right to foreclose the lien. The owner or any other person responsible as provided herein, shall be jointly and severally liable for the charges. 
(Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § II(7-1-5), 7-1-91)  
Secs. 9-45—9-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION 
 
Sec. 9-56. - Filth and carrion. 
No person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city shall permit or allow any stagnant or unwholesome water, filth, carrion, rubbish, refuse, junk or garbage or impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, or objectionable, unsightly matter of whatever nature to accumulate or remain on such real property or within any easement area on such real property or upon any adjacent right-of-way for streets and alleys between the property line of such real property and where the paved surface of the street or alley begins. Such conditions are hereby defined as public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § II(7-1-2), 7-1-91)  
Sec. 9-57. - Vegetative growth. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to permit weeds, brush, or grass to grow thereon to a height greater than 12 inches upon any undeveloped tract or acreage, or six inches upon any developed tract or lot. Weeds, brush or grass on undeveloped tracts shall be removed within 50 feet from any surface improvement or property line if there is no surface improvement. Brush, weeds and grass in excess of the limits set forth herein are hereby defined as public nuisances. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to keep the area adjacent to its property line, including the front or side parkway between the property line or sidewalk and the curb and the rear parkway between the property line and the alley pavement or travel way, or if there is no curb, in areas where development exists on both sides of an alley the property owner shall maintain vegetative growth in the rights-of-way between the property and the improved surface or center of the rights-of-way. In areas where the property is segregated from the rights-of-way by a barrier/screening device, the property owner shall be required to maintain both sides of the rights-of-way up to the barrier/screening device. Vegetative growth will be maintained to the height established for the type of property adjacent to the location. Trees and shrubs shall not be planted in alley rights-of-way. Trees and shrubs adjacent to the rights-of-way will be maintained so that the branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrian travel, vehicular line of sight or the provision of services. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property referred to in this article to cut and remove all weeds, brush and other objectionable or unsightly vegetation as often as may be necessary to comply with this article and to use every precaution to prevent the same from growing on such premises. 
(d)  The following shall be used as a reference for examples of the requirements of this section: 
(1)  Developed property: Tracts of land with structures on them. 
No weeds, grass, etc., shall grow to an excess of six inches, nor shall any rubbish, brush or any unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter accumulate or grow on the property. 
(2)  Undeveloped property—Type A: Tracts of land with no structures that are one acre or less. 
No weeds, grass, etc., shall grow to an excess of 12 inches, nor shall any rubbish, brush or any unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter accumulate or grow on the property. 
(3)  Undeveloped property—Type B: Acreage or platted lots larger than one acre without structures. 
The property shall be mowed 50 feet in from any surface improvement or property line, if there is no surface improvement, when the grass and weeds reach a height of 12 inches. All unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter shall be removed. 
(4)  Undeveloped property—Type C: Acreage or platted lots larger than one acre where structures adjoin or there is a structure on the property. 
The property shall be mowed a minimum of 50 feet from all structures and 50 feet from any surface improvement or property line, if there is no surface improvement, when the grass and weeds reach a height of 12 inches. All unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § II(7-1-3), 7-1-91)  
Sec. 9-58. - Trimmings. 
The following acts are declared to be unlawful and subject to the penalties of this section, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, as follows: 
(1)  The permitting of accumulation or the throwing, placing, dumping or depositing of any lawn trimmings, hedge trimmings or other cuttings or trimmings of weeds, flowers or other vegetation on lots, vacant or occupied, driveways or any other private property. 
(2)  The permitting of accumulation or the throwing, placing, dumping or depositing of any lawn trimmings, hedge trimmings, or other trimmings of weeds, flowers or other vegetation on or in any gutter, street, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb, alley or any other public property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1621-7-91, § II(7-1-4), 7-1-91)  
Sec. 9-59. - Vegetative growth variances. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in chapter 9 of this Code, any person given notice of vegetative growth noncompliance under the provisions of section 9-41 et seq. of this Code may, within ten days of the date of delivery of such notice or publication, apply for a variance from the provisions of said chapter 9. 
(a)  The application fee for such variance shall be nonrefundable in the sum of $25.00. 
(b)  Enforcement of chapter 9 shall be suspended pending decision on the variance request by the city council, whose decision shall be final. 
(c)  The city council may grant a variance for a term not to exceed 12 months. Such variance may be renewed annually. 
(d)  If a variance is granted, the applicant shall be responsible to pay the city the sum of $38.00 per hour for the mowing or trimming required with a one hour minimum charge. The number of hours required will vary with the difficulty of achieving compliance. 
(e)  If a variance is granted, the maximum number of mowings or trimmings shall be 18 per 12-month period, but the applicant shall only be billed for the actual number of mowings or trimmings required for compliance with the Code. Billings shall be once per month. 
(f)  Failure to pay any bill incurred hereunder within 30 days shall constitute an act of noncompliance. Compliance shall then be achieved under the administration of section 9-41 through 9-45 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1802-5-93, § I, 5-3-93)  
Sec. 9-60. - Exemption. 
Any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control over residential property that has rear or side yard rights-of-way adjacent to thoroughfares of four lanes or larger is exempt from mowing those rights-of-way except for vacant property greater than one acre; provided, however, this exemption does not waive any other provision of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the same. 
(Ord. No. 2320-2-98, § I, 2-16-98)  
Sec. 9-61. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Graffiti prohibition. 
(1)  An owner of any tangible property in the city commits an offense if the owner fails to remove all graffiti from the owner's property after the director notifies the owner that graffiti is present on the property and must be removed. 
(2)  Before issuing a citation for a violation under this section, the director shall serve the owner with written notice to remove the graffiti from the property within 15 calendar days from the date the notice is served. 
a.  The notice shall state the following: 
1.  The director has determined that the property has graffiti in violation of this chapter; 
2.  The director has offered to remove the graffiti at no cost to the owner and the owner has refused the offer; 
3.  If, within 15 calendar days from the date the notice is served, the owner has not removed the graffiti, the owner may be issued citations for failure to abate graffiti; and 
4.  The owner may, within 15 calendar days from the date the notice is served, request a variance from the city manager in accordance with subsection (c) which acts as an appeal to the initial city enforcement process. 
b.  The notice may be served by handing it to the owner in person or by United States certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address as shown on the tax rolls of the Denton County Appraisal District. If the owner cannot be found and the notice is returned by the United States Postal Service, then the owner may be notified by: 
1.  Publication one time in the official newspaper of the city; and 
2.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the premises to which the violation relates; or 
3.  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the premises to which the violation relates. 
c.  The 15 calendar days will be counted from the date the notice is personally served on the owner or from the 15th day after the notice is placed in the United States certified mail; or from the date the notice is published or posted in compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  If the owner fails to take abatement action within the time prescribed hereinabove or fails to receive approval to leave the graffiti in place by a variance, the property shall be subject to abatement of the graffiti by the city without further notice. The cost of the graffiti removal shall be recovered from the owner or by placing a lien against the property in accordance with the procedures set forth in state law. 
(4)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section if no notice was served on the owner. 
(5)  This section does not apply if the graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure and the removal of the graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal. 
(b)  Graffiti abatement procedures. 
(1)  The city may remove, at no cost to the owner, any graffiti the city determines to be in violation of this chapter upon receiving written consent and a waiver of liability from the owner of the property. The city may prepare and distribute forms for this purpose. 
(2)  The owner may, if the owner desires, give advance consent to the director to remove graffiti from the property in the future without the need for the director to obtain the owner's consent prior to each removal. Such prior authorization shall be in writing to the director and shall be signed by the owner. The prior authorization may be revoked by the owner at any time by notifying the director in writing. 
(3)  Whenever the city is authorized by this chapter to remove graffiti and uses public funds for the removal and for the repainting and repair of the property from which the graffiti is removed, the city shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, except in the following circumstances: 
a.  The director determines in a written notice to the owner that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community; or 
b.  The owner agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area. 
(4)  Where property defaced by graffiti is owned by a public entity other than the city, the city shall cause removal of the graffiti only after securing the consent of an authorized representative of that public entity. 
(c)  Graffiti abatement hearing. 
(1)  If a variance is sought, the owner must submit a variance request to the city manager within 15 calendar days from the date the notice is served. 
(2)  If the request is made within the time prescribed hereinabove, the owner shall be entitled to present evidence and arguments to the city manager that the owner's property does not contain graffiti. The determination of the city manager may be appealed to the city council within seven calendar days from the date the city manager's decision is served. If the city manager determines that the property contains graffiti and his decision is not timely appealed, the city manager may order that the graffiti be abated with no further notice. 
(3)  If an appeal of the city manager's determination is sought, the owner must submit an appeal to the city secretary within seven calendar days from the date the city manager's decision is served. If the appeal is made within the time prescribed hereinabove, the owner shall be entitled to present evidence and arguments to the city council that the owner's property does not contain graffiti. The determination of the city council shall be final. If the city council determines that the property contains graffiti, the city council may order that the graffiti be abated with no further notice. 
(4)  If a variance request is not made within the time prescribed hereinabove, the director may immediately order that the graffiti be abated. Before ordering such abatement, the director shall give written notice ("abatement order") served in accordance with this chapter that, unless the graffiti is removed within 15 calendar days from the date the abatement order is served, the city shall enter upon the property and cause the removal, painting over or such other eradication of the graffiti. 
(5)  The following procedures shall apply to actions by the city to abate and recover costs for abatement of graffiti on private property which was done pursuant to an abatement order issued by the city council, the city manager, or the director: 
a.  Abatement action. Not sooner than the time specified in the abatement order, the director shall implement the abatement order. The director should provide an accounting to the owner of the costs of the abatement action ("abatement accounting") on a full cost recovery basis not later than seven business days from the date the abatement action is completed. The abatement accounting shall include all administrative costs incurred by the city in abating graffiti on the property. 
b.  Lien. If all or any portion of the amount set forth in the abatement accounting remains unpaid after 30 calendar days from the date of the abatement accounting, the city may obtain a lien on the property which was the subject matter of the abatement action in accordance with the procedures set forth in state law. 
(Ord. No. 3360-07-2006, § 2, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 3709-09-2009 , § 1, 9-21-09)  
Secs. 9-62—9-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LITTER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways and property, ch. 13. 
State Law reference— Littering, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-81. - Littering public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep or deposit dirt, trash or other litter into any street or onto any sidewalk within the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter papers or other material detrimental to the order of the city in the public parks, streets, or on any sidewalk. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Code 1990, § 8-3-3)  
Sec. 9-82. - Littering private places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any litter on any private lot or premises whether such lot is owned by the person or another. All trash or litter shall be placed in approved receptacles. 
(Code 1990, § 8-3-4)  
Sec. 9-83. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § I, adopted Aug. 3, 1998, repealed § 9-83, which pertained to posting on fences and utility poles and derived from Code 1990, § 8-3-2.  
Sec. 9-84. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § I, adopted Aug. 3, 1998, repealed § 9-84, which pertained to handbills and derived from Code 1990, § 8-3-1.  
Sec. 9-85. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2358-8-98, § I, adopted Aug. 3, 1998, repealed § 9-85, which pertained to placing advertising material on vehicles and derived from Code 1990, § 8-3-1.  
ARTICLE IV. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 9-86. - Property maintenance code—Adopted. 
The 2015 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code published by the International Code Council, Inc., amendments and such other addendum as adopted and published by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted as the property maintenance code for the city with such local amendments as set forth in this article. A copy of this code is on file in the office of the director of building inspection division of the neighborhood services department. 
(Ord. No. 3996-05-2013 , § 1, 5-20-13; Ord. No. 4269-05-2016 , § 1, 5-2-16)  
Sec. 9-87. - Same—Amendments. 
The city adopts the following revisions and additions to the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition. 
Section 101.1; amend to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These Regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Lewisville, hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
Section 103; amend title to read as follows: 
SECTION 103
DEPARTMENT OF NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICES 
Section 103.1; amend to read as follows: 
103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Department of Neighborhood Services is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the code official. 
Section 103.5; amend to read as follows: 
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in the schedule set forth in Section 2-201 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances. 
Section 106.2; amend to read as follows: 
106.2 Notice of Violation. Whenever the code official determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, the code official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
Exception: Citations for violations of this code may be issued without requiring the issuance of a notice. 
Section 106.3; amend to read as follows: 
106.3 Prosecution of violation. If a notice of violation is issued and is not complied with in the time prescribed by such notice, the code official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant hereto. 
Section 107; Delete entire section 
Section 108; Delete entire section 
Section 111.1; amend to read as follows: 
111.1 Application of appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the City Council, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice, or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means. 
Sections 111.2 - 111.3; Delete. 
Section 111.4; amend to read as follows: 
111.4 Open hearing. All hearings before the City Council shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. 
Section 111.4.1; Delete entire section 
Section 111.5; Delete entire section 
Section 111.6; amend to read as follows: 
111.6 City Council decision. The City Council may modify or reverse the decision of the code official by majority vote. The code official shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision of the City Council. 
Section 111.6.1; Delete entire section 
Section 111.6.2; Delete entire section 
Section 111.7; amend to read as follows: 
111.7 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of the city secretary of the City of Lewisville. 
Section 112.4; amend to read as follows: 
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable for a fine of up to $2,000 dollars per offense, per day. 
Section 302.4; delete. 
Section 303; delete entire section. 
Section 304.14; amend to read as follows: 
304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any area where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
Section 308; delete entire section. 
Section 602.2; amend to read as follows: 
602.2 Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet room. 
Section 602.3; amend to read as follows: 
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases, or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: Deleted 
Section 602.4; amend to read as follows: 
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
Section 602.5; amend to read as follows: 
602.5 Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall. 
(Ord. No. 3996-05-2013 , § 1, 5-20-13; Ord. No. 4269-05-2016 , § 2, 5-2-16)  
Secs. 9-88—9-115. - Reserved.  
Chapter 9.5 - OLD TOWN DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Appendix A. Guidelines for Signage in Old Town 
Appendix B. Old Town Boundaries 
Appendix C. Required Clearances from Conductors 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, adopted June 2, 2003, amended the Code with the addition of a new chapter, which the editor has designated chapter 9.5, sections 9.5-1, 9.5-21—9.5-30, 9.5-41—9.5-47, 9.5-51—9.5-58, 9.5-71—9.5-74, 9.5-91—9.5-102, 9.5-121—9.5-125, 9.5-141—9.5-148, 9.5-161—9.5-167, 9.5-181—9.5-183, 9.5-190—9.5-198, apps. 1—6. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 9.5-1. - Definitions. 
Amended final plat. A plat of a subdivision correcting the scrivener errors of a previously approved plat in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the Texas Local Government Code, and a copy of which has been filed for record with the county clerk of Dallas or Denton County, Texas. 
Architect. Any state-registered architect. 
Brick veneer. That form of construction composed of individual kiln fired brick units, stone, split face block, glass block or combination of these materials laid up unit by unit, set in mortar and installed per the current adopted building code. (To utilize tilt wall and/or pre-cast concrete construction types, see section 6-181.) 
Building. A structure (anything constructed or erected), designed to be used as a place of occupancy, storage, or shelter. 
Building area. A portion of a lot on which single-family buildings are allowed to be placed. 
Building lot. A single tract of land located within a single block which, (at time of filing for a building permit) is designed by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. It shall front upon a street or approved place. Therefore, a "building lot" may not coincide with a lot of record. A building lot may be subsequently subdivided into two or more building lots, and a number of building lots may be cumulated into one building lot, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
Building pad. A portion of a lot on which commercial building footprints, driveways and mutual accesses are designed and shown on the approved Old Town development plan. 
City. The City of Lewisville, Texas, and all its governing and operating bodies. 
City staff. All city employees designated by the city and by properly constituted authority to recommend and enforce the regulations contained in this chapter. 
Clear vision area. A part of a lot (generally corner lot) which may not be utilized for plantings, walls, fences, parking, vending machines, or other obstructions which would cause danger, as determined by the city, to traffic by obstructing the view. 
Commercial development. Any non-single-family residential development requiring a development plan in accordance with this chapter. 
Control of access line. Lines along sections of the street and alley rights-of-way that delineate areas where no driveway access will be permitted, these lines shall be shown within the limits that the city determines to be potentially unsafe for driveway access. 
Corner clip. A triangular area of additional right-of-way at street and alley intersections. 
Council. The city council of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Easement. The right granted for the purpose of limited public use across, over, or under private land. 
Engineer. The city engineer of the City of Lewisville, or any state-licensed civil engineer. 
Final plat. A plat of a subdivision which has been approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and a copy of which has been filed for record with the county clerk of Dallas or Denton County, Texas. 
Fire lane. A fire apparatus access road that is a minimum of 20 feet in width and constructed of either asphalt or reinforced concrete, sufficiently designed to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus, and provides a surface capable of being striped in accordance with current city specifications. Fire apparatus access roads will be required and maintained in accordance with the International Fire Code. 
Lot of record. A lot that is created by an approved subdivision, the plat of which has been duly recorded in the office of the appropriate county clerk. 
Masonry veneer. That form of construction composed of individual kiln fired brick units, concrete tilt-wall, stone, concrete block, concrete, exposed aggregate, and glass block when installed in accordance with the adopted building code. (Tilt-wall and/or pre-cast concrete construction type shall provide architectural features including reveals; articulations, chamfered edges, etc. so that areas bordered by said features do not exceed 100 square feet in size. A minimum of two colors must be used on each elevation. 80 percent of each elevation must utilize natural and/or earth tone colors. In addition, each elevation may have 20 percent of another type of color if opted.) 
Master plan. The various plans for the city and its adjoining areas, as adopted by the council, and as it may subsequently be amended, and which indicates the existing and recommended general locations of various land uses, streets, parks, and other public and private developments and improvements. 
Mining. Shall mean the use of a facility or area for the extraction, removal, or stockpiling of sub-earth materials, including sand, gravel, oil, gas or other materials found under the earth. The following are not considered mining: 
(1)  The excavation, extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth materials for ponds or lakes, or incidental to an approved plat, or incidental to construction with a building permit, or for governmental or utility construction projects such as streets, alleys, gas, electrical, water, telephone facilities and similar projects. 
(2)  The extraction, removal, or stockpiling of earth materials incidental to construction of landscaping, retaining walls, screening devices and similar activities consistent with the land use allowed at the site of removal. 
(3)  Grading and filling outside the scope of an approved plat or Old Town development plan when done in conjunction with an approved grading and fill permit properly issued by the city. 
Minor plat. A plat of a subdivision that involves four or fewer lots which front on an existing street and do not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities and has been approved in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, and a copy of which has been filed for Record with the county clerk of Dallas or Denton County, Texas. 
Non-single-family. As specified in the Old Town development plan requirements shall include all uses in all zoning districts that are not single-family or two-family residential in nature. For purposes of this definition, multi-family residential and mobile home parks shall be considered as non-single-family residential and will be required to comply with the Old Town development plan process. 
Old Town design review committee. The Old Town design review committee of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Old Town development plan. The development plan for one or more lots upon which is shown all information required by this chapter. There are specific requirements for Old Town development plans. 
Opaque. As specified in the screening requirements shall mean a fence or hedge that you cannot see through. A chain link fence with slats or a fabric fence is not acceptable. 
Ordinances, standards, and codes. The official maps, master plans, ordinances, and specifications of the city. 
Planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Plat. A complete and exact plan, map, or drawing, on which a sub divider's plan of a subdivision is presented and is submitted for approval, and a copy of which has been or will be filed in the office of the appropriate county clerk. 
Preliminary plat. A preliminary plan or drawing that represents a sub divider's plan of the subdivision, showing all boundaries and location of individual properties and streets. Preliminary plats must be approved by either the planning and zoning commission or city council, as applicable. 
Protected tree. Trees that are defined by a protected tree list, by species and meeting ordinance mandated minimum caliper size. 
Replat. The subdivision of any part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition or lot. 
Screening hedge. An allowable screening device of shrubs as required in this chapter. 
Screening fence. A solid opaque screening fence used to screen outside storage in accordance with the screening section of this chapter. 
Screening wall. A solid, opaque screening wall made of wood, brick, stone or decorative concrete block to be erected at designated areas in accordance with the screening section of this chapter. A screening hedge may also be used a required screening device. 
Setback line. A line that a building must be set back from the property line, the street right-of-way line or easement line. 
Site improvements. All necessary site related improvements required by this chapter. 
Off-site public improvements. All public improvements constructed on public property. 
On-site public improvements. All public improvements constructed on private property in public easements. 
Public improvements. All infrastructures necessary for development as required by this chapter, which include surface improvements (curbs, gutters, driveway approaches, sidewalks, paved streets, alleys, bridges, culverts, street lights, and etc.) and utilities (water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm drains, fire hydrants, and etc). 
Semi-public improvements. All improvements required by this chapter installed on private property, other than easements, and privately maintained. (e.g. fire lanes, fire lines, on site private fire hydrants, screening devices, on site drainage, meters, and backflow devices). 
Street. A public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, boulevard, or however otherwise designated. 
Alleys. Minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Alleys, interior. Internal alleys within a subdivision not parallel to a city street. 
Alleys, perimeter. Alleys adjacent to and parallel to a city street requiring a screening wall between the rights-of-ways. 
Arterial streets. Major streets in the city's street system that serves as an avenue for the circulation of traffic onto, out, or around the city and carry high volume of traffic, designated on the thoroughfare plan as P6D, P4D. 
Collector streets. Streets whose principal function is to carry traffic between residential streets and the arterial streets, but that may also provide direct access to abutting properties, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development, designated on the thoroughfare plan as C2U, and C4U. 
Controlled access streets. Streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Culs-de-sac. Short minor streets having only one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
Dead end streets. Streets other than a cul-de-sac with only one outlet. 
Residential streets. Streets which are intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and which is used for access to abutting properties. 
Subdivision. The division of a parcel of land into two or more lots, or building sites for purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) including one lot subdivision and all divisions of land involving dedication of streets, alleys, and easements, or change in existing streets. The term also includes re-subdivision, and the term subdivider or developer are synonymous and interchangeable, and include any person, partnership, association, firm, trustee, or agent who participate in subdivision of land within the intent, scope, and purview of this chapter. Divisions of land for agricultural purposes in parcels of five acres or more shall not be included within this definition, unless any such division of five acres or more include the planning or development of a new street or access easement. 
Tract. An unplatted parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by a recorded deed and which is recognized as a separate parcel for purpose of transfer of title. 
Tree survey. A drawing showing protected trees located outside of the building area on single-family lots and outside of the building pad for commercial lots. 
Truck lay. The route fire department apparatus travels from a fire hydrant to all points of a structure or combustible storage area. Actual distance is measured along a paved street and/or fire lane as the apparatus would travel. 
Utility company. Companies, corporations and other entities that undertake transmission and distribution of electricity, telecommunications, radio or television communications. 
Utility lines. Poles, structures, wire, aerial cables and related facilities used in transmission and distribution of electricity, telecommunications, radio or television communications. 
Utility lines, existing. Poles, wires, aerial cables and other related facilities that are in place and in operation at the time of the effective date of this chapter. 
Utility lines, new. Poles, wires, aerial cables and other related facilities that are not in place and in operation at the time of the effective date of this chapter. 
Utility lines, 60KV. An electric line used for electrical distribution having a voltage rating of 60,000 volts. 
Variance. A grant of permission by the council that authorizes a specific suspension or waiver of the rules and regulations in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 9.5-2—9.5-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 9.5-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development within the area of the city, known as Old Town, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-22. - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-23. - Jurisdiction. 
Provisions of the chapter shall apply to the Old Town Center Design District and the Old Town Design District of the city, as described in appendix B. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; 0032-18-ORD , § 5, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 9.5-24. - Special districts. 
Special districts, such as utility districts, road districts, etc., will be allowed only after approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-25. - Submittal procedure. 
The submittal of plats, either preliminary or final, development plans, and building permit applications shall be directed to the department of community development, central permitting section, of the city. Such submittals will be processed in accordance with procedures as outlined within this chapter and policies adopted in conjunction therewith. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-26. - Title opinion. 
To provide evidence that the owner has adequate title and authority to convey dedication, a title opinion must be submitted for all plats or actions that include dedication of land or easements to the city. Said title opinion must be deemed to be satisfactory by the city attorney of the city and will be at the sole expense of the owner. In the event there is one or more lien holder(s), written approval by the lien holder(s) must be provided to show agreement of the plat or dedication. Dedication along state routes shall be by warranty deed. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-27. - Tax certificate. 
An original tax certificate must be submitted as required with all plats, development plans, requests for permits for construction of public or semi-public improvements, or requests for permits for construction of private buildings. All taxes due to the city must be current at the time of approval of plats or site plans and at the time of issuance of said construction permits. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-28. - Public and private improvement design standards. 
Standards for design of public improvements and of private improvements which directly interface with public improvements shall be as outlined in the city standard specifications and Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction of the North Central Texas Council of Governments as adopted by the city, except as otherwise noted. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-29. - Plat required. 
(a)  In accordance with the Local Government Code, section 212.004, the owner of a tract of land, located within the limits or in the extra-territorial jurisdiction of a municipality, who divides the tract in two or more parts for the purpose of sale, or to lay out a subdivision or building lots or any lots, or streets, alleys, parks or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots, shall cause a final plat to be made in accordance with this chapter and with the Local Government Code. 
(b)  Every structure hereafter erected or altered shall be located on a lot of record as identified on a final plat for the property. This provision shall not apply when a new building or addition is no more than ten percent of the size of the existing building or buildings on the tract, provided there are one or more buildings already located on the tract. This provision shall apply up to a maximum addition or new building of 5,000 square feet in size when there are no significant impacts to the property as determined by a current survey. If there are changes in drainage, city utilities or required parking a plat will still be required. 
(c)  For all unplatted tracts, a master development plan, called a preliminary plat in this chapter, may be required prior to preparation of any final plat. For the purpose of subdividing a large tract which includes an extensive amount of public improvements, a preliminary plat shall be submitted identifying lots, blocks and phases to be final platted in time, as development occurs, and on the condition that all building lots and phases can stand alone in terms of public and semi-public improvements. 
(d)  In further subdividing a final platted lot, the lot of record must be replatted in its entirety. In addition, all replats of commercially zoned land and all replats of single and two family residential zoned land of more than six lots must be considered in a public hearing in accordance with the Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3599-09-2008, § 1, 9-8-08)  
Sec. 9.5-30. - Variances and exceptions. 
(a)  Where the city council finds that hardship or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with these regulations and /or the purpose of these regulations may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal, it may approve exceptions to these subdivision regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations. In approving exceptions, the city council may require such conditions and stipulations that will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements of these regulations. 
A petition for any such exception shall be submitted in writing by the owner/agent, four weeks prior to any council meeting, to the community development department. The request shall state fully the grounds for the application and all facts relied upon by the applicant. All supporting exhibits, fees and documents must be included with the application. Incomplete applications will not be processed until all documents are received by staff. 
(b)  Variances requested on the face of a plat or Old Town development plan, will be scheduled for the appropriate board after staff's review. Variances requested on Old Town development plans will be placed on the city council agenda and variances on preliminary and final plats will go before the planning and zoning commission first with a recommendation to the city council. 
(c)  An administrative fee for processing variance requests is applicable for all requests. 
 

Figure 1—City of Lewisville Organizational Chart 
 

Figure 2—Community Development Organizational Chart 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 9.5-31—9.5-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ARCHITECTURAL APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 9.5-41. - Purpose/general provision. 
The Old Town center design district and the Old Town design district are established to build on the area's turn-of-the-century small town character. The design districts are also created to preserve and enhance the special historic, architectural and aesthetic features of this area. The provisions of this article are established to ensure that new construction and alterations to existing structures are compatible with the unique character of Old Town (appendix 1). 
No land shall be used and no structure shall be erected for, converted to, or used for any principal or accessory use other than such uses as allowed in accordance with chapter 17 of this Code known as the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-42. - Old Town design review committee. 
To insure appropriate architectural design in the Old Town center design district and the Old Town design district, the city council has created the Old Town design review committee. The committee has been given the duty of reviewing and approving or denying proposed projects under applications for letters of design approval. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-43. - Old Town architectural design standards adopted. 
The Old Town architectural design standards will serve as the guide by which the Old Town design review committee reviews projects for appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-44. - Letter of design approval required. 
Within the Old Town center design district and the Old Town design district, the issuance of a letter of design approval reflects appropriate design under the Old Town design standards and is required as a condition of the following: 
(1)  Issuance by the community development department of a building permit for construction of a new structure; 
(2)  Issuance by the community development department of a building permit for expansion of an existing structure; and 
(3)  Issuance by the community development department of a building permit for renovation, remodeling or other alteration of the exterior of an existing structure. 
(4)  Issuance by the community development department of a sign permit for new signs and the alteration, renovation or rehabilitation of an existing sign or signs. 
(5)  The installation of outdoor murals, decorative clocks or street/sidewalk lighting features which will be visible from the adjacent public rights of way. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 9.5-45. - Pre-design conference. 
A pre-design conference with city community development staff is required prior to the submission of an application for a letter of design approval. A development plan containing the following information shall be submitted to community development staff for discussion at the pre-design conference: 
(1)  Footprints of all existing structures. 
(2)  Proposed footprints of all new structures. 
(3)  Building setbacks. 
(4)  Location of parking areas. 
(5)  Location of landscape areas. 
(6)  Building elevations for all sides of the building or buildings. 
(7)  Photographs of adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-46. - Applying for a letter of design approval. 
(a)  Projects which are required to obtain a letter of design approval prior to approval of various permits will be required to be heard by Old Town design review committee (OTDRC). Applicants will be required to demonstrate to the committee appropriate use of architectural features and design which are visually harmonious with Old Town. 
Applicants should utilize the following steps when developing plans to submit to the committee. 
(1)  Property owners are strongly encouraged to engage licensed architects and other design and planning professionals to assist them in developing their concepts. The architectural guidelines in this chapter provide the framework for projects to be considered. Knowledge of architectural principles and styles are necessary to developing well thought out plans for presentation. 
(2)  An application packet, which includes 13 copies of all supporting documents should be prepared and submitted to the department of community development for the OTDRC to review. Adequate documentation is essential to provide a complete understanding of the work proposed. Applicants are required to submit the following documentation: 
a.  Completed application form. 
b.  Site plan/roof plan (drawn to scale). 
c.  Proposed building elevations (to scale). 
d.  Photographs of existing building conditions. 
e.  Product literature or specifications. 
f.  Materials samples and color samples. 
If drawings are to be included in the submittal package, it should be drafted to scale and executed in a manner that clearly depicts the character of the proposed work. While a professionally produced drawing is encouraged, it is not required, as the sketches that follow illustrate.  

Inappropriate Drawing 
 

Appropriate Drawing—Free Hand 
 

Appropriate Drawing—Mechanically Drafted 
(3)  Presentation of project before OTDRC. Each project will have a formal presentation by the applicant. The presentation should focus on how the proposed project complies with the design guidelines and is appropriate in Old Town. The OTDRC will determine based upon the information supplied by the applicant and city staff as to the appropriateness of design in compliance of this chapter. 
(4)  Decisions of the OTDRC. The OTDRC will either approve the project and issue a letter of design appropriateness, table the project to obtain additional information from the applicant or city staff, or deny the project for failure to meet design appropriateness. Denial of the project will require the applicant to resubmit the project addressing the design elements which were deemed inappropriate to the OTDRC or seek an appeal from the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 9.5-47. - Appeal. 
The applicant may appeal all decisions of the Old Town design review committee to the city council. A written notice of appeal may be filed after receipt of notification of the decision of the Old Town design review committee. The appeal shall be a de novo hearing. City council may uphold, reverse or modify the committee's decision.  

Figure 3—Letter of Design Approval Process 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 9.5-48—9.5-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLAN SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 9.5-51. - General provisions. 
(a)  The city has established a central location for submitting plans for development and construction once property is properly zoned. All plats, site plans and plans for building construction shall be submitted directly to the building inspection division of the community development department. Persons wishing to discuss specific questions in the development process should contact the appropriate division, but all formal submittals should be made to this "one stop" location to provide a coordinated review. Copies of the city's development and construction regulations are available at the building inspection division and on-line at www.cityoflewisville.com. 
(b)  Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, final plat or Old Town development plan, the developer/owner shall consult with the appropriate city staff review committee concerning the proposal. Staff will assist in determining whether the proposed development is generally consistent with city standards, plans and policies. 
(c)  The city review staff will be available on a regular weekly basis for a joint meeting with any person wishing to discuss projects in review or proposed for submittal. The project engineer or architect is encouraged to attend the review meeting in order to directly receive pertinent information regarding the proposed project. This meeting will not provide a full review of any particular project, but will provide the opportunity for a developer, architect or engineer to schedule a regular meeting to assist in expediting the city review process. Persons wishing to schedule a time for the regular review meeting should contact the community development department. 
(d)  Twelve copies, 22" × 34", of preliminary plats, final plats and Old Town development plans shall be included with all formal submittals. Plats and Old Town development plans will be reviewed by applicable community development divisions. The parks and leisure services department will review plats and site plans involving residential development and right-of-way landscaping and irrigation. Copies of the submittals are also furnished to the electric, telephone, gas, cable, and solid waste disposal utility companies for review and comment. The initial review period will be a maximum of 15 working days, with subsequent re-submittal reviews to be a maximum of ten working days. On larger sets of plans staff may require additional time for review. The building inspection division will coordinate all submittals and returns of marked-up copies, including payment of review fees, as well as acceptance of tax certificates, file copies and other required materials. 
(e)  All preliminary plats, final plats and Old Town development plans submitted for review will be on the city's active list for a period of three months from the date of each submittal. After the three-month period, a project will be considered abandoned and will be removed from the files. Substantial developer-initiated changes in the project from one submittal to the next that need additional review will require payment of one-half of the original review fee. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-52. - Requirements for submittal of final file copies. 
Following completion of the review process, plats and replats must be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for final approval. In the event a variance is requested, all preliminary and final plats must have final approval by the city council after a recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. Development plan approval can be granted by city staff if the site plan conforms with all applicable requirements of the city. If a variance is requested, the development plan shall be forwarded directly to the city council upon completion of staff review. 
(1)  Preliminary plats. Following the completion of the review process and 12 days prior to the scheduled planning and zoning commission meeting, the applicant must submit final file copies. This will include one mylar and two blueline prints of 22' × 34" sheet size and 20 copies of 11' × 17" sheet size reductions. If development and/or construction variances are being requested, the number of 11' × 17" sheet size reductions to be submitted shall be 40 to allow for the additional submission to the city council. 
(2)  Final plats. Following the completion of the review process and 12 days prior to the scheduled planning and zoning commission meeting, the applicant must submit final file copies, all with seals and notarized signatures shall be original. This will include one mylar and one blueline prints of 22' × 34" sheet size, one mylar and three blueline prints of 18' × 24" sheet size, and 20 copies of 11' × 17" sheet size reductions. If development and/or construction variances are being requested, the number of 11' × 17" sheet size reductions to be submitted shall be 40 to allow for the additional submission to the city council. At such time when all final file copies have been submitted, as outlined in this chapter, to the planning and community services division, the plat will be considered filed with the city to be heard by the planning and zoning commission, in accordance with Local Government Code, section 212.009. 
(3)  Minor plats. Following the completion of the review process, the applicant must submit final file copies, all with seals and notarized signatures shall be original. This will include one mylar and one blueline prints of 22' × 34" sheet size, one mylar and three blueline prints of 18' × 24" sheet size and three 11' × 17" sheet size reductions. 
(4)  Old Town development plans. Following completion of the review process, the applicant must submit one original 22' × 34" sheet size mylar, signed and sealed by a state-licensed civil engineer and/or a state-registered architect, to be signed by city staff members and utility companies. After all signatures are collected, 12 blueline copies 22' × 34" sheet size must be submitted prior to a pre-construction conference. Development plan construction may begin prior to final plat acceptance by the planning and zoning commission if staff review is complete and no variances are requested. If development and/or construction variances are requested, 20 11' × 17" reductions must be submitted four weeks in advance of the city council meeting at which the variance request will be presented. 
(5)  Denton County filing fees. For all documents to be filed at the Denton County clerk's office, including all plats, deeds, easements, abandonments, and corrections, a separate check in the exact amount of the county filing fee shall be submitted with the document(s) to be filed. The check shall be made payable to "Denton County Clerk." 
(6)  External agency permit submittals. Submittals for floodplain development to F.E.M.A., and the U.S. Corps of Engineers (C.D.C. applications), can be processed concurrently with city staff approval. Submittals for TXDOT permits will be processed through city initiation (per TXDOT policy) only upon completion of city staff review. Permits are granted only to the city by TXDOT and not private developers. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-53. - Park and other public use dedication requirement. 
Park dedication for residential development shall be in accordance with the city park dedication ordinance. All rights-of-way and land proposed for public use dedication associated with a current or future development shall be dedicated with a final plat. Requirement of fees in lieu of land for park dedication purposes shall be met prior to the approval of the final plat for the project. Land for park dedication purposes may be deeded to the city in advance, but will have to be included on the plat as development occurs. Rights-of-way acquisition for public improvement projects will not be affected by this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-54. - When an Old Town development plan is required. 
(a)  Development plan approval is required for all construction involving new buildings. Old Town development plans may proceed through staff review and approval so long as a final plat, when required, has been approved or is in the process of being reviewed and approved with no variances. Once the Old Town development plan is approved, a temporary, 30-day construction permit for public and semi-public improvements may be issued prior to acceptance of a fully compliant final plat, as long as the final plat is scheduled for a planning and zoning meeting with no variances. In the event that the city council denies the plat, all temporary permits will be revoked. Development plans must also be submitted for approval when any of the following apply: 
(1)  Change in the square footage of any existing enclosed building or parking area. This provision shall not apply when a new building or addition is no more than ten percent of the size of the existing building or buildings on the tract, provided there are one or more buildings already located on the tract. This provision shall apply up to a maximum addition or new building of 5,000 square feet in size when there are no significant impacts to the property as determined by a current survey. If there are changes in drainage, city utilities or required parking an engineering site plan will still be required. 
(2)  Any change requiring additional fire protection to the site. 
(3)  Change in the fire lane configuration or location. 
(4)  Change in grading or drainage. 
(5)  Addition of new water or sanitary sewer services to the site. 
(6)  Change in use from residential to commercial. 
(b)  Existing legal non-conforming structures may maintain a legal non-conforming status unless one of the items listed above is triggered or unless the use or operation of the structure or property ceases or becomes vacant for a period of 12 months or more, in which case, the start up of any use of the structure or property will require compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, including platting and submission of an Old Town development plan. 
(c)  Development plans for new construction or for alteration(s) to a site must be reviewed by all applicable departments. Any minor changes on the site which would otherwise trigger a development plan will require submission of a copy of the approved development plan, prepared in accordance with this chapter, with the proposed change(s) drawn in. More significant changes may require full submission of a new development plan in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 3235-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05; Ord. No. 3599-09-2008, § 2, 9-8-08)  
Sec. 9.5-55. - Accelerated review for Old Town development plans. 
An accelerated review may be utilized for the review process in limited situations. Development plans submitted in accordance with this section will be reviewed within seven working days; each subsequent submittal will be reviewed within five working days. The following is a list of minimum requirements for invoking the special review process. Review fees are those of a regular submittal. 
(1)  The property must be platted as one platted lot or building lot. 
(2)  No city council action is required. 
(3)  No public improvements other than driveways and sidewalks are required. 
(4)  No right-of-way or easement dedication is required. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-56. - Requirements for phasing a development. 
Development may be phased on a plat or engineering site plan by establishing phase lines and/or lot lines. The phasing on an engineering site plan for a lot with existing developments shall not be allowed. The engineering site plan for lots with existing developments shall fully comply with the requirements of this chapter. Each phase shall be capable of standing alone, as development occurs, and shall not be dependant on future construction associated with separate phases to meet city standards or requirements. All required public, semi-public and private improvements, as defined by this chapter, (roads, turn lanes, deceleration lanes, RR crossings, traffic control devices, sidewalks, screening walls, etc.), shall be designed and constructed with each phase in conformance with all applicable city standards. 
The pro-rated cost of public improvements which are deferred for the construction of future phases shall be deposited with the city prior to the scheduling of the final plat for consideration by the planning and zoning commission. The pro-rated cost will be established based on the percentage of the area being developed out of the total property area and excluding all right-of-way (R.O.W.) dedications. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-57. - Procedures for issuance of building permit. 
(a)  No building permit including but not limited to permits for electrical, mechanical, plumbing, signs, fire protection, etc. (with the exception of temporary power permits associated with construction), will be issued for any residential or commercial building in the Old Town design district or Old Town center design district until all public improvements associated with the development are completed and accepted by the city and a letter of design Appropriateness is obtained. These public improvements constitute the basic infrastructure required to serve the development and include construction of streets, sidewalks, drainage, water and sanitary sewer facilities as outlined in article V. Simultaneous construction of public and private improvements will require city council action. In addition, gas and electrical service shall be available to each lot prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Commercial buildings have to follow additional requirements prior to obtaining a building permit. These requirements include submitting an Old Town development plan for staff approval, construction and acceptance of all required public and semi-public improvements (fire lanes, fire lines, fire hydrants and other appurtenances, sidewalks, driveway approaches, drainage facilities, water and sanitary sewer service connections, etc.) as shown on the approved Old Town development plan. 
(c)  A foundation permit may be issued, on a case-by-case basis, based on the approved development plan that adequately addresses the location and elevations of water and sanitary sewer services in relation to the proposed finish floor elevation of the building. 
(d)  No building construction above the slab may be commenced prior to the construction and approval of all fire lanes, fire lines, fire hydrants and other waterline appurtenances. 
(e)  Some items of public and semi-public improvements i.e. sidewalks, driveway approaches, grading and drainage improvements, water and sanitary sewer service connections may be constructed simultaneously with the building provided a cash escrow is deposited with the city to cover 100 percent of the cost of the improvements. A non-refundable fee of $250.00 will be charged for escrow handling. On cash escrows where the developer satisfactorily completes all public and semi-public improvements, the city will return the entire amount escrowed plus interest earned on that escrow. If the developer fails to complete the project, and the city is to complete the project at a later date, then the amount escrowed plus the interest will be retained by the city. 
(f)  Three-party contracts may be considered on case-by-case basis and are subject to approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-58. - Grading and filling regulations. 
(a)  Prior to commencement of any grading or filling operation, the owner, developer or contractor shall secure a "grading and fill" permit properly issued by the city. Said permit will be issued only after the requirements of this section and related requirements have been met. The permit will be valid for a period of 180 days from the date of issuance. The permit may be extended in increments of 180 days, if approved, and will be valid for a maximum period of up to 18 months from the date of initial approval. 
In order to apply for a permit, the applicant shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Submittal of a grading and/or fill plan. The plan shall comply with the applicable provisions of a grading and filling plan requirements. 
(2)  Submittal of review fees and tax certificates. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements of a development plan, the grading and fill plan must indicate the specifics of the proposed work, including areas to be excavated or filled, erosion control measures, means of ingress and egress, restoration plans, hauling routes with traffic control, and any other items deemed appropriate by city staff to fully define the work. 
(c)  A grading and fill permit will not be issued if the work is deemed to adversely affect drainage on adjacent or other properties, create a traffic safety problem, or be considered a mining operation. Specific use district zoning is required for mining, including such mining as sand and gravel removal. 
(d)  Any grading or filling operation in the floodway or floodplain will trigger additional requirements contained elsewhere within this chapter. 
(e)  Any grading or filling operation involving the removal of trees is prohibited prior to the approval of an old town development plan for commercial developments. 
Any grading or filling operation involving the removal of trees is permissible with an approved preliminary plat when accompanied by a grading plan, tree survey and tree mitigation plan. Tree mitigation fees must be paid before grading permits will be issued. 
(f)  A grading and fill permit is not required for the addition of topsoil or similar material used to spread over grassed areas in average depths of less than two inches. 
(g)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
 

Figure 4—Preliminary Plat Approval Process Flowchart 
 

Figure 5—Final Plat Approval Process Flowchart 
 

Figure 6—Development Plan Process Flowchart 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 3235-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05)  
Secs. 9.5-59—9.5-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 9.5-71. - Required development procedures. 
(a)  General provisions. This section deals with all construction on all lots in the Old Town design district and Old Town center design district. 
All Old Town development plan, plat, grading, construction plan and grading and fill plan review fees and tax certificates are due at time of initial submittal. 
(b)  Non-single-family Old Town development plan criteria. An Old Town development plan, signed and sealed by a state-licensed professional engineer and/or a state-registered architect, must be submitted in accordance with city regulations and policies. Information on specific city regulations, policies and standards is contained elsewhere in this chapter. Development may be phased by establishing phase lines and/or lot lines. Each phase shall be capable of standing alone and not dependant on future construction associated with separate phases to meet city standards or requirements. 
Construction must be underway with 180 days from the date of formal approval and the building substantially completed with 18 months of the date of formal approval. That portion, which is not substantially complete within 18 months, may be resubmitted in accordance with the most current city standards and regulations. 
The following is a checklist for items, which shall be included, as applicable, on each Old Town development plan submitted for review. The Old Town development plan shall include a cover sheet, a copy of the final plat or tract and applicable construction drawings. When an Old Town development plan is submitted on several sheets an overall site layout shall be included showing general information such as building location, zoning, setbacks, etc. for reference purposes. 
(1)  A title block located at the bottom right hand side of the page to include project's name, addition's name, lot, block and phase designations, total acreage, zoning classification and address if available (see appendix for title block). 
(2)  A summary table for building square footage and total number of parking spaces required for each proposed classification and R.O.W. square footage or acreage (if applicable). 
(3)  Staff and utility companies signature block (see appendix). 
(4)  Tax certificate showing all tax payments to the city are current. Taxes must be current as of the date of formal city approval of the site plan. 
(5)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(6)  Location map 1 inch = 1,000 feet (Must use city base map). 
(7)  Sheet size of 22" × 34". 
(8)  Scale of 1 inch = 20 feet maximum for lots up to three acres, and 1" = 40 feet maximum for lots exceeding three acres. For site plans requiring extensive grading, drainage, other site related improvements, or unusual lot configuration the office of the city engineer shall be consulted for designating scale. 
(9)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(10)  Distances and bearings of the lot including total land area, subdivision lot and block designation and phase lines. The entire platted lot or tract shall be shown on the Old Town development plan. 
(11)  Iron rods shall be set or found and shown on site plan. 
(12)  Contours with intervals of two feet or less or spot elevations, referred to sea level datum, including city benchmark. Information can be obtained from the city engineer's office. 
(13)  Building setback lines including required setback from all water, sanitary sewer and drainage easements. 
(14)  Zoning of subject lot and adjoining property. 
(15)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(16)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. 
(17)  Traffic control signals, devices, striping and traffic control plan, if applicable, in conformance with the latest edition of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(18)  Streets, alleys and easements adjacent to the site showing right-of-way and limits of paving. 
(19)  Driveways, sidewalks, water and sanitary sewer services, grading and drainage. 
(20)  Parking layout, including maneuvering as well as loading and unloading service areas. 
(21)  Screening devices, if applicable. 
(22)  Landscaping plan, including a summary table showing number, size and type of trees and percentage of landscaping for parking areas, if applicable. Irrigation plans illustrating connection to main water line through a separate irrigation meter or off of main water meter. Irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent off-site drainage nuisance. 
(23)  Construction details for all site improvements as defined in definitions section and as applicable. 
(24)  Fire protection including fire hydrants, fire lanes, fire lines and related devices, if applicable. 
(25)  Dumpster location, if applicable. 
(26)  Other utilities, if applicable. 
(27)  Finished floor elevation. The builder is responsible for furnishing an engineering or surveyor certification of the foundation elevation and building setbacks prior to construction of a foundation. 
(28)  Variances from this chapter, which may be requested, shall be listed on the face of the site plan. 
(29)  Tree survey and mitigation plans. 
(30)  Note stating required exterior finish. 
(31)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
(32)  Traffic control plan, shall be submitted for all proposed construction within a street right-of-way. The traffic control plan shall incorporate all applicable state department of transportation traffic control plan sheets. 
(33)  Show location of all proposed free standing signage. Refer to the city sign ordinance for requirements and limitations. 
(34)  Date of approval from the Old Town design review committee. 
(c)  Single-family Old Town development plan criteria. An Old Town development plan must be submitted in accordance with city regulations and policies. An Old Town development plan is not required for single-family detached dwellings, although all single family developments must submit engineering plans for review to ensure right of way dedication and escrow/construction of public improvements. Information on specific city regulations, policies and standards is contained elsewhere in this section. 
The section applies to individual single family construction projects involving infill development. Single family construction projects which involve multiple lots for more than one residential structure shall comply with non-single-family development plan criteria found elsewhere in this section. 
Construction must be underway with 180 days from the date of formal approval and substantially completed with 18 months of the date of formal approval. That portion, which is not substantially complete within 18 months, must be resubmitted in accordance with the most current city standards and regulations. 
The following is a checklist for items, which shall be included, as applicable, on each single-family Old Town development plan submitted for review. A single-family Old Town development plan may be submitted on a single sheet or on several sheets as necessary. When a single-family Old Town development plan is submitted on several sheets an overall site layout shall be included showing general information such as building location, zoning, setbacks, etc. for reference purposes. 
(1)  A title block located at the bottom right hand side of the page to include project's name, addition's name, lot, block and phase designations, total acreage, zoning classification and address if available (see appendix for title block). 
(2)  A summary table for building square footage. 
(3)  Staff signature block (see appendix). 
(4)  Tax certificate showing all tax payments to the city are current. Taxes must be current as of the date of formal city approval of the site plan. 
(5)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(6)  Sheet size of 22" × 34". 
(7)  Scale of 1 inch = 20 feet maximum. 
(8)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(9)  Distances and bearings of the lot including total land area, subdivision lot and block designation. 
(10)  Iron rods shall be set or found and shown on site plan. 
(11)  Building setback lines including required setback from all water, sanitary sewer and drainage easements. 
(12)  Zoning of subject lot and adjoining property. 
(13)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(14)  Streets, alleys and easements adjacent to the site showing right-of-way and limits of paving. Exception: right-of-way dedication may be required to meet minimum street right-of-way widths, however, individual single family projects will not require payment for paving or public water and sewer line upgrades. 
(15)  Driveways, sidewalks, water and sewer services, grading, drainage, and erosion control plans. 
(16)  Screening devices, if applicable. 
(17)  Landscaping plan, including a summary table showing number, size and type of trees and percentage of landscaping for parking areas, if applicable. Irrigation plans illustrating connection to main water line through a separate irrigation meter or off of main water meter. Irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent off-site drainage nuisance. 
(18)  Fire protection including fire hydrants. 
(19)  Other utilities, if applicable. 
(20)  Finished floor elevation. The builder is responsible for furnishing an engineering or surveyor certification of the foundation elevation and building setbacks prior to construction of a foundation. 
(21)  Tree survey and mitigation plans. 
(22)  Note stating required exterior finish. 
(d)  Minor plat. The final approval of minor plats is delegated to the city manager, or designee. Minor plats are those that involve four or fewer lots that front on an existing street do not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities and is not a replat. The city manager or designee may, for any reason, elect to present the plat to the planning and zoning commission for approval. The city manager or designee shall not disapprove a plat and shall be required to refer any plat that is not approved to the planning and zoning commission. 
The following is a checklist for items that shall be included, as applicable, on each minor plat submitted for review: 
(1)  Title block—Same as final plat (see appendix). 
(2)  For all residential subdivisions, a plan summary table, to include total acreage per phase, total number of lots and number of lots per phase and zoning classification, minimum lot size, minimum dwelling size and density per acre. A summary table of each lot area (esq.) and a tree schedule in accordance with the landscaping section shall also be included. 
(3)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(5)  Sheet size of 22" × 34" for review copies. 
(6)  Location map 1 inch = 1,000 feet (Must use city base map). 
(7)  Maximum scale of 1 inch = 100 feet, (maximum scale of 1 inch = 200 feet, one sheet for addressing purposes). 
(8)  Boundary line, accurate in scale and with exact distances and bearings, of the subject tract and each lot within the subdivision including exact acreage per lot for all non-single-family developments. Location of corner pins and monuments, including description and whether found or set. 
(9)  Metes and bounds description of the subdivision, with exact acreage, in reference to the deed records of the county, including the volume and page of the deed for the land being platted. 
(10)  Lot number and block letter designations. Building setback lines shall be shown or noted including setback lines from all water, sanitary sewer and drainage easements. 
(11)  Zoning of subject lot and adjacent property. 
(12)  The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(13)  Lines or limits designating boundaries of municipalities, counties and special districts such as municipal utility districts, road utility districts, levee districts, etc. 
(14)  Existing streets, alleys and access easements including street names, with all curve data and widths of rights-of-way. 
(15)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(16)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. 
(17)  For all residential development, the park dedication agreement shall be finalized at the time of approval of the final plat including all dedications and/or fees to be paid at this time. The agreement, including the approval date, must be noted on the face of the plat. 
(18)  All land proposed for public use dedication or to be reserved for the common use of all property owners, together with conditions or limitations of such use. Such reservations and dedications must be identified with a lot and block designation except street and alley rights-of-way. 
(19)  The 100-year flood plain per current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), if applicable, shall be delineated. If the floodplain is not mapped, the developer is responsible for making this determination using a FEMA approved method. 
(20)  Flowage easements, if any, pertaining to drainage including a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
(21)  Other features which impact the subject property including, but not limited to, buildings, cemeteries, parks, landfills and monuments. 
(22)  Right-of-way and public property to be abandoned should be identified on the plat, but information is to be provided separately as required for creation of an abandonment ordinance. 
(23)  Certification by a licensed land surveyor, registered in the state, to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him or under his direct supervision and that all the monuments and corner pins shown exist and are correctly described. 
(24)  A certification of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks, easements and other public ways, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner, trustee(s) or person(s) duly authorized to sign the plat. This will include any lien holder(s) on the property (see appendix). 
(25)  City signature block (See appendix). 
(26)  Tree survey and mitigation plans. 
(e)  Preliminary plat. A preliminary plat and final plat may not be submitted for simultaneous review. Substantial changes in a subdivision may require submission and formal approval of a revised preliminary plat. 
A preliminary plat will be required on all unplatted tracts which do not conform with tract dimensions shown in current central appraisal district records, or which involve dedication or construction of city streets, drainage ways or utilities. The approval of the preliminary plat by the city shall be effective for a period of 180 days after the date of formal approval and a final plat may be submitted consistent with the approved preliminary plat. Following the 180-day period the preliminary plat will be valid for a period up to 18 months from preliminary plat approval date if it complies with all updated city standards and regulations. Following an 18-month period after the approval of a preliminary plat, the plat or any portion of the plat which has not had final plat approval by the planning and zoning commission, will be considered invalid and removed from the files. 
For tracts over 100 acres, prior to the expiration of the 18-month period, a request for one-year extension may be submitted for approval to the city council if there are no changes to the preliminary plat and/or city standards and regulations. 
The following is a checklist for items that shall be included, as applicable, on each preliminary plat submitted for review: 
(1)  Title block (see appendix). 
(2)  For all residential subdivisions, a plan summary table, to include total acreage per phase, total number of lots and number of lots per phase and zoning classification, minimum lot size, minimum dwelling size and density per acre. 
(3)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(5)  Sheet size shall be 22" × 34". 
(6)  Location map 1 inch = 1,000 feet (Must use city base map). 
(7)  The maximum scale on preliminary plats shall be 1 inch = 100 feet, except that non-residential tracts over 100 acres may be drawn to a maximum scale of 1 inch = 200 feet. 
(8)  Abstract(s) and survey(s) of subject tract. 
(9)  Abstract and survey lines. 
(10)  Boundary line, accurate in scale, of the subject tract. 
(11)  The layout, building setback lines including setbacks from water, sanitary sewer and drainage easements and approximate dimensions of proposed lots, blocks, etc. 
(12)  Lot number, block letter designations and acreage of each lot. 
(13)  Zoning of subject lot and adjoining property. 
(14)  Contours with intervals of two feet or less, referred to sea level datum, including benchmark. 
(15)  The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unplatted land. 
(16)  Lines or limits designating boundaries of municipalities, counties, and special districts such as municipal utility districts, road utility districts, levee districts, etc. 
(17)  Existing and proposed sanitary sewer and water system shown for a distance that impacts the subject property. 
(18)  Other utility systems, proposed and existing, including private transmission lines. 
(19)  A drainage plan of the proposed and existing drainage systems shall be submitted for review and comment. The drainage plan shall include: all drainage areas (on-site and off-site) that affect the area being preliminary or final platted, both in its natural state and in the ultimate development, location of lines, inlets, existing and proposed easements, proposed drainage rights-of-way, all required drainage calculations in accordance with the city drainage criteria manual. In addition, the 100-year floodplain, if applicable, shall be designated. 
(20)  Existing and proposed streets and alleys, including widths of right-of-way and pavement. Street names shall provide continuity with existing streets. Where a development abuts or contains a street shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, the preliminary plat shall include a proposed dedication of right-of-way in accordance with the requirements of the thoroughfare plan. 
(21)  Cross-section of proposed streets and alleys showing the width of pavement, type of pavement and location and width of sidewalks. 
(22)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(23)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. 
(24)  Traffic control signals, devices and striping. 
(25)  Median openings, turning lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
(26)  For residential developments, park dedication provisions are to be addressed by the park board prior to approval of the preliminary plat. The park dedication agreement shall be noted on the face of the plat with the approval date. 
(27)  All land proposed for public use dedication or to be reserved for the common use of all property owners, together with conditions or limitations of such use, and must be identified with a lot and block designation except street and alley rights-of-way. 
(28)  Other features which impact the subject property including, but not limited to, buildings, cemeteries, parks, landfills and monuments. 
(29)  Phase lines must be clearly delineated, with improvements capable of standing alone as development occurs and not depending on future construction to meet city standards or requirements. 
(30)  Variances from this chapter that may be requested shall be listed on the face of the plat. 
(31)  City signature block. (See appendix.) 
(32)  Tree survey and mitigation plan. 
(f)  Final plat. A final plat will be required upon final city approval of a preliminary plat. Final plats shall substantially conform with approved preliminary plats, or a revised preliminary plat must be submitted for formal approval. On a tract which conforms with tract dimensions shown in current Denton County appraisal district records but which has not been formally platted, a final plat will be required prior to or at the time of submission of an Old Town development plan. 
All review fees and tax certificates are due at time of initial submittal. 
Review copies of the final plat, plus final construction plans for construction of public improvements associated with the plat, shall be submitted simultaneously in accordance with this chapter and policies of the city. The construction plans are an integral part of the final plat. A tree survey shall be required to accompany a final plat if construction plans are required to be submitted. 
The following is a checklist for items, which shall be included, as applicable, on each final plat submitted for review: 
(1)  Title block (see appendix). 
(2)  For all residential subdivisions, a plan summary table, to include total acreage per phase, total number of lots and number of lots per phase and zoning classification, minimum lot size, minimum dwelling size and density per acre. A summary table of each lot area (esq.) and a tree schedule in accordance with the landscaping section shall also be included. 
(3)  North point arrow (oriented to the top or right of the sheet) and date. Dates of revisions are also to be added with each modified set of plans. 
(4)  Name, address and phone number of contact person of developer, owner or builder, engineer or surveyor. 
(5)  Sheet size of 22" × 34" for review copies. 
(6)  Location map 1 inch = 1,000 feet (Must use city base map). 
(7)  Maximum scale of 1 inch = 100 feet, (maximum scale of 1 inch = 200 feet, one sheet for addressing purposes). 
(8)  Boundary line, accurate in scale and with exact distances and bearings, of the subject tract and each lot within the subdivision including exact acreage per lot for all non-single-family developments. Location of corner pins and monuments, including description and whether found or set. 
(9)  Metes and bounds description of the subdivision, with exact acreage, in reference to the deed records of the county, including the volume and page of the deed for the land being platted. 
(10)  Lot number and block letter designations. Building setback lines shall be shown or noted including setback lines from all water, sanitary sewer, and drainage easements. 
(11)  Zoning of subject lot and adjacent property. 
(12)  The names of adjacent subdivisions and/or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
(13)  Lines or limits designating boundaries of municipalities, counties, and special districts such as municipal utility districts, road utility districts, levee districts, etc. 
(14)  Existing and proposed streets, alleys and access easements, including street names, with all curve data and widths of rights-of-way. Street names shall provide continuity with existing streets. Where a development abuts or contains a street shown on the city's thoroughfare plan, the final plat shall include the dedication of right-of-way and construction of said streets in accordance with the requirements of the thoroughfare plan. Where it is determined by city staff to be impractical to construct one-half of the street, the developer shall escrow the full monetary value of these improvements prior to the approval of the final plat/replat. 
(15)  Easements, deed restrictions or encumbrances which impact development of the lot. 
(16)  Control of access lines, corner clips and clear vision areas. 
(17)  For all residential development, the park dedication agreement shall be finalized at the time of approval of the final plat including all dedications and/or fees to be paid at this time. The agreement, including the approval date, must be noted on the face of the plat. 
(18)  All land proposed for public use dedication or to be reserved for the common use of all property owners, together with conditions or limitations of such use. Such reservations and dedications must be identified with a lot and block designation except street and alley rights-of-way. R.O.W. dedication square footage and acreage must be listed on the plan. 
(19)  The 100-year flood plain per current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), if applicable, shall be delineated. If the floodplain is not mapped, the developer is responsible for making this determination using a FEMA approved method. 
(20)  Flowage easements, if any, pertaining to drainage including a note regarding responsibility for maintenance. 
(21)  Other features which impact the subject property including, but not limited to, buildings, cemeteries, parks, landfills and monuments. 
(22)  Right-of-way and public property to be abandoned should be identified on the plat, but information being provided separately as required for the creation of an abandonment ordinance. 
(23)  Certification by a licensed land surveyor, registered in the state, to the effect that the plan represents a survey made by him or under his direct supervision and that all the monuments and corner pins shown exist and are correctly described. 
(24)  A certification of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks, easements and other public ways, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner, trustee(s) or person(s) duly authorized to sign the plat. This will include any lien holder(s) on the property (see appendix). 
(25)  City signature block (See appendix). 
(26)  Variances from this chapter shall be listed on the face of the plat. 
(27)  Tree survey (single-family) (Construction plans are also required to be submitted) 
(g)  Construction plans. Three sets of construction plans shall accompany submittal of any final plat. The construction plans shall be considered as an integral part of the final plat and will be reviewed accordingly. Plans shall contain engineering data for the construction of all public improvements (water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and paving) consistent with current city development standards and master plans. Construction must be underway within 180 days from the date of formal approval and substantially completed within 18 months from the date of formal approval. That portion, which is not substantially complete within 18 months, must be resubmitted in accordance with the most current city standards and regulations. 
(1)  Plans and profiles shall be drawn on sheets measuring 22" × 34" overall dimensions. 
(2)  Maximum scale for all construction plans shall be 1 inch = 40 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 5 feet vertical. (e.g. 1 inch = 50 feet horizontal and 6 feet vertical are not acceptable) Construction plans for street reconstruction shall be drawn to a 1 inch = 20 feet scale. 
(3)  North point arrow oriented to top or right of the sheet. 
(4)  Date: (Dates of revisions to be added with each modified set of plans). 
(5)  Benchmark description to sea level datum (to be obtained from city engineer's office). In the event a benchmark is not available near the project site, a temporary benchmark shall be established based on the city's benchmark. 
(6)  Typical cross-sections of proposed streets and alleys drawn to a maximum scale of 1 inch = 10 feet horizontal and 1 inch = 2 feet vertical, and drawn from beyond right-of-way to beyond right-of-way. 
(7)  Proposed street and alley pavement sections shall include: thickness of pavement, base course, subgrade, pavement cross-slope, parkway cross-slope, location and width of sidewalks, typical location of underground utilities. 
(8)  Plan and profile of each street and alley with top of curb grades for streets and centerlines for alleys. The plan view shall show all existing features and the profile view shall include the existing ground. The profile gradelines and cross-sections of intersecting streets should be adjusted to provide a smooth junction and proper drainage. 
(9)  A drainage area map to a maximum scale 1 inch = 200 feet, (1 inch = 1,000 feet if over 500 acres) of all areas contributing storm water runoff or drainage within and surrounding the proposed subdivision. The drainage area map shall include size of areas, storm frequency, duration data, amounts of runoff, points of concentration and any additional data necessary for the proper design of drainage facilities. 
(10)  A plan and profile of proposed storm sewer showing hydraulic gradient and hydraulic data, pipe grades and sizes, manholes, inlets, pipe connections, culverts, outfall structures, bridges, ditches. 
(11)  A plan and profile of the proposed water distribution system showing pipe sizes, location of valves, fire hydrants, fittings and other appurtenances, including installation and backfill details. 
(12)  A plan and profile of the proposed sanitary sewer system with pipe grades and sizes, manholes, cleanouts and other appurtenances, including installation and backfill details. 
(13)  All profiles shall include the elevation of other utility crossings. 
(14)  Each plan and profile sheet shall be signed and sealed by a state-licensed professional engineer. 
(15)  Trench safety plan, prepared by a state-registered professional engineer, and soil analysis shall be provided with all construction plans when required by state or federal law. 
(16)  The city reserves the right to require corrections to plans based on actual field conditions that are found to be contrary to the information shown on the plans. 
(17)  The engineer certifying the plans is responsible for the accuracy and completeness of plans submitted for review and construction. 
(18)  Finished floor elevation, proposed grading and drainage for all single-family lots. The builder is responsible for furnishing a certification of the foundation elevation and building setbacks prior to construction of a foundation. 
(19)  Tree survey. 
(20)  Traffic control plan, shall be submitted for all proposed construction within a street right-of-way. The traffic control plan shall incorporate all applicable state department of transportation traffic control plan sheets. 
(21)  The developer is responsible for submitting a street lighting plan in accordance with this chapter. The city will coordinate the installation of the street lighting system with the electrical service provider. 
(22)  External agency permit submittals. Submittals for floodplain development to F.E.M.A., and the U.S. Corps of Engineers (C.D.C. applications), can be processed concurrently with city staff approval. Submittals for TXDOT permits will be processed through city initiation (per TXDOT policy) only upon completion of city staff review. Permits are granted only to the city by TXDOT and not to private developers. 
(23)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
(h)  Grading and filling plan requirements. This section covers the requirements and procedures prerequisite to obtaining a grading permit. Grading or on-site preparations for grading are prohibited prior to the issuance by the city of a grading permit. Grading permits that involve tree removal will only be issued when accompanied by an approved final plat with construction plans and/or an approved Old Town development plan. All activities associated with this plan shall be completed within 18 months of the date of formal approval. A six month extension may be granted on a case by case basis when requested in writing. 
Construction plans are required to be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of a grading permit. The following is a list of items and requirements that shall be addressed and complied with on the construction plans. 
(1)  A title block located on the bottom right hand corner of the sheet, to include project name; lot, block and subdivision if appropriate; zoning classification and physical address, if available. 
(2)  Construction plans shall be furnished on 22" × 34" mylar sheets. Review plans shall be submitted on 22" × 34" prints. 
(3)  The plan layout shall be orientated with the north arrow up or to the right on the sheet. 
(4)  Location map drawn to 1 inch = 1,000 feet. The city base map shall be used. 
(5)  The plan scale shall be suitable to show clearly the proposed grading. In no case shall the plans be drawn smaller than 1 inch = 100 feet. 
(6)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner, developer and engineer. The engineer shall also stamp, sign and date the drawings. The engineer must be a state-licensed professional civil engineer. 
(7)  Contours, with intervals of two feet or less, of the existing site. The city's topographic information may be used for this purpose. 
(8)  Streets, alleys, sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements, utilities, and drainage on or near the site. Excessive fill or cut on existing or proposed utilities will not be allowed. 
(9)  A detailed erosion control plan, for both during construction and post construction. 
(10)  A detailed traffic control plan, where applicable. The traffic control plan shall conform to TMUTCD and shall include truck routes. 
(11)  All trees shall be shown. 
(12)  Construction entrance details including locations, materials and cross section, along with specifications for maintaining clean streets. 
(13)  Fences and other physical features. 
(14)  Grading plan including finished contours and/or grades. 
(15)  Any other items stipulated by city staff which may be considered site specific and needed to fully review the proposed construction and protect surrounding properties and the traveling public. 
(16)  Any other appropriate items cited in this chapter. 
(17)  Hauling/trucking from or to the site will not be allowed during rainy conditions or when muddy conditions exist. Grading, loading and unloading will not be allowed during windy conditions such that dust could cause a problem to anyone. 
(18)  Prior to commencement of work, the contractor shall attend a preconstruction meeting with city staff at a time and place approved by city staff. 
(19)  A grading permit will not be issued for mining operations. 
(20)  The contractor shall establish erosion control devices in accordance with the current Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 9.5-72. - Improvements on land that is served by substandard public improvements. 
(a)  General provisions. This section deals with lots or tracts that are served by one or more existing substandard public improvements including water, sanitary sewer, streets, sidewalks or storm drainage. Such developments must meet these required minimum standards in order to obtain a building permit for a new building or if an addition is being made to an existing building. In reviewing the required Old Town development plan, the city staff will note areas that fail to meet minimum standards. If in the opinion of the city staff, on a case-by-case basis, these minimums are not adequate, more extensive improvements may be required as necessary. Additionally, each of the lots or tracts must follow all city master plans for streets, utilities, parks and other public improvements. Where it is determined by city staff to be impractical to construct one-half of the street, the developer shall escrow the full monetary value of these improvements prior to the approval of the final plat/replat in accordance with the following schedule. 
* Enforce street standards per the Old Town Design District Master Street Plan. 
* Dedicate the necessary right-of-way in accordance with the Old Town Design District Master Street Plan 
PAVING COSTS (ESCROW)—PHASED PROGRAM 
2004—2010: $0 cost 	2011—2015: ¼ cost of abutting streets 	2016 and beyond: ½ cost of abutting streets 
Exception: $0 costs—Single lot owner-occupied residential development 
 
(b)  Paving. Minimum street right-of-way of 50 feet shall be required. 
(c)  Water lines. If development is to occur on land which is currently served by sub-standard water utilities, the owner, developer or applicant may be required to improve the existing system to current requirements. The standard for improvement shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Existing line sizes vs. current required line sizes. 
(2)  Existing materials vs. current required materials. 
(3)  The ability to service both potable and fire protection needs. 
All projects will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
(d)  Fire protection. Inadequate or substandard water line size may require additional fire hydrants or other measures in order to provide adequate fire protection on a case-by-case basis. 
(e)  Sanitary sewers. If improvement is to occur on land that is served by a sub-standard sanitary sewer utilities, the owner, developer, or applicant may be required to improve the existing system to current requirements. The standard for improvement shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Existing line vs. current line sizes requirements. 
(2)  Existing materials vs. current material requirements. 
(3)  The ability to service the sanitary sewer requirements of the development and existing service areas. Inflow and infiltration studies may be required for the area as determined by the city. 
All projects will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
(f)  Septic systems. Application for construction of a septic system must be submitted to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). Application, fees, tests, design and on-site inspections must be submitted and coordinated with the TCEQ. The tract of land must consist of one acre or more. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city, the city must be in receipt of: 
(1)  Approved septic system permit by the TCEQ; 
(2)  Approved design by the TCEQ; and 
(3)  Approved final inspection by the TCEQ. 
Septic systems will not be permitted within the city limits where any part of the platted lot or tract is within 100 feet of an existing city sanitary sewer line. The requirements to connect to the city's sewer system shall be enforced even if the improvements must include a lift station, force main or both. This requirement will not be enforced in instances where city staff determines that the connection is impractical. 
(g)  Drainage. Development(s) adjacent to an existing ditch, within street right-of-way, shall provide for an enclosed storm sewer system on-site and discharge into the ditch by means of a pipe system. If an adequate outfall condition is unavailable (whether a ditch or storm sewer system) developments may be allowed to discharge into street rights-of-way; runoff not to exceed the original amount. Drainage easements shall be provided by plat or by separate instrument for all storm drainage facilities up to an adequate outfall condition (if on-site), capable of containing the 100-year flood event. 
(h)  Open space requirements. Standards for parks and open space must be provided in accordance with the city park dedication ordinance and other applicable ordinances or policies. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3134-10-2004, § I, 10-4-04)  
Sec. 9.5-73. - Certificate of corrections. 
When an amending plat is proposed for the correction of a plat which has been filed of record, and when the sole purpose of the amending plat is for one or more of the following, then a certificate of correction may be filed of record (see appendix). This section shall apply only if the sole purpose of the amending plat is: 
(1)  To correct an error in any course or distance shown on the prior plat. 
(2)  To add any course or distance that was omitted on the prior plat. 
(3)  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the prior plat. 
(4)  To indicate monuments set after death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments. 
(5)  To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character or which originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character on the prior plat. 
(6)  To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission as previously approved by the city planning and zoning commission or the city council; such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats. 
(7)  To relocate one or more lot lines or to correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between one or more adjacent lots where the owner or owners thereof join in the application for plat amendment and where the number of lots remains unchanged and provided that such amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a material adverse affect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-74. - Abandonment of real property. 
(a)  General provisions. An abandonment ordinance is required for abandonment of any public right-of-way. Any easement may be abandoned with a certificate of abandonment (see appendix) in accordance with paragraph (c) below (Ordinance 1947-8-94). Requests for abandonment shall be made in writing to the community development department. The city will file with the county all documents that are required to record the transaction. A $150.00 application fee must accompany all requests and the Denton County filing fees shall be submitted with a separate check. If applicable, fair market value will be established by the city based on information, acceptable to the city. Should appraisals be required, the cost shall be paid in advance by the applicant. Any relocation, adjustment or other construction shall be the financial responsibility of the applicant. 
The following information must be attached: 
(1)  Metes and bounds description of the property to be abandoned. 
(2)  Exhibit showing the subject abandonment. 
(3)  Letters of release from utility companies, if applicable. 
(4)  Application fee made payable to City of Lewisville. 
(5)  Filing fee made payable to Denton County Clerk. 
(b)  Additional requirements for certain abandonments. 
(1)  Abandonment of an improved street or alley: 
a.  Fair market value of the real property and the improvements that are to be removed or converted to private use. 
b.  Dedication of easements for any facilities that are to remain. 
(2)  Abandonment of street or alley right-of-way (unimproved): 
a.  Fair market value of the real property. 
b.  Dedication of easements for any facilities that are to remain. 
c.  Compensation for detriment to the remainder. 
(3)  Abandonment of a part of an occupied easement where the reduction in easement will adversely affect the operation and maintenance of the facility: 
a.  Fair market value of the released area. 
b.  Compensation for detriment to the remainder. 
(4)  Abandonment of an occupied easement in exchange for another easement at the request of the property owner: 
a.  Fair market value of the difference in value if the abandoned easement is greater than that received. 
b.  Reserved. 
(c)  To abandon an easement(s) in exchange for an equivalent easement(s) or when it is determined that an easement(s) is no longer necessary and an adequate easement(s) is provided to serve the property, a certificate of abandonment (see appendix), or such other documents as may be legally required, will be filed of record. This certificate will be filed after all information for abandonment of an easement on real property has been submitted and a final determination for abandonment has been made by the director of community development. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 9.5-75—9.5-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 9.5-91. - Construction standards. 
(a)  General provisions. All improvements shall be in conformance with the city's construction standards and specifications except as may be otherwise provided. The city's specifications include standard as well as special specifications. The city's construction standards consist of those various drawings identified as city construction standards and issued by the city. Public improvements, semi-public improvements, and private improvements constructed in public rights-of-way and easements shall be constructed in conformity with this chapter. The requirements of this chapter are considered minimum requirements and are not intended to replace good engineering judgment or practices. 
(b)  Standard specifications. Standard specifications of the city are the "Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction" as published under the authority of the North Central Texas Council of Governments. This publication, latest edition, along with the amendments and special provisions to the document, approved or issued by the city, shall comprise the standard specifications. 
(c)  Construction specifications. Construction specifications are those construction specifications that are not covered by the standard specifications. Special specifications shall be required for all projects having items of construction not adequately covered by the standard specification. All special specifications shall be subject to review and approval by the city. 
(d)  Construction standards. Construction standards are those drawings identified as city construction standards and issued by the city. Detailed construction plans shall be required for all items of construction not covered by the city's construction standards. In the event of conflict the standard specifications shall be superseded by the provisions and requirements of this document. Only the item or items of conflict shall be affected. All other provisions and requirements shall stand. 
(e)  Pre-construction meeting. The contractor for each project, or for any phase, shall notify the city of the intent to commence work. Sufficient notice shall be given so that a pre-construction conference may be held. No work shall commence except as specifically authorized at the pre-construction meeting. 
(f)  Construction permit. The city will issue a permit for all public works construction to be constructed within rights-of-way and easements. The permit will be issued based on approved engineering plans. No work requiring a permit shall be started until a permit is duly issued. 
(g)  Construction inspection fee. Prior to the issuance of any public works construction permit, the city will collect all applicable fees in accordance with the city fee ordinance. 
(h)  Exception for utility companies. Utility companies are not required to secure a permit for repairs and day-to-day maintenance operations but shall notify the city. Utility companies will be required, by this chapter, to get a permit without fee for new developments and for all relocations. 
(i)  Traffic control plan. Each set of construction plans submitted to the city for review and approval shall include a traffic control plan. The plan shall provide for the safe handling of traffic through and in the area of construction. Construction, signing, barricades, etc., shall be in conformance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices where applicable. 
(j)  Construction methods. All utility lines installed under paving shall be installed by a method other than open cut, except as specifically approved by the city. City staff may approve, on case-by-case basis, open cuts under any one of the following conditions: 
(1)  The main to be connected onto is under paving. In this case, the open cut shall be limited to the area of the main, the remaining installation to be by other than open cut. 
(2)  A boring machine cannot be used because of space limitations. 
(3)  The size of the utility line is too large to be economically feasible to be installed by methods other than open cut. 
(4)  Conditions are such that it would be impossible or impractical to install the utility line by means other than open cut. 
In the event the open cut method is approved, the pavement shall be removed in complete panels and replaced with early yield high strength concrete in accordance with the approved plans. The traffic control plan shall adequately address the safe handling of traffic through the area of the open cut. 
(k)  Material testing. The developer is responsible for providing all material testing services required for the proposed development. The required testing shall be performed by a geotechnical testing laboratory company under the supervision of a licensed professional engineer. The procedures and criteria for testing are generally outlined in North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) standard specifications. A copy of the test results shall be furnished to the city. 
(l)  Final acceptance. Final acceptance is the formal approval by the city. It will be made in writing based on the finding that the improvements have been satisfactorily installed and that all administrative requirements have been satisfied. 
(m)  Partial acceptance. The city will not accept any part of any development prior to the completion and acceptance of the entire development. 
(n)  Conditional acceptance. The city may issue a letter of conditional acceptance upon the determination by the city that unusual conditions warrant such acceptance and that the city will not be adversely affected. 
(o)  Record drawings. In order to receive final acceptance, the design engineer must submit a final set of record drawings including revisions made during construction. 
(1)  The record drawings shall comply with the Texas Engineering Practice Act and Rules Concerning the Practice of Engineering and Professional Engineering Licensure and the Policy Advisory Opinions issued by the Texas Board of Engineers. 
(2)  Record drawings final set must include a digital submittal of record drawings in the form of a CD labeled with the name of the subdivision or construction project name and the name of the entity that prepared and submitted data. 
(3)  The CD of the record drawings must contain the following: 
a.  Separate TIF file for each individual plan sheet of the record drawings (DO NOT combine sheets in one TIF file). 
1.  TIF file resolution should be 300 DPI or best resolution for legibility, black and white scan with no color or gray scale scan and file size cannot exceed three MB. 
2.  Label each TIF file according to the title of the plan sheet, including corresponding sheet numbers, i.e., C1-Paving Plan, C2-Water Plan, C3-Grading Plan, etc. 
3.  The order of the TIF files should match the same order on the cover page of the record drawings. 
4.  The cover page of the engineering site plan shall have the staff signatures. 
b.  One CAD drawing with public infrastructure and plat information within the same drawing in DGN or DWG format. 
1.  For purposes of this section: 
(i)  Public infrastructure shall include the following: fire hydrants, water mains, water valves, water meters, water annotation: pipe sizes, material types, sewer mains, manholes, cleanouts, sewer annotation: pipe sizes, material types, storm mains, inlets, headwalls, outfalls, other drainage structures (valley gutters, etc.), storm annotation: pipe sizes, material types, buildings, paving: edge of pavement, parking area, striping. 
(ii)  Plat information shall include the following: subdivision boundary, parcel lot lines, street centerlines, ROW lines, easements, street labels and easement types and sizes. 
2.  Requirements for CAD submittal of record drawings. The following requirements for submittal of CAD data have been prepared for the purpose of incorporating the digital submittal information into the city's geographic information system (GIS) base mapping, so that accurate data may become available to emergency responders, construction inspectors, city planners, engineers, and the larger development community. 
(i)  The CAD file must contain public infrastructure and plat information within a single drawing in DGN or DWG format. Files in DXF or DWF format are not acceptable. Drawing must be "stand-alone" without the necessity of attaching reference or XREF files, or modifying levels and layers. 
(ii)  The CAD data is not meant to be printed. As such, it should not be all inclusive of the information displayed on the plan sheets. Objects normally set up in the layout tab ("paper space") for the purposes of plotting plan sheets, such as title blocks, page borders, legends, vicinity maps, and north arrows, should NOT be included in the CAD file. Callout detail boxes also should not be included. 
(iii)  CAD data must be drawn at full scale (1:1) and oriented to true north. 
(iv)  The data must be tied to city monumentation data, in real world coordinates, and spatially referenced to the city's GIS projected coordinate system: North American Datum 1983 (NAD83), Texas State Plane, North Central FIPS 4202; Units: US Feet. 
(v)  All polygons must close without overlaps. All lines must be snapped at their endpoints and free of gaps or dangles. Annotation text that breaks the continuity of lines should be shifted out of the way of the line. 
(vi)  Public infrastructure and plat information must be organized into separate layers according to feature type, and drawn as polylines (except for annotation). All layers must be turned on and visible/unfrozen. IMPORTANT: Layer names should be intuitive and descriptive of the objects on that layer. Features must be cleanly segregated into their appropriate layer, and not appear on other unrelated layers. Remnants of lines or points used in the development of the drawing but not representative of actual real-world features (trim lines, transit points, etc.) should be removed from the drawing. Existing infrastructure should be on separate layers from proposed infrastructure and should be differentiated as such in layer names (i.e., "EXIST_WATER_MAIN" versus "PROP_WATER_MAIN"). Any additional features not listed are optional and must also be on separate layers with clear, understandable layer names. 
(p)  Maintenance bonds. Prior to final acceptance, the developer shall furnish the city an acceptable 100 -percent, two-year maintenance bond. The maintenance bond shall cover all items of construction dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; 0006-18-ORD , § 2, 1-8-18)  
Sec. 9.5-92. - Paving. 
(a)  General provisions. The paving of streets, alleys, turning lanes, driveways and sidewalks shall be in accordance with this section and the construction standards of the city. Temporary asphalt streets, connections and driveways will be considered on an individual basis and shall be constructed in accordance with approved plans. All street construction shall be in accordance with the criteria and design standards shown on the street details, figures 28A—28F, street design criteria, table 1, Old Town street design criteria, table 1A and the Old Town design district master street plan, figure 28G. 
(b)  Streets. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all proposed streets shall conform to the Old Town Design District master street plan of the city. Design of such streets shall take into consideration existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, public convenience, safety and the relationship of uses that will be served by the streets. The developer is responsible for the dedication of the right-of-way and construction of all street(s) within the development and one-half of the street(s) that abuts the development, in accordance with section 9.5-72. Where it is determined by city staff to be impractical to construct one-half of the street, the developer shall escrow with the city the full monetary value of these improvements prior to the approval of the final plat/replat, in accordance with section 9.5-72. Any off-site street required, by the platting process, to provide adequate access to the development shall be the entire responsibility of the developer. These provisions shall apply in all cases including where there is an existing sub-standard street. 
When not shown in the city's Old Town design district master street plan, all proposed streets shall: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets. 
(2)  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the city to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuation of, or conformance to existing streets impractical. 
(3)  Be laid out so that street right-of-way lines intersect at 90 degrees and so that no street curvature is closer to the point of intersection of right-of-way lines than 35 feet on residential streets and 50 feet on collector and arterial streets. 
(4)  Make use of existing median openings in the thoroughfares without any alterations to them and provide necessary minimum left-turn lane storage lanes for entry into subdivisions along both traveled ways, as necessary. 
No residential and collector (two-lane) street intersection with arterial streets shall be allowed within 350 feet of a major arterial street intersection (four-lane undivided and above) and/or within proposed right turn lane limits. 
Residential streets shall be laid out in a manner to discourage use by through traffic. Jogs and offsets at intersections measuring less than 150 feet in residential streets and 200 feet in undivided collector streets, measured between centerlines, are prohibited. This provision shall not apply if the intersecting street is a divided street and a median opening is not provided for either street. Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the city's master thoroughfare plan. In no case shall a street right-of-way be less than 50 feet. 
Half streets shall be prohibited, except where necessary to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformance with the other requirements of these regulations and where the city finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided or platted. When a half street has already been provided, the remaining portion of the street shall be platted within such subdivision. Where part of a residential or collector street is being dedicated along a common property line, the first dedication shall be one-half of the proposed street right-of-way plus five feet, with a minimum of 20 feet of pavement width to be constructed. 
Dead end streets shall not be longer than 600 feet in length, measured from the intersecting centerline to the radius point of the cul-de-sac turnaround. All dead end streets shall terminate with an approved cul-de-sac having an outside minimum radius of 60 feet from the right-of-way line. 
The reservation in private strips of land at the end of, or adjacent to, proposed or existing streets and intended for the purpose of controlling access to property shall be prohibited. 
Street grades shall be set at a minimum of 0.60 percent and a maximum of six percent for all streets other than residential streets, which may be set at a maximum of seven percent. The minimum street grade will not apply to non-curbed streets. Streets cross slope shall be three percent. 
Proposed streets intersecting existing streets shall be designed and constructed so as to eliminate dips and humps. This may require removal and replacement of a section of the existing street to the extent required to provide uniform pavement profiles that will accommodate emergency vehicles entering the intersection. It must be assumed that emergency vehicles will not come to a stop before entering the intersection, even though the intersection may be controlled by stop signs. Where future intersections are known, the initial construction shall take into account the requirements of this section so that the cross street may be constructed without the necessity to reconstruct the street initially constructed. 
(c)  Concrete strength requirements. The minimum compressive strength shall be 3,500 PSI at 28 days except that in intersections and in areas where hand finishing is required the minimum compressive strength shall be 3,750 PSI. The minimum cement ratio shall be 5.5 sacks per cubic yard, except in intersections and in areas where hand finishing is required the minimum cement ratio shall be 6.0 sacks per cubic yard. The use of fly ash shall not be permitted. Early yield high strength concrete shall have a compressive strength of 4,200 PSI at three days for panel replacements. The minimum current ratio for early yield high strength concrete shall be eight sacks per cubic yard. 
(d)  Pavement thickness requirements. Residential streets and residential alleys shall be a minimum of six inches in thickness. Commercial streets and commercial alleys shall be a minimum of eight inches in thickness. Streets and alleys serving both residential and commercial shall be a minimum of eight inches in thickness. All alleys shall be considered commercial except those serving only single-family and two family zoning classifications and uses. 
Where right turn, left turn or deceleration lanes are added to existing streets, the pavement thickness shall be ten inches. 
(e)  Base course. All street and alley paving shall be placed on a base course compacted to a minimum of 95 percent of Standard Proctor. The base course thickness shall be a minimum of six inches and shall consist of lime or cement stabilization as recommended in the geotechnical report. In small areas where stabilization is not practical, the base course shall consist of six inches of compacted flexible base (95 percent Standard Proctor) or four inches of asphalt base as directed by the city. Where the geotechnical report identifies area having high sulfates, the base course shall consist of four inches of asphalt. All base courses shall be on compacted subgrades. Added pavement thickness may not be substituted for base course. 
(f)  Pavement width requirements. The minimum pavement width for residential streets shall be 31 feet measured back to back of curbs. The use of rollover curbs are only allowed for front entry residential uses. This use requires a variance approved by the city council. When rollover curbs are approved, the minimum standard width shall be 33 feet measured back to back of curbs. 
Commercial streets shall be a minimum of 37 feet measured back to back of curbs. Wider street paving shall be constructed to provide the number of through lanes, left turn lanes, right turn lanes, acceleration, and deceleration lanes as required and shown as part of the city's master thoroughfare plan. 
Additional visitor parking for residential subdivisions may be provided through the use of head-in on-street parking (90-degree angle parking). These spaces must be a minimum nine feet wide and 18 feet long. Provisions shall be made to prevent vehicles from overhanging the sidewalk. The city will maintain these parking areas if provided in a dedicated right-of-way. If these parking areas are provided in a parking easement, then a homeowners association (H.O.A.) is required. No more than six parking spaces in a row will be allowed without a break. A break shall consist of a minimum 9-foot by 18-foot curbed island. 
(g)  Curbs. 
(1)  Monolithic curbs. All streets shall be constructed with a monolithic curb continuous on each side of the street pavement. Monolithic curbs shall be six inches in height and six inches wide, in accordance with the appropriate construction standard. 
(2)  Rollover/mountable curbs. The use of rollover curbs are only allowed for front entry residential uses. This use requires a variance approved by the city council. When rollover curbs are approved, the minimum standard width shall be 33 feet measured back to back of curbs. 
(h)  Sidewalks. In the Old Town design district sidewalks shall be constructed for all projects that require an Old Town development plan and shall be located in the right-of-way beginning at the property line extending a minimum of four feet or to the back-of-curb, whichever is less, in accordance with Texas Accessibility Standard (TAS). In the Old Town center design district sidewalks shall be constructed for all projects that require an Old Town development plan and shall extend from the back-of-curb to the property line. All projects that require an Old Town development plan shall provide sidewalk access from the front-door to the public sidewalk located within the street right-of-way. Handicap ramping shall be provided for all pedestrian crossings. Sidewalks shall be included on construction plans and on development plans. All sidewalks shall incorporate a five feet wide by five-foot long passing area at a minimum of every 200 feet along all streets. 
Developers of tracts of land served by sidewalks not meeting the requirements of this chapter, or not structurally sound, shall be responsible for removing the existing sidewalks and constructing new sidewalks to meet current requirements. The dedication of additional right-of-way or easement may be required to provide adequate space for the construction of sidewalks. Along state routes, a right-of-way or sidewalk easement may be dedicated to the city and the sidewalk shall be constructed within this right-of-way or easement. Sidewalks across bridges shall be continuous and approved safety features shall be incorporated into the design to adequately protect pedestrian traffic. 
Sidewalks shall be constructed as part of the infrastructure improvements associated with the developments. Sections of sidewalk construction, at locations approved by the city, may be delayed until development of adjacent lots. Instances in which sidewalk construction may be delayed include the front and side yards of residential and commercial properties where subsequent building construction would likely damage the sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be constructed at street intersections, areas of existing high pedestrian traffic and drainage locations that would not be subject to destruction during later development of the adjacent lot. In areas where sidewalk construction is delayed, grading shall be in full conformance with the typical section. 
Off-site sidewalks to a maximum distance of 1,000 feet shall be constructed as part of the residential (including apartments) infrastructure where required to provide pedestrian access to existing sidewalk networks. If the distances exceed 1,000 feet, the city will construct the length of sidewalk in excess of 1,000 feet. Off-site sidewalks may be constructed of asphalt in accordance with the city's standard details in areas where further development is imminent or as directed by the city engineer. Asphalt sidewalks shall be required and replaced with concrete sidewalks as part of the engineering site plan process. 
(i)  Driveways. All driveways in the city shall be constructed by city permit only. A permit will be granted only after due consideration of safety, traffic flow, and conflicts with existing and proposed facilities. In addition to the above, access to state controlled highways shall require State and city permits. The contractor shall construct the proposed driveway within five days of the sawcut and removal of the existing pavement. 
(1)  Residential driveway approaches shall follow these guidelines: 
a.  Width shall be 12 feet (minimum) and 24 feet (maximum), plus a five-foot flare for single-family detached; or 1.5 foot flare for single-family attached (three units or more). 
b.  The radius or flare point at the street or alley of any driveway shall not extend beyond the property line(s). 
c.  All driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard driveway construction details. 
d.  Maximum slope of a residential driveway shall not exceed eight percent up to the right-of-way line and 14 percent beyond the right-of-way line. 
Refer to figures 13, 14 and 15 for options for front entry residential driveways over sewer service. 
(2)  Commercial driveway approaches shall follow these guidelines: 
a.  Required widths: 
1.  One way: 15 feet plus 20-foot radii. 
2.  Two way: 30 feet maximum plus 20-foot radii. 
A maximum width of 35 feet plus 25-foot radii will be allowed for commercial and industrial sites where significant truck traffic is projected and at designated truck entrances, in accordance with figure 8. 
b.  Maximum slope of a commercial driveway shall not exceed seven percent within the right-of-way and ten percent beyond the right-of-way. 
c.  The minimum spacing (measured to the near radius points of the driveways) between driveways along: 
1.  Principal and collector (P6D, P4D, C4U) streets shall be 75 feet on the same platted lot, and 50 feet between adjacent lots. 
2.  Collector (C2U) streets shall be 50 feet. 
d.  All two-way driveways shall intersect streets at 90 degrees. 
e.  Adequate site distances and on-site maneuvering shall be available from every driveway. 
f.  All driveway approaches shall be constructed in accordance with the city standard driveway construction details. 
g.  Driveways on State maintained highways shall meet the state department of transportation minimum requirements and must be approved by the city based on the finding that the driveway will not create a traffic safety hazard or jeopardize quality of traffic handling. Such factors as vehicular speed, existing traffic patterns, existing and proposed driveway and ramp locations, and existing and future street intersections, shall be considered. 
h.  Concrete driveways shall be poured with a three-day cure design mix (4,200 psi at three days). Under special circumstances, a longer cure time may be specified by the city. 
(3)  Driveway permit application. Application for a driveway permit can be made as part of the development plan request or as a separate request. Driveway permit applications shall contain sufficient information to allow the city to fully assess the adequacy of the proposed driveway design. A commercial or multi-family driveway permit application for arterial and collector streets shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Drawn to the maximum scale of 1 inch = 40 feet. 
b.  The dimensions, locations and design of the driveway(s) being requested. 
c.  The location of any building or structure, either existing or proposed. 
d.  List uses on commercial lots (such as office, retail store, gas station, etc.). 
e.  The parking lot layout with the proposed internal circulation pattern. 
f.  All existing or proposed driveways, gutters, storm sewers, manholes, fire hydrants, utility poles, service fixtures, etc., which may affect driveway operations. 
g.  Any existing driveways or curb cuts located on adjacent lots or lots across the street. 
h.  All of the geometric design features of the roadway itself, including the presence of a median, the number and width of travel lanes, the presence of a shoulder or a parking lane, etc. 
i.  The distances to intersecting streets. 
(j)  Major traffic carriers. In addition to the various other requirements, thoroughfares classified as major traffic carriers on the city thoroughfare plan shall also meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Traffic signals: 
a.  Minimum spacing of one-quarter mile except where approved by the city, cased on an engineering study. 
b.  Preference will be given to street intersections over private development driveways. 
c.  Turn lanes and geometrics shall be designed for maximum safety and efficiency of the intersection. 
(2)  Median openings: 
a.  Full median openings shall be at minimum spacings of one-quarter mile except where approved by the city based on an engineering study. 
b.  Mid-block median openings shall be designed to restrict cross-access. (This allows for left turns along the thoroughfare, but not from the cross street/driveway.) 
(k)  Stamped concrete. At locations where median and island pavement is required, a stamped (imprinted concrete paving) and patterned surface with coloring shall be installed in accordance with the following: 
(1)  In addition to the requirements of the standard specifications, median and island pavement installation shall be performed in accordance with either Patterned Concrete Industries, Inc. or Bominite Corporation standard installation specifications. This includes requirements for expansion joints, joint fillerboard, welded wire fabric and concrete mix. Color hardeners and release agents as recommended by the tooling manufacturer shall be used. 
(2)  Median and island pavement shall be stamped in a pattern and colored in accordance with one of the following: 
a.  Per Patterned Concrete Industries, Inc. 
Pattern: Running bond cobble 
Color: Dark red 
b.  Per Bominite Corporation 
Pattern: Running bond cobblestone 
Color: Colonial red 
Other patterns and colors will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
(3)  The contractor performing the work must provide a letter from one of the above tooling manufacturers to the city engineer stating that the installer is trained and licensed to install the specified work prior to being issued a construction permit. 
(4)  Street pavement shall meet all the above specifications for stamped-patterned concrete. 
(5)  Median pavement, which is installed in different phases as required by a total development, shall utilize the same pattern, color and installation technique as other phases within the project. 
(l)  Lane closures. In instances where the proposed construction necessitates the closure of an existing travel lane, the construction plans shall include specifications for traffic control and a work sequence to minimize the effect on existing traffic. As a minimum, early strength concrete shall be specified along with a work sequence whereby lane closures are of minimal duration. Specific details will be reviewed by city staff and approval will be based on the finding that every step has been taken to accomplish the purpose of this section. Depending on conditions associated with the particular site, city staff may alter those requirements where it is determined that existing traffic will not be significantly effected. On major thoroughfares, a cash bond may be required as a guarantee by the contractor that the specifications will be complied with to the fullest. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3134, § I, 10-4-04; Ord. No. 3235-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05)  
Sec. 9.5-93. - Blocks. 
(a)  The length, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined regarding provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use proposed as well as needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of traffic. 
(b)  Where no existing subdivision controls block lengths, arterial blocks shall be a minimum of 660 feet and a maximum of 2,600 feet in length. Blocks in multi-family, commercial and industrial zoned developments shall be a minimum distance of 500 feet and a maximum distance of 1,800 feet. 
(c)  Blocks in single-family and two-family zoned developments shall not contain more than 18 platted lots on either side between intersections and shall not exceed a maximum distance of 1,800 feet. When conditions prevent the installation of streets to address block lengths, a fire control easement of 40 feet may be allowed to define the appropriate block length. One fire control easement may be used per block. No structures may be allowed within such easement. 
(d)  In the event a property owner is platting only major street rights-of-way for dedication and construction, the requirements stated herein shall be met with final platting of the property into lots and blocks. 
(e)  All distances specified shall be measured along the centerline of the street right-of-way between the center points of street intersections. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-94. - Lots. 
(a)  All lots shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and the city's zoning ordinance. All lots shall adjoin a public street or may be served by an access easement or private street. Such access easement or private street shall meet the same minimum standards as required for a fire lane, although the easement or private street itself may not be a required fire lane. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines, except for single-family attached townhouse developments (three units or more attached). 
(b)  In subdivisions where buildings are to be served by septic tanks, the size of lots shall be sufficiently large to accommodate adequate drainage fields and to meet the standards set forth by the state department of health and the city. 
(c)  A lot which had construction thereon or had been platted prior to the adoption of this chapter, which is reduced in size to less than herein required by reason of the widening of an abutting street by the city or other governmental agency, may be used for dwelling purposes. In such instance, the minimum lot area or depth requirements shall be computed on the basis of the original lot size prior to the street widening. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3235-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05)  
Sec. 9.5-95. - Easements/R.O.W.s. 
(a)  General provisions. Easements and/or R.O.W.s shall be provided for all city owned public facilities (water, sanitary sewer and storm drainage) and shown on subdivision plats. Easements and/or R.O.W.s for utilities shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width, except as otherwise provided. Where a subdivision is bounded by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm sewer easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse or of such width to provide for any future construction plus 15 feet on each side, except for open channels having a capacity of less than 500 CFS. 
In situations where a city owned utility lies within its own prescribed minimum easement and a privately owned utility (electric, gas, telephone, cable) is located, underground or overhead, adjacent to and outside the city easement, it would be agreeable to the city that such easements may be mutually shared for ingress-egress and for temporary storage of equipment or materials. 
In situations where two city utility systems are to be installed separately in parallel easements, the maximum width of the easements may be reduced by a combined total of five feet. 
In residential subdivisions, separate easements of at least seven and one-half feet for all other utilities, such as electric, telephone, natural gas and cable television shall be provided as required and where necessary. 
In single-family residential subdivisions, city owned utilities shall be located within a prescribed right-of-way and shall not be located within easements. If an existing city owned utility is located within a dedicated easement prior to the development of a single-family subdivision, the developer shall convert the easement into a right-of-way or relocate the utility into a street right-of-way. 
(b)  Water and sanitary sewer line easements. (Not applicable to single-family residential subdivisions) Refer to table 2 (waterline easements) or table 3 (sanitary sewer easements) for proper easement widths for different pipe sizes at different depths of cover. 
A ten-foot building setback is required from all pressured utility line easements. A five-foot building setback is required from all non-pressured utility line easements. Lots platted prior to November 20, 1989 will be reviewed by city staff on case-by-case basis and the setback requirements may be reduced to the extent determined practical by staff after consideration of line size, location, depth and proposed use of the subject lot. 
Refer to table 2 (waterline easements) or table 3 (sanitary sewer easements) for proper easement widths for different pipe sizes at different depths of cover. 
(c)  Storm drainage easements. (Not applicable to single-family residential subdivisions). Refer to table 4 (drainage easements) for determining proper widths. 
A five-foot building setback is required from all storm drainage easements, except a 20-foot building setback applies to drainage easements containing an open channel. Lots platted prior to November 20, 1989 will be reviewed by city staff on case by case basis. The above requirements may be reduced to the extent determined practical by staff after consideration of line size, location, depth and proposed use of the subject lot. 
Additional widths may be required depending upon the engineering design, size, depth, soil conditions and other criteria as determined by the city engineer or his representative. 
(1)  Storm drainage easements, open channels—Less than 500 CFS. Storm drainage easements for open channels shall be designed to the widths required to convey the 100-year design frequency flows plus an additional 15-foot width beyond the top of bank on one side to provide for maintenance equipment access. All widths shall be determined and substantiated by drainage calculations in accordance with the city drainage criteria manual. Rights-of-way shall be dedicated in residential subdivisions and drainage easements will not be accepted. 
(2)  Storm drainage easements, open channel—Over 500 CFS. Not applicable (right-of-way required). 
(d)  Access easements. In lieu of street frontage, lots may be accessed by means of an access and utility easement. Such easement must be dedicated by a plat and filed with the county clerk. Such easement must be maintained by the owners and shall in no way be the responsibility of the city. Such easements shall be in good repair and shall be maintained by all responsible property owners. The width of such easements shall be sufficient to accommodate a minimum 24 feet of paving. The need for such easements shall be determined by following the usual platting process established in this chapter. 
(e)  Slope easements. Slope easements or extension of parkway cross slopes (3 percent) shall be required in areas of new development, where significant earth (cut or fill) slopes extend into private property beyond street right-of-way lines. These slopes are required for the stability of the roadway sections, effective erosion control, drainage, and maintenance. At developer's option, either of the following alternates shall be followed: 
(1)  The slope easement width will be determined as follows: 
Height of Fill or Cut (feet) 	Maximum Slope Rate 	Slope Easement Required 
0—3.0 	3H:1V 	None 
3.1—10.0 	3H:1V 	From R.O.W. line to limit of slope 
10.1—15.0 	4H:1V 	From R.O.W. line to limit of slope 
Over 15.0 feet to be determined by city from right-of-way line to the limit of slope. 
 
(2)  Other maintenance-free slope protection methods (e.g. concrete rip-rap, retaining walls, etc.) may be utilized for slopes steeper than 3:1. 
(f)  Parkway cross slope extension. The parkway cross slope (two percent) shall be extended an additional ten feet beyond the right-of-way line to the hingepoint of the slope for cut or fill slopes in excess of three feet in height. No easements or additional right-of-way will be required. The additional parkway and cut or fill slope shall be landscaped as required to equal the adjacent public parkway in accordance with the landscaping requirement of this chapter. 
(g)  Fire hydrant and water meter easements. A blanket easement of five-foot radius from the center point of all fire hydrants and a five-foot radius from the center point of all other appurtenances (fire hydrant valves, water meters, meter boxes) shall be granted to the city, for each platted lot in the city. This blanket easement shall be noted on the final plat and will be used for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting and maintaining the above named appurtenances. 
(h)  Construction easements. The developer, at his own cost, shall be responsible for obtaining appropriate temporary construction easements or letters of agreement from adjacent property owners for the proper construction of streets, drainage, and water and sewer facilities and provide such documentation to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-96. - Drainage. 
(a)  General provisions. The design, size, type and location of all storm drainage facilities in the city shall be in accordance with the city drainage criteria manual requirements. The developer and his engineer shall bear total responsibility for the adequacy of design. The approval of a given drainage facility in no way relieves the developer of his responsibility. All storm drainage structures and improvements shall be designed for the case of ultimate watershed development. Prior to any channel improvement or storm water detention design, the office of the city engineer shall be consulted regarding preferred flood control strategies for the watershed of interest. 
Drainage ways and/or floodways for all open channels and creeks where the accumulated storm run-off is more than 500 CFS shall be dedicated to the city, except in non-residential areas where the property owner is to maintain the channel unless otherwise approved by the city. The width of the drainage right-of-way will be determined by the city on a case-by-case basis. Right(s)-of-way(s) shall encompass all areas having a ground elevation one foot above the water surface elevation based upon the design flood or the top of the high bank or channel edge, whichever is greater. The right-of-way shall also include at least a 15-foot wide maintenance strip along both sides of the channel or, if the community development department so allows, at least a 20-foot wide maintenance strip along one side of the channel. Streets, alleys, bike paths, etc., alongside the channel can serve as all or part of the maintenance right-of-way provided they are unobstructed. 
All drainage outfalls into the city-maintained drainage rights-of-way/creeks shall be designed to discharge at the flow lines of creeks. The design shall include proper erosion control measures and velocity controls. No discharges will be permitted near the tops of creek banks. Only pipe outfalls (no flumes) will be allowed in the city-maintained drainage rights-of-way. Creek banks disturbed during the construction of storm sewer outfalls shall be properly restored, compacted, seeded and/or sodded to the satisfaction of the city's P.A.L.S. department. It is recommended that the owners/developers conduct a field meeting with parks department staff during preliminary plat/preliminary engineering stage to identify the locations for proposed drainage outfalls. It shall be the owner's/developer's responsibility to remove trash, debris, fallen trees, etc., and to restore and repair creek banks prior to the dedication of drainage rights-of-way and acceptance of the subdivision. 
All drainage structures or improvements in the city shall be designed to properly accommodate the runoff from a storm event of 100-year frequency. 
If a site discharges more than two CFS of storm water over the right-of-way at each drive approach, an onsite storm drainage system shall be required for connection to an existing public storm sewer system, if public storm sewer is available near the site and has the capacity to handle the 100-year future discharge. 
A storm drainage system will be required to connect into a public storm sewer system near the site which is capable of handling the 100-year future discharge. 
If the public storm sewer system has inadequate capacity for 100-year storm discharges, the developers have the following design option: 
(1)  Option A: To upgrade the public storm sewer system to accommodate the 100-year storm discharges from their site as well as any offsite future 100-year discharges upstream of their property, at their own expense. The city may participate in these costs subject to availability of funds (up to a maximum of 50 percent). 
(2)  Option B: To design their onsite storm sewer system for a total runoff to include: 
a.  100-year onsite developed runoff; 
b.  100-year offsite drainage coming into the property under existing (undeveloped) conditions. 
The resulting excess discharges (above the capacity of public system) shall be retained or detained onsite, to reduce peak runoff so the existing public drainage system will not be overloaded. Article 5.4.3. of the city's comprehensive drainage study lists several alternatives on how to provide retention or detention system. 
Downstream development(s) that have exercised option B will be protected from upstream development(s) by the city (within their own jurisdiction) by enforcing the same option on them to provide retention or detention for their discharges in excess of pre-development conditions. 
Drainage improvements in residential developments shall be located within rights-of-way. Street and alley layouts shall be arranged such that the drainage can be provided within the rights-of-way. In the event drainage improvements must be located outside street and alley rights-of-way, a drainage right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
If a variance for front entry is granted for single-family attached (three (3) units or more attached), then lot-to-lot drainage shall be allowed provided there are deed restrictions and a homeowner's association (H.O.A.) put into place to address maintenance of the approved drainage plans. In addition, a private drainage easement shall be shown on the final plat and a note shall be placed on the plat indicating that the approved drainage pattern must be maintained and preserved and listing any restrictions within the private drainage easement necessary to maintain and preserve the approved drainage pattern. Drainage must be routed to the nearest available street at breaks in between buildings. In no case shall more than ten units drain out to the street from the same break between buildings. 
(b)  Drainage design of storm sewer systems based on discharge. The drainage system design shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  An enclosed storm sewer shall be provided in all areas where the quantity of the accumulated storm run-off does not exceed 200 CFS. 
(2)  In drainage courses where the accumulated storm run-off is more than 200 CFS and less than 500 CFS either an enclosed storm sewer system or a concrete line channel shall be constructed. 
(3)  In drainage courses where the accumulated storm run-off is more than 500 CFS, the drainage improvements may be either an enclosed storm sewer system, a concrete line channel or a composite channel. The composite channel design shall consist of a concrete channel bottom of a minimum 12-foot width and concrete slope paving along both sides of the channel to the limits of a ten-year design frequency. This provision does not apply when no improvements to the drainage course are proposed and the channel is left in its natural state. 
(4)  All streets shall be protected from flooding in accordance with this chapter and the city's drainage criteria manual. Inlets shall be provided along all streets at maximum spacings of 600 feet. The maximum gutter flow from a high point on any street to the first inlet shall be 600 feet. 
(c)  Criteria for filling in a floodplain. An area of special flood hazard is defined as the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area has been identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on its Flood Insurance Rate Map, Community No. 480195, found on the most current dated map. On watercourses not covered by the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the special flood hazard area shall be determined by an appropriate floodplain analysis. The results of such an analysis must be reviewed and accepted by the office of the city engineer prior to design. 
All construction or construction-related activity which is proposed to take place in a special flood hazard area shall be subject to the conditions of this chapter and any amendments thereto, of the city. A development permit is required to ensure conformance with the provisions of these ordinances. In addition, the following specifications shall also be observed: 
(1)  There shall be no increase in the 100-year water surface elevation on any property upstream, downstream, or on the opposite bank (unless developer owns both banks) from the proposed site caused by construction activity in the floodplain. The floodplain may be altered only to the extent permitted by equal conveyance reduction on both sides of channel. The property owner/developer shall be required to provide technically acceptable proof (such as a backwater analysis) that this restriction has not been violated. 
(2)  Any increase in mean stream flow velocity shall be limited so as not to exceed the open channel velocity limitations delineated in section 7 of the drainage criteria manual. In addition, there shall be no increase in erosional activity on any property upstream, downstream, or on the opposite bank from the proposed sites caused by construction activity in the floodplain. The owner or developer shall be required to provide technically acceptable proof (such as backwater analysis) that this restriction has not been violated. 
(3)  The toe of any fill slope shall parallel the direction of flow. 
(4)  Maximum unreinforced fill slope shall be 3:1 unless approval for a steeper grade is received from the office of the city engineer. Vertical walls, terracing, and other slope treatments will be acceptable subject to approval of construction plans by the office of the city engineer. 
(d)  Required technical information to be submitted for city review. The engineer shall be required to submit for city review appropriate hydraulic and hydrologic design calculations and technical information. This includes at a minimum: 
Drainage Structure Type 	Required Submittal 
Open channels 	All information delineated in section 7 of the design manual. 
Culverts 	All information delineated in section 8 of the design manual. 
Storm sewers (including inlets) 	All information delineated in sections 5 and 6 of the design manual. 
Storm water storage facilities 	All information delineated in section 9 of the design manual. 
Construction in a flood hazard zone 	Hydraulic calculations and/or computer runs providing no increase of flood elevation or erosional activity on neighboring property. 
Landscaping plan specifying plans for erosion control on cut and fill slopes and restoration of excavated areas. 
Information required under the current ordinance (flood damage prevention ordinance) relating to the issuance of a development permit. 
 
The office of the city engineer may require additional technical backup information. 
(e)  Requirements for drainageway/floodway as part of city park system. Where the city has designated a floodway or floodplain as a dedicated drainageway or part of the city park system, the following shall be provided: 
(1)  Parallel streets fronting along the park or dedicated drainageway; 
(2)  Culs-de-sac which provide public access fronting on the park; and 
(3)  Loop streets that provide public access fronting on the park. 
In the above cases, the parks and recreation board shall have the right to review and approve the proposed street alignment fronting on city parks and shall in cases where the alignment is unsatisfactory, negotiate a satisfactory alignment with the developer and the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3235-08-2005, § 1, 8-1-05)  
Sec. 9.5-97. - Water lines. 
(a)  General provisions. This section deals with general requirements for water line construction in the city. All water lines shall be sized and designed in accordance with the city water distribution system master plan. All construction shall be in accordance with city standard specifications and construction standards. Other pertinent requirements for water connections, oversizing, main extensions, backflow and cross connections, water restrictions, conservation, impact fee and other water related fees are included in the water and sewer regulations ordinance. The state department of health, Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), and the Environmental Protection Agency must be consulted for their regulations and specifications, where required. 
(b)  Water main categories. Water lines in the city are categorized as: 
(1)  Distribution lines—Sizes six inches through 14 inches (nominal diameter). 
(2)  Transmission lines—Sizes 16 inches through 48 inches or over (nominal diameter). 
Distribution lines shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate water for potable and fire protection needs. Transmission line sizes are as shown on the city water distribution system master plan. 
The city water distribution system master plan may be periodically revised to meet the current demands as well as future needs as development occurs. 
(c)  Water line requirements. The waterline requirements table of this section provides the basic water line requirements. These requirements are considered minimum. 
The owner/developer shall be required to install at their own expense, all water lines up to 12-inch size, including all engineering costs. It shall be the developer's responsibility to determine the demand of the subject development. All off-site water mains required to connect service to the subdivision shall be installed at the expense of the developer up to 12 inches. The owner shall also be responsible for obtaining easements, when required, from other property owners for off-site water main connections. 
All water lines shall be designed to complete a looped system to avoid dead-end lines. Valves shall be placed at or near the ends of mains in such a manner that a shut down can be made for a future main extension without causing a loss of service on the existing main. 
Valve and fire hydrant spacing as shown on the waterline requirements table is considered minimum. Additional valves and fire hydrants may be required as determined by the city. 
The following shall apply to the installation of all water lines: 
(1)  All water lines shall be installed within a city street right-of-way or when necessary, within an easement that is contiguous to the right-of-way. 
(2)  Water lines shall not be installed within a TXDOT right-of-way. A water line easement that is contiguous to the TXDOT right-of-way shall be provided. 
(3)  The city reserves the right to consider alternate alignments on a case-by-case basis when field conditions warrant. 
Water lines within residential developments shall be installed within rights-of-way. All water lines shall be shown on plan and profile sheets to the same scales as required for paving improvements. Should a water line exist in an easement prior to rezoning of the property for residential use or prior to development of the property for residential use, then the existing line shall be either relocated to rights-of-way at the developer's cost or the existing easement shall be dedicated to the city as right-of-way. 
Waterline crossings at all street intersections designated C4U or larger (except service connections) shall be encased in a steel encasement pipe (class, length and size as determined by the city). Valves may be required at both ends at street crossings, if the crossing is utilized for both domestic service and fire protection needs. 
Waterline crossings at existing streets in an established neighborhood would be required to be dry-bored with encasement requirements at street intersections and none at mid-block or between intersections. 
All service lines shall be installed for each lot, with a suitable marker placed at the point of stub-out for reference in advance of street paving, sidewalk construction or any other item of street construction. Service lines shall be provided with a corporation at the main and an angle meter stop at the property line. A suitable reference marked "W" (minimum letter height of two inches) shall be chiseled or some other city approved method on the face of the curb, or on pavement where there is no curb. 
Service connections will not be permitted on transmission mains or fire hydrant leads unless authorized by the city. 
Meter boxes shall be located within a five-foot radius blanket easement on private property. 
(d)  Water line materials. All water line materials (pipes and fittings) shall conform with AWWA standards. New water line construction shall not consist of ten or 14 inch pipes. 
(1)  Water lines of 12 inches (nominal) or less in diameter shall be one of the following: 
a.  Ductile iron pipe, cement lined, bituminous coated, class 50 with polyethylene encasement. 
b.  P.V.C. AWWA standard C900 class 150 (D.R. 18). 
(2)  Water lines larger than 12 inches (nominal) diameter shall be one of the following: 
Note: Concrete pipe manufacturers shall make all proposed pipe connections. 
a.  Ductile iron pipe, cement lined, bituminous coated class 50, with polyethylene encasement. 
b.  Reinforced concrete pressure pipe, steel cylinder pipe (RCCP) AWWA standards C303. 
c.  Pre-stressed concrete pressure pipe, AWWA standard C301. 
d.  PVC AWWA standard C905 class 235 (D.R. 18). 
(3)  Fittings shall be either gray or ductile cast iron and shall be cement lined inside and bituminous coated on the outside. Fittings for reinforced concrete cylinder pipe shall be specially manufactured in accordance with AWWA standards. 
(e)  Backflow devices. Approved double check detector check valves must be installed on all privately maintained fire lines, at locations approved by the city. 
Requirements for backflow devices other than fire lines are governed by the city backflow prevention ordinance and the water and sewer regulations ordinance. 
(f)  Booster pump stations. The city will operate and maintain only those booster pump stations and force mains that serve the public. Booster pump stations and force mains serving private developments shall be privately maintained. 
(g)  Oversizing and extensions. The city may elect to oversize certain mains as required or as depicted in the current water distribution system master plan. The city may participate on lines greater than 12 inches if the demand of the project is less than or equal to a 12-inch line capacity, and the line is depicted on the water distribution system master plan. 
If a development requires lines exceeding 12 inches to service the area, the city may participate in the oversizing above the size needed to supply the development. 
If a project requires the city participation, and if city funds are available, the developer, owner, builder, or applicant shall design the project and submit the approved plans for bidding by the city. If city funds are not available, the developer may design and construct the project subject to an agreement for connection and reimbursement. See water and sewer regulations ordinance. 
Water extensions outside the city will not be granted to private entities. Water extensions outside the city may be granted to neighboring municipalities or governmental entities as approved by the city council. 
(h)  Meter requirements. Each connection to service individual or multiple spaces or structures shall be metered by an approved device with radio read meter capabilities. Meters from ¾ inches up to and including two inches shall be purchased through the city (see fee ordinance). Meters greater than two inches shall be approved by the city and purchased by the developer, builder, owner, or applicant and dedicated to the city. 
Individuals installing water meters shall pay administration fees, meter costs, meter deposits and capital recovery fees. Meters installed for city owned buildings or street medians are exempt from capital recovery fees. Capital recovery fees shall not be required for fire protection water lines. 
All meters shall be dedicated to the city except devices classified as private and utilized for sub-metering. 
All required meters, backflow device boxes, and valves shall be approved by the city. 
Temporary water service for all water requirements shall be metered by a city temporary meter, excluding the water necessary for flushing and disinfecting purposes. Procedures for obtaining a temporary meter is addressed in the water and sewer regulations ordinance. 
(i)  Utility location plan. Water lines shall be installed in accordance with the utility location plan except as otherwise approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-98. - Fire protection. 
(a)  General provisions. The fire marshal will review all plans and specifications of all proposed developments and will ensure adequate fire protection is provided. 
If, in the opinion of the fire chief, adequate fire protection requires additional fire hydrants and water lines to serve proposed developments, he will direct the owner of the property, in writing, to locate at pre-designated positions on the property a fire hydrant or hydrants and adequate water lines to provide adequate fire protection at the owner's own expense. The location and number of fire hydrants and water lines shall be situated as to afford adequate fire protection to all buildings located or proposed to be located on the property. Such installation to be completed in such reasonable period of time as the fire chief may direct. 
(b)  Fire hydrant specifications and coverage requirements. 
(1)  Fire hydrants shall be located no more than a 500-foot truck lay to all points of any structure or combustible storage area on the lot. 
(2)  Fire hydrants located on the opposite side of a street, designated as four-lane or larger on the current city thoroughfare plan, shall not be considered acceptable for meeting hydrant coverage requirements. 
(3)  Fire hydrants shall be positioned to allow trucklays to follow normal traffic flow patterns to the site either by street or fire lane. 
(c)  Fire hydrant markers. Fire hydrant "blue reflective markers" shall be installed by the developer on all streets, fire lanes and paved access easements to indicate fire hydrant locations. Fire hydrant markers shall be installed in the middle of the nearest traffic lane adjacent to the hydrant. When hydrants are installed at ninety-degree turns along fire lanes or mutual access easements, markers shall be placed on private street(s), fire lane(s) or mutual access easement(s) immediately adjacent to the fire hydrant. Figure 16. 
(d)  Fire hydrant specifications. All fire hydrants must meet required city standard fire hydrant specifications. 
(1)  All fire hydrants shall have one 4.5-inch pumper nozzle and two 2.5-inch hose nozzles with the city's standard threads; shall have a main barrel valve opening of not less than 5.25 inches; and shall be placed on mains of not less than six inches in diameter. Six-inch gate valves shall be placed on all fire hydrant leads. All fire hydrants shall have a valve at the main with flange-to-flange fittings. 
(2)  All fire hydrants shall be of a "break-away" design in accordance with city standard fire hydrant specifications. 
(3)  Each hydrant shall have a minimum of two primer coats. The final coat of paint on the body of all hydrants shall be a silver color of approved aluminum paint. The top and outlet caps of all fire hydrants shall be painted by the developer with a machine implement paint or approved equal, in accordance with the size of the line constructed. 
a.  Six-inch line—Red. 
b.  Eight-inch line—Blue. 
c.  Ten- to 14-inch line—Green. 
d.  16-inch or larger—Yellow 
(e)  Fire protection distribution systems. Water distribution systems shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate water for fire protection to the development and shall conform to the city's water distribution system master plan. Maintenance of private water lines and fire hydrants is the responsibility of the property owner. 
(1)  Old Town center design district and Old Town design district. 
a.  Sizes and allowable dead end lengths. In the Old Town design district and Old Town center design district the minimum water line size shall be eight inches. Dead end lines over 300 feet and up to 600 feet in length shall be 12 inches minimum. Dead end lines over 600 feet in length will not be allowed. Dead end lines shall terminate at a fire hydrant that shall be installed for maintenance purposes and may not necessarily be considered for fire hydrant density as required. Flush hydrants may be installed in lieu of hydrants at terminating points of dead end lines for maintenance purposes only. 
b.  Water line requirements for fire protection. The owner developer shall choose from a nine-option menu to provide either a public or private water line distribution system for fire protection. The menu is located at the end of this section. 
Perpendicular crossings of underground public water lines may be allowed under driveways and sidewalks to provide protection/domestic service to the site. All crossings shall meet construction standards applicable with all provisions of this chapter. 
c.  Valves. Additional isolation valves may be required to be installed depending upon the configuration of the system as determined by the city. 
d.  Construction standards. All water line construction shall conform to construction standards located elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-99. - Sanitary sewer lines. 
(a)  General provisions. The design, size, type, and location of all sanitary sewer lines shall be in accordance with the wastewater collection system master plan, city standard construction drawings, regulations, standards specifications, this chapter and good engineering practice. In addition, the design and construction methods shall meet or exceed Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and Environmental Protection Agency regulations. The water and sewer regulations ordinance of the city shall also be adhered to in regards to the design and construction of sanitary sewer lines. 
All sanitary sewer lines shall be installed within rights-of-way or sanitary sewer easements. Sanitary sewer lines may not be located in easements in the yard of any residential lot. Should a line exist in an easement prior to the rezoning of the property for residential use or prior to development of the property for residential use, then the existing line shall be either relocated to city right-of-way at developer expense, or the existing easement shall be dedicated to the city as right-of-way. 
(b)  Materials. Sanitary sewer lines 12 inches in diameter and less shall be PVC SDR-35 for depths less than ten feet. When PVC pipe is used for depths exceeding 10 feet, the pipe material shall be PVC SDR-26. Lines larger than 12 inches diameter shall be as specified by the city. Manholes can either be poured-in-place or pre-cast. 
(c)  Manhole spacing. Manholes shall be provided at all points of directional change, including the P.C. and P.T. on horizontal curves. Manholes shall be provided at vertical points of intersection (vertical curves are generally not allowed). All sanitary sewer lines shall terminate at a manhole. See table 6 for spacing criteria. 
(d)  Manhole size criteria. Sanitary sewer manhole size criteria are established based on depth/diameter/maximum allowable pipe connection/pipe size relationship. The criteria are given in the sanitary sewer manhole size table 6. 
(e)  Minimum pipe size. The minimum size of sanitary sewer lines shall be eight inches in diameter for lines that are to be maintained by the city. 
(f)  Parallel sanitary sewer collection systems. Residential or commercial sanitary sewer collection lines shall be designed to not exceed maximum depths of 12 feet-0 inches measured from finished grade to the bottom of the pipe. Depths greater than 12 feet-0 inches will only be permitted when parallel sanitary sewer collection lines to serve properties on both sides of the street are provided. The office of the city engineer shall be consulted to determine the location and design criteria of the parallel lines prior to final design. 
(g)  Oversizing and extensions. The city may elect to oversize certain mains as required or as depicted in the most recent waste water collection system master plan. The city may participate on lines greater than 12 inches (inches) if: 
(1)  The demand of the project is less than or equal to a 12-inch line capacity; and 
(2)  Shown on the wastewater collection system master plan. 
If a project involves city participation and if city funds are available, the developer, owner, builder, or applicant shall design the project and submit the approved plans for bidding by the city. If city funds are not available, the developer may design and construct the project subject to an agreement for connection and reimbursement. See water and sewer regulations ordinance. If a development requires lines exceeding 12 inches to serve the area, the city may participate in the oversizing above the size needed to supply the development. 
During the process of development, the owner(s) of the subject property shall extend sewer mains by constructing the necessary sewer line within proper easements, at their sole expense, to serve the adjacent property, when the adjacent property or any portion thereof, are considered to be in the same sewer basin. The construction of the lines shall extend along the frontage or through the property to the furthest point possible, where the adjacent property can readily tie into the system. 
Sanitary sewer extensions outside the city will not be granted to private entities. Sanitary sewer extensions outside the city may be granted to neighboring municipalities or governmental entities as approved by the city council. 
(h)  Clean-outs. A clean out, directed toward the main, shall be provided on all services at the property line or easement line. 
(i)  Utility location plan. Sanitary sewer lines shall be installed in accordance with the utility location plan except as otherwise approved by the city. 
(j)  Additional easements. Additional easements for sanitary sewer lines shall be dedicated along state-controlled routes and along other routes when the right-of-way is not sufficient to adequately provide for the orderly construction and maintenance of the sanitary sewer improvements. 
(k)  Emergency maintenance. When conditions warrant, the city may perform maintenance operations during the warranty period. The cost of such maintenance shall be paid for by the developer/contractor. 
(l)  Television inspection. 
(1)  The developer or contractor shall, at its own expense, perform a television inspection of all sanitary sewer gravity lines prior to acceptance by the city. Repairs shall be made if required and the television inspection repeated as many times as needed until the line is deemed acceptable. Prior to final acceptance, the developer or its contractor shall escrow funds as specified in the city fee ordinance to cover the cost of a second television inspection. If the developer or its contractor performs the second television inspection in accordance with the terms stated hereinafter, the escrow shall be refunded less administrative costs. 
(2)  The developer or contractor shall use color videotape in all television inspections. 
(3)  The developer or contractor may employ a firm qualified in the type of work to make the television inspections, or if qualified and acceptable to the city, he may perform the inspection himself. 
(4)  The city inspector must be present during the television inspection, unless specifically otherwise authorized in writing. 
(5)  The visual inspection by photographic means of the sanitary sewer mains shall commence after the compaction of backfill, the air test, and the mandril test are completed. 
(6)  The jet ball technique may be used to remove all foreign debris and silt, prior to photographic inspection. 
(7)  The second visual inspection by the developer or contractor shall be made no sooner than the 20th month and no later than the 22nd month after the date of the letter of acceptance of the subdivision by the city. In the event the developer or contractor shall refuse or fail to complete the second inspection within time permitted, the city shall use the escrowed funds previously described to cause completion of the inspection. Such inspection shall be made no later than 23 months after acceptance of the subdivision. 
(8)  All television equipment used shall be approved by city staff resolution. 
(9)  All information gathered must be legible, clearly understandable, and of good picture quality. 
(10)  A run sheet shall be made, and it shall be compatible with the tape in noting deficiencies. 
(11)  By audio on the tape, the operator must note the date and time the recording is made, note the developer or contractor's name, project name, and contract number, note the name of company performing the inspection, if other than the developer or contractor, and the operator's name, note the location, line, designation, main size, and direction of run, identify every 50-foot station, identify the station of each manhole and identify deficiencies and include station number. 
(12)  The sewer mains must be televised from manhole to manhole in a downstream manner. 
(13)  All sanitary sewer mains must be laced with water. The television inspection must be done immediately following the lacing of the main with no water flow. 
(14)  One tape per visual photographic inspection shall be furnished to the city. 
(15)  Tapes must be VHS and shall be one-half inch size. 
(16)  All tapes and run sheets shall be submitted to the city inspector for storage and inspection by the city. All tapes and run sheets shall become the property of the city. 
(m)  Criteria for repair. The developer shall make repairs if the city inspector notes problems, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Pulled or slipped joints. 
(2)  Water infiltration. 
(3)  Cracked or damaged pipe. 
(4)  If standing water is found in pipes of gradients equal to or greater than 0.7 percent. 
(5)  In pipes of gradients less than 0.7 percent, a maximum one-half inch of standing water will be allowed in eight inches through 12 inches diameter pipes; and a maximum ten percent of pipe size or three inches, whichever is less in pipes greater than 12 inches diameter. 
(6)  Structural damage to pipe. 
The city shall review the visual photographic tape and notify the developer or contractor of required repairs. 
If repairs are required, another television inspection of the repaired area shall be made after the repairs are complete, at the developer or contractor's expense. Repairs shall be made to the satisfaction of the city. 
(n)  Lift stations and force mains. The city will operate and maintain only those lift stations and force mains which serve the public. Lift stations and force mains serving private developments shall be privately maintained. 
(o)  Sanitary sewer services. No sanitary sewer service of less than four inches in diameter shall be connected to a city-maintained sanitary sewer main. Services of six inches in diameter or larger shall connect to sanitary sewer lines only at manholes. An "S" shall be chiseled or some other city approved method on the face of the curb or on pavement where there is no curb, to identify the exact location of the sanitary sewer service. A sanitary sewer service shall be stubbed out to all residential lots to a point, eight feet minimum, within the lot. The elevation of all services shall be shown on the plans and shall be established such that the lot will be adequately served. For connection fees, see the city's fee ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-100. - Erosion control. 
(a)  General provisions. Private property owners, developers, or builders shall be accountable for any erosion of their property or construction site that results in measurable accumulation of sedimentation in dedicated streets and alleys. Any accumulation deeper than one inch in dedicated streets, alleys, or offsite private property constitutes a violation of this policy. 
(1)  Maximum use shall be made of vegetation to minimize soil loss. 
(2)  Natural vegetation shall be retained wherever possible. 
(3)  Where inadequate natural vegetation exists, or where it becomes necessary to remove existing natural vegetation, temporary controls shall be installed promptly to minimize soil loss and insure that erosion and sedimentation does not occur. 
(4)  Erosion control plans shall be submitted to city engineer for approval prior to actual construction. 
(5)  Wastes or disposal areas and construction roads shall be located and constructed in a manner that will minimize the amount of sediment entering streams and city storm sewers. 
(6)  When work areas or material sources are located in or adjacent to live streams, such areas shall be separated from the stream by a dike or other barrier to keep sediment from entering a flowing stream. Care shall be taken during the construction and removal of such barriers to minimize the sediment transport into a stream. 
(7)  Should preventative measures fail to function effectively, the applicant shall act immediately to bring the erosion and/or siltation under control by whatever additional means are necessary. 
(8)  Runoff shall be diverted away from construction areas as much as possible. 
(9)  Developers, builders, or owners of property shall permanently stabilize all disturbed areas prior to final acceptance of the subdivision, project, and/or structure. Stabilization shall be accomplished through the use of perennial vegetative cover or other permanent means, such as channel lining, retaining wall, etc. 
(b)  Permanent erosion control. Permanent erosion controls are installed at or near end of the construction project when no further disturbance of the area will occur. The purpose of these controls is to permanently minimize soil loss. Methods used to achieve minimal soil loss include: restoring ground cover, building retaining walls for steep slopes, or reducing wave or water action by lining channels or shorelines with gabions, jute mats, vegetation, or similar materials. Examples of typical permanent measures are vegetation cover using perennial plants, headwalls, stilling basins, riprap, tree wells, gabions, matting along channels, retention lakes, terracing, and retaining walls. 
(c)  Temporary erosion control. Temporary erosion control methods are used to abate sediment runoff from construction sites. The application of control devices can yield significant water quality and drainage benefits at a minimal cost to the developer. The erosion control measures can be grouped as barriers, filter devices, or routing devices. 
(d)  Erosion control barriers. The erosion control methods that can be classified as barriers include: 
(1)  Straw bale sediment barrier; 
(2)  Sandbag sediment barrier; 
(3)  Check dam; and 
(4)  Sediment trap. 
These measures trap sediment and prevent high runoff velocities that cause erosion. Barrier devices are illustrated in the erosion control barriers figures 29—33. 
The straw bale and the sandbag sediment barriers can reduce sediment loads significantly. A sandbag barrier is more durable and should be used to withstand more intense storm events. Siltation berms and check dams are not as effective for sediment removal as the other types of barriers and operate best in storm events of limited intensity. 
(e)  Erosion control filters. Filtering methods can be used in place of barriers. Filter devices allow runoff to pass through but retain sediment by filtration. The types of filters available are: 
(1)  Filter berm; 
(2)  Filter fence; 
(3)  Filter inlet; and 
(4)  Vegetation filter strip. 
The erosion control filters figures 29—33 show some typical erosion control filters. 
Excellent sediment removal can be achieved using a filter berm, fence, or inlet. The filter berm is constructed of rock and therefore is capable of withstanding heavier storm events than the filter fence or filter inlet. In general, the vegetation filter strip will operate less effectively than the other devices. 
(f)  Routing devices. Only one method, the flexible downdrain, is classified strictly as a routing device. A schematic of a downdrain is shown in figure 33. The purpose of the device is to convey waters down steep slopes or across highly erodible soils. 
Some of the methods classified under erosion control barriers can be used as routing devices to protect erodible areas. Sandbag sediment barriers and straw bale sediment barriers are both suitable for this purpose. 
A routing device is an erosion prevention tool that can eliminate erosion problems on steep slopes and other critical areas. It is not designed to capture any solids already moving with the water. 
(g)  Performance. Erosion from construction sites can be a significant water quality problem. Developing areas are cleared of vegetation during construction leaving the soil exposed and susceptible to erosion. Runoff then transports eroded sediment from these areas and deposit it downstream. The accumulation of silt in streams and ponds is a form of water pollution that is unattractive and impedes drainage. 
Prevention is a key aspect of erosion control. Many of the control methods presented herein can be placed in a manner that will protect highly erodible areas such as steep slopes. The prevention of erosion requires prior planning to ascertain the placement of selected control methods. The rewards of this planning will be a significant reduction in soil loss. Not only can soil loss be prevented, but also eroded soil can be recovered on the construction site and used for fill. 
The particulate material in construction site runoff is generally heavier and larger than particulates in urban runoff. These attributes facilitate the removal of the material whether the removal is by settling in a sediment trap or by filtration through a filter fence. Temporary sediment traps, filters, and routing devices can effectively control erosion for construction sites if properly applied. These methods are used in an effort to control temporary increases in sediment loads. 
A quantifiable assessment of performance is difficult because the nature of erosion control is more preventative than corrective. A rough assessment of performance can be conducted by comparing the soil loss from a site with controls to the loss from a comparable site without controls. 
(h)  Design considerations. Sediment traps and flexible drains are flow collection devices that will require hydraulic design. An estimate of the peak design flow rate and runoff volume is necessary for proper sizing of these management methods. Runoff volume and peak flow are calculated based on the design storm. Design storms for temporary erosion control structures shall be based on the ten-year return frequency. 
The design storm frequency for construction sites should consider several factors including: 
(1)  The length of time and size of construction activity; 
(2)  The severity of damage that could result to downstream waters if the design storm is exceeded; and 
(3)  Local concerns toward environmental protection. 
(i)  Enforcement. Should proper erosion controls fail or become inoperative, the city shall notify the owner, builder, or developer of the violation in writing. The owner, builder, or developer has five days after being notified to begin correcting the problems. If no corrections are started, the city may revoke the development permit, building permit, or withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-101. - Private utilities. 
(a)  General provisions. In the course of development the services of other private utility agencies may be required. In addition, gas and electrical service shall be available to each lot prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(1)  Telephone. 
(2)  Gas. 
(3)  Electric. 
(4)  Cable. 
(5)  Solid waste. 
(b)  Underground utilities. In areas where no overhead utility lines currently exist, all new utility lines of 60KV and below shall be placed underground. 
In areas where overhead utility lines exist, the utility companies may augment, upgrade, repair, replace and maintain as necessary. 
Relocations may take place based on no change in the character of service. Overhead lines may be relocated overhead and underground lines shall be relocated underground. 
The utility companies shall be responsible for developing administrative policies and cost reimbursement procedures for the installation and extension of underground facilities. These policies should permit the utility companies to recover the cost differential between the cost of extending and installing overhead and underground service, in the event the city or a developer requests such facilities from the utility companies. 
All utilities shall be constructed and installed in accordance with current standards of the city and the utility companies. No utility shall be constructed closer than two feet to any curb. 
Adequate easement shall be provided at the time of platting for all underground utilities. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-102. - Miscellaneous construction. 
(a)  General provisions. The developer shall be responsible for the construction, or payment in lieu of construction, of all traffic control devices, railroad crossings and bridges within or adjacent to the development. 
(b)  Traffic control devices. Traffic control devices include traffic signage, street name signs, pavement markings, school beacons, traffic signals, and all related items. All traffic control devices as shown on plans and approved by the city shall be installed by the developer(s) at their sole cost, unless otherwise directed. Any developer or property owner requesting the installation of a traffic signal shall pay 100 percent cost for the design and construction. The city, upon evaluation of the needs and justified warrants of the proposed signal shall help coordinate the approval process on its own thoroughfares, as well as the TXDOT routes. Any developer whose development necessitates the modification of an existing traffic signal shall pay for 100 percent of the total cost of the design and construction of the modifications to the traffic signal, roadway approaches, signage and all related items. 
(c)  Street lighting. The standard city streetlight shall be a 100-watt high pressure sodium fixture mounted on an ornamental pole for residential areas, and a 200-watt high-pressure sodium fixture mounted on an ornamental pole for all major roadways. 
The developer shall submit a proposed street lighting plan as part of the construction plans for public improvements. The street lighting plan shall be approved by the Public Works department prior to the commencement of construction. Streetlights are required to be installed at 600-foot intervals along all streets. Additionally, streetlights are required to be installed at street intersections, culs-de-sac, bridges, railroad crossings and other selected points when the city determines that a streetlight is needed for traffic safety. 
Streetlights will typically be located in easements adjacent to rights-of-way on residential and undivided streets. On divided streets, streetlights with dual mast arms and fixtures will be located within the median. 
Once the proposed street lighting plan is approved, the public works department will arrange for the installation of all street lighting with the appropriate electrical utility company. The developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the installation of the proposed street lighting system. The city will pay the monthly charges for all required streetlights. 
Any streetlights that exceed the standards listed above must be located on private property and on a separately metered service. Installation cost, maintenance, and the monthly electrical charges will be the responsibility of the property owner. 
The above requirements do not apply to signalized intersections where the streetlights are an integral part of the traffic signal, or to streetlights located within state department of transportation rights-of-way. 
(d)  Railroad crossings. The developer shall bear 100 percent of the total cost of all proposed railroad crossing design and construction triggered by new development(s). The developer who first develops any quadrant of a street/railroad crossing shall pay 100 percent of the total cost of the construction and shall be eligible for reimbursements from the other three quadrant developer(s)/owner(s) in the amount of 25 percent of the total cost of construction, at the time of their development. The reimbursement process will remain in effect for ten years from the time of completion and acceptance of the railroad crossing improvements. 
(e)  Bridges. The developer shall bear 100 percent of the total cost of all proposed bridge design and construction triggered by new development(s). The city shall help coordinate approval processes through other federal and state agencies, as needed. 
(f)  Payment. Payments made to the city as a condition of this section shall be made prior to the approval of the final plat or engineering site plan (if a final plat is not required). 
 

Figure 7—Commercial and Industrial Driveway Layout, Truck Entrances 
 

Figure 8—Front Entry Residential Driveway Over Sewer Service Line, Option 1 
 

Figure 9—Front Entry Residential Driveway Over Sewer Service Line, Option 2 
 

Figure 10—Front Entry Residential Driveway Over Sewer Service Line, Option 3 
 

Figure 11—Fire Hydrant Marker Placement 
 

Figure 12—Public Fire Protection, Option 1 
 

Figure 13—Public Fire Protection, Option 2A 
 

Figure 14—Public Fire Protection, Option 2B 
 

Figure 15—Private Fire Protection, Option 3A 
 

Figure 16—Private Fire Protection, Option 3B 
 

Figure 17—Public Fire Protection, Option 4A 
 

Figure 18—Public Fire Protection, Option 4B 
 

Figure 19—Private Fire Protection, Option 5A 
 

Figure 20—Private Fire Protection, Option 5B 
 

Figure 21—Utilities Location Plan Within Street R.O.W., Residential/Collector 
 

Figure 22—Utilities Location Plan Within Street R.O.W., Collector/Minor Arterial 
 

Figure 23—Utilities Location Plan Within Street R.O.W., Arterial/Collector 
 

Figure 24—Erosion Control Barriers 1 
 

Figure 25—Erosion Control Barriers 2 
 

Figure 26—Erosion Control Filters 1 
 

Figure 27—Erosion Control Filters 2 
 

Figure 28—Routing Device 
 

Figure 28A—City Standard—80' R.O.W. 
 

Figure 28B—City Standard—60' R.O.W. 
 

Figure 28C—City Standard—50' R.O.W. 
 

Figure 28D—Old Town Standard—72' R.O.W. 
 

Figure 28E—Old Town Standard—60' R.O.W. 
 

Figure 28F—Old Town Standard—50' R.O.W. 
 

Figure 28G—Old Town Design District: Master Street Plan 
Table 1. Street Design Criteria 
Street Classification 
	Residential 	Collector (Undivided) 	Principal Arterial (Divided) 
No. of lanes 	2 	2 	4 	4 	6 
Width of pavement 	31' (B-B) 	37' (B-B) 	49' (B-B) 	25' (B-B) Each direction 	37' (B-B) each direction 
R.O.W. width 	50' 	60' 	80' 	100' 	124' 
Design speed (mph) 	25 	30 	40 	50 	50 
Maximum degree of curvature/or minimum radius for design (center line): (normal crown) 	28°/200'* 	13°/428'* 	7°/821'* 	4°/1389'* 	4°/1389'* 
Median width 	— 	— 	— 	25' 	25' 
Parkway width 	9.5' 	11.5' 	15.5' 	12.5' 	12.5' 
Median opening spacing 	— 	— 	— 	400'—600'** 	400'—600'** 
Street intersection radius (curb) 	25' 	25' 	30' 	35' 	35' 
Corner clip row dedication*** 	12' × 12' 	12' × 12' 	12' × 12' 	12' × 12' 	12' × 12' 
 
Notes: 
1.  The above design standards are considered to be minimum. Other design elements such as stopping sight distance, super-elevation, grades, etc., shall be used in design whenever appropriate as dictated by good engineering practice. 
2.  Additional right-of-way will be required at major intersections for left or right turn lanes (if required) to maintain traffic volume capacities through the intersection. 
3.  Additional right-of-way will be required for acceleration or deceleration lanes where appropriate. 
4.  Residential parking lanes shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. 
5.  Median and parkway widths may be adjusted by the city engineer to address special conditions. 
6.  All turn lanes shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. 
7.  All corner clip R.O.W. dimensions shall be 12' × 12' for all street classifications including residential collector (undivided) and principal arterial (divided). 
*  Under special conditions, the city engineer will determine the maximum degree of curvature. (Super-elevation may be required.) 
**  Minimum median opening spacing based on traffic volumes and turning movements. Use 600 feet minimum where traffic signals may be needed and on all six-lane thoroughfares. Use 1,320-foot minimums on all major traffic carriers as identified on the thoroughfare plan. Exact minimums will be reviewed on a case by case basis. 
***  Corner clip dimensions are based on parkway and radii dimensions shown and will be adjusted on a case by case basis when parking and radii dimensions vary from those shown above. 
Table 1A. Old Town Street Design Criteria 
Number of lanes 	2 	2 	2 
Width of pavement 	38' (B-B) 	48' (B-B) 	49' (B-B) 
R.O.W. width 	50' 	60' 	72' 
Design speed (mph) 	25 	25 	25 
Maximum degree of curvature/or minimum radius for design (center line): (normal crown) 	28°/200'* 	13°/428'* 	7°/821'* 
Median width 	N/A 	N/A 	N/A 
Parking lane 	1 side 
10'/parallel 	2 sides 
10'/parallel 	2 sides 
16'/angle 
Parkway width 	6' All sidewalk 	6' All sidewalk 	6' All sidewalk 
Median opening spacing 	— 	— 	— 
Street intersection radius (curb) 	25' 	25' 	25' 
Corner clip R.O.W. dedication*** 	12' x 12' 	12' x 12' 	12' x 12' 
 
Notes: 
1.  The above design standards are considered to be minimum. other design elements such as stopping sight distance, super-elevation, grades, etc., shall be used in design whenever appropriate as dictated by good engineering practice. 
2.  Additional right-of-way will be required at major intersections for left or right turn lanes (if required) to maintain traffic volume capacities through the intersection. 
3.  Additional right-of-way will be required for acceleration or deceleration lanes where appropriate. 
4.  Residential parking lanes shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. 
5.  Median and parkway widths may be adjusted by the city engineer to address special conditions. 
6.  All turn lanes shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. 
*  Under special conditions, the city engineer will determine the maximum degree of curvature. (super-elevation may be required.) 
**  Minimum median opening spacing based on traffic volumes and turning movements. use 600-foot minimum where traffic signals may be needed and on all 6-lane thoroughfares. use 1,320-foot minimums on all major traffic carriers as identified on the thoroughfare plan. exact minimums will be reviewed on a case by case basis. 
***  Corner clip dimensions are based on parkway and radii dimensions shown and will be adjusted on a case by case basis when parking and radii dimensions vary from those shown above. 
Table 2. Waterline Easements 
Pipe Size 	Minimum Depth of Cover 	Maximum Depth of Cover 	Minimum Width of Easements 
8"—12" 	3.5' 	5.0' 	15' 
16"—20" 	4.0' 	6.0' 	20' 
24"—48" 	4.5' 	7.0' 	25' 
 
Note: Width(s) may be reduced by five feet when the easement is contiguous with street right-of-way. 
Table 3. Sanitary Sewer Easements 
Pipe Size 	Minimum Depth of Cover 	Maximum Depth of Cover 	Minimum Width of Easements 
8"—12" 	5.0' 	6.0' 	15' 
15"—21" 	5.0' 	9.0' 	20' 
24"—36" 	5.0' 	12.0' 	25' 
39"—48" 	5.0' 	15.0' 	35' 
 
Notes: 
For each additional two feet of cover, add five feet to easement width. 
Widths may be reduced by a maximum five feet, when the easement is contiguous with street right(s)-of-way. 
An additional five feet may be reduced as conditions warrant and as determined by the city. 
Table 4. Drainage Easements (Enclosed System) 
Pipe Size 	Minimum Depth of Cover 	Maximum Depth of Cover 	Minimum Width of Easements 
18"—24" 	** 	5.0' 	15' 
27"—48" 	** 	7.0' 	20' 
54"—72" * 	** 	8.0' 	25' 
 
Notes: 
*  For pipes larger than 72 inches (diameter) easement width(s) will be determined by the city engineer, based on design conditions. 
**  Minimum depth is controlled by hydraulic grade line requirements. (Hydraulic grade line to be no closer than 1.5 feet from surface per design manual. 
For each additional two feet of cover, add five feet to easement width(s). 
Width(s) may be reduced by five feet when the easement is contiguous with street right(s)-of-way. 
An additional five feet may be reduced as conditions warrant and as determined by the city. 
Table 5. Waterline Requirements 
Water Line 	Minimum Depth of Cover 	Maximum Depth of Cover 	MinimumDomestic Tap Size 	Maximum Domestic Tap Size 	Maximum Valve Spacing 	Maximum Residential Hydrant Spacing 	Maximum Commercial Hydrant Spacing 	Fire Hydrant Paint (Color) 
*6" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	1" 	500' 	1,000' 	N/A 	Red 
8" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	2" 	600' 	1,000' 	600' 	Blue 
*10" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	3" 	600' 	1,000' 	600' 	Green 
12" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	6" 	600' 	1,000' 	600' 	Green 
*14" 	42" 	60" 	3/4" 	6" 	600' 	1,000' 	600' 	Green 
16" 	48" 	72" 	6" 	— 	600' 	1,000' 	600' 	Yellow 
20" 	48" 	72" 	6" 	— 	1,000' 	1,000' 	1,000' 	Yellow 
24" 	54" 	84" 	6" 	— 	1,000' 	1,000' 	1,000' 	Yellow 
30" 	54" 	84" 	6" 	— 	2,000' 	1,000' 	1,000' 	Yellow 
36" 	54" 	84" 	6" 	— 	2,000' 	1,000' 	1,000' 	Yellow 
42" or larger 	54" 	84" 	6" 	— 	2,000' 	1,000' 	1,000' 	Yellow 
 
Notes: 
1.  Maximum fire hydrant spacing shall be 1,000 feet in residential areas and 600 feet in commercial areas. 
2.  Waterlines 8 inches through 12 inches are considered distribution mains. Waterlines 16 inches and larger are considered transmission mains. 
*  For existing lines only. these lines sizes will not be permitted for new development. 
3.  A 6-inch tap is allowed for a fire hydrant only with a lead of less than 50 feet. 
Table 6. Sanitary Sewer Manhole Size 
Pipe Size 	Depth of Cover (average) 	Diameter of Manhole 	MaximumManhole Spacing 	Construction Options 	Maximum Number of Pipe Connections Allowed in Manhole 
12" and under 	5'—6' 
7'—10' 
11'—15' 	4' 
5' 
6' 	500' 	Cast-in-place or pre-cast 
Cast-in-place or pre-cast 
Cast-in-place or pre-cast 	3 
3 
4 
15"—21" 	5'—9' 
10'—15' 

(See note #1 below) 	5' 
6' 	500' 	Cast-in-place or pre-cast 
Pre-cast only 	3 
4 
24"—36" 	5'—9' 
10'—20' 
(See note #1 below) 	5' 
6' 	800' 	Cast-in-place or pre-cast 
Pre-cast only 	3 (24"—27") 
2 (30"—36") 
3 (24"—27") 
2 (30"—36") 
39"—48" 	5'—9' 
10'—20' 
(See note #1 below) 	6' 
7' 	1,000' 	Pre-cast only 
Pre-cast only 	2 
2 
 
Notes: 
1.  If the proposed system design requires lines to be constructed to depths greater than shown above, the city engineer's office shall be consulted for additional requirements. 
2.  Where the above requirements cannot be met, a junction structure may be utilized. 
3.  Where drop connections are proposed, the city engineer's office shall be consulted for proper sizing. 
Table 7. Old Town Design District Master Street Plan 
	STREET NAME 	LIMITS 	TYPE OF STREET 	R.O.W. 	PAVEMENT WIDTH 	ZONING DISTRICT 
				EXIST. 	PROP. 		
1 	TEMPLE DRIVE 	DEGAN—LYNN 	RESIDENTIAL 	50' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) 
2 	WALTERS STREET 	COWAN—CHARLES 	RESIDENTIAL 	38' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) PUBLIC USE 
3 	HEROD STREET 	CHURCH—COLLEGE 	RESIDENTIAL 	60' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) PUBLIC USE 
4 	HICKORY STREET 	EDNA—COWAN 	RESIDENTIAL 	41' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
5 	HICKORY STREET 	COWAN—HATCHER 	RESIDENTIAL 	41' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) 
6 	EDWARDS STREET 	EDNA—COWAN 	RESIDENTIAL 	41' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
7 	EDWARDS STREET 	COWAN—CHARLES 	RESIDENTIAL 	48' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) 
8 	MILTON STREET 	PURNELL—SAMUEL 	RESIDENTIAL 	50' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) 
9 	HATCHER AVENUE 	EDWARDS—ELM 	RESIDENTIAL 	40' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
10 	HENRIETA STREET 	LEGENDS—MAIN 	RESIDENTIAL 	50' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
11 	LEONARD STREET 	LEGENDS—MAIN 	RESIDENTIAL 	50' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
12 	LEGENDS DRIVE 	KEALY EAST 	RESIDENTIAL 	50' 	50' 	31' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
13 	DEGAN AVENUE 	RICHLAND—COLLEGE 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	60' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) 
14 	LYNN AVENUE 	MAIN—COLLEGE 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	60' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
15 	EDNA AVENUE 	RICHLAND—COLLEGE 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	60' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) 
16 	EDNA AVENUE 	PURNELL—MAIN 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	60' & 50' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
17 	KEALY AVENUE 	MAIN—NORTH OF COLLEGE 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	68' & 72' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) OLD TOWN CENTER 
18 	COWAN AVENUE 	MAIN—COLLEGE 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	60' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
19 	COWAN AVENUE 	PURNELL—MAIN 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	67' & 40' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
20 	COLLEGE STREET 	I.H. 35E—RAILROAD 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	60' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) PUBLIC USE 
21 	RAILROAD STREET 	MAIN—COLLEGE 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 		60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
22 	RAILROAD STREET 	MAIN—S.H. 121 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 		60' 	37' B-B 	LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LI) 
23 	PURNELL STREET 	MILL—RAILROAD 	COLLECTOR STREET (C2U) 	60' 	60' 	37' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LI) 
24 	PURNELL STREET 	I.H. 35E—MILL 	COLLECTOR STREET (C4U) 	80' 	80' 	49' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
25 	MILL STREET 	PURNELL—COLLEGE 	COLLECTOR STREET (C4U) 	80' 	80' 	49' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) OLD TOWN CENTER 
26 	RICHLAND STREET 	I.H. 35E—COWAN 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	40' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
27 	PERRY AVENUE 	COWAN—HATCHER 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	40' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
28 	ELM STREET 	COWAN—HATCHER 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	40' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
29 	HATCHER AVENUE 	ELM—PERRY 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	40' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
30 	MILTON STREET 	SAMUEL—MAIN 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	50' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
31 	SAMUEL STREET 	MILTON—CHARLES 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	50' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
32 	ELM STREET 	MILTON—MILL 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	60' & 50' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) OLD TOWN CENTER 
33 	HOUSTON STREET 	CHARLES EAST 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	38' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
35 	WHATLEY AVENUE 	MILL—KEALY 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	40' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
36 	THOMAS STREET 	KEALY EAST 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	50' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
37 	KEALY AVENUE 	PURNELL—MAIN 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	40' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) OLD TOWN CENTER 
39 	HARRIS STREET 	MAIN—COLLEGE 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	36' & 40' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
40 	CHARLES STREET 	MAIN—COLLEGE 	OLD TOWN—50' STANDARD 	50' 	50' 	38' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) PUBLIC USE 
41 	CHARLES STREET 	PURNELL—MAIN 	OLD TOWN—60' STANDARD 	60' 	60' 	48' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 1 (OTMU1) OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) PUBLIC USE 
42 	WALTER STREET 	CHARLES—LEONARD 	OLD TOWN—60' STANDARD 	66' & 67' 	60' 	48' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) PUBLIC USE 
43 	HENRIETTA STREET 	MAIN—COLLEGE 	OLD TOWN—60' STANDARD 	66' 	60' 	48' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
44 	LEONARD STREET 	MAIN—COLLEGE 	OLD TOWN—60' STANDARD 	52' & 66' 	60' 	48' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
45 	EDNA AVENUE 	MAIN—RICHLAND 	OLD TOWN—60' STANDARD 	60' 	60' 	48' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
46 	DEGAN AVENUE 	MAIN—RICHLAND 	OLD TOWN—60' STANDARD 	60' 	60' 	48' B-B 	OLD TOWN MIXED-USE 2 (OTMU2) 
47 	MAIN STREET 	CHARLES—MILL 	OLD TOWN—72' STANDARD 	80' 	72' 	60' B-B 	OLD TOWN CENTER 
 
  
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04; Ord. No. 3134-10-2004, § I, 10-4-04)  
Secs. 9.5-103—9.5-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 9.5-121. - General provisions. 
(a)  (1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish incentives for the preservation of existing and protected trees, replanting of trees lost due to development and to provide guidelines for minimum landscaping on site as well as within the city rights-of-way. 
(2)  Removal of trees. Unless otherwise allowed by this article, no property shall be clearcut nor shall a tree be removed without first securing the necessary approvals from the city. For purposes of this article, clearcutting shall mean the removal of all trees from a tract of land. Exceptions: 
a.  Single-family or two-family dwellings. Prior city approval and mitigation shall not be required for the removal of a protected tree or clearcutting if the lot or parcel where the tree is being removed is a final platted lot or parcel that is occupied by a single-family or two-family dwelling for which the city has authorized such occupancy. 
b.  Public utilities and infrastructure. Prior city approval and mitigation shall not be required for the removal of a protected tree or clearcutting in any right-of-way or easement area required or acquired by the city that has been or will be dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
c.  As required by city. Prior city approval and mitigation shall not be required for the removal of a protected tree or clearcutting if the city requests removal of the tree(s) because the city has determined such trees cause a danger or a hazardous condition due to a natural disaster or due to the tree being in violation of any clear vision area or other traffic visibility requirements in the general development ordinance. 
d.  Dead or diseased trees. If a certified arborist provides a tree survey and report to the city showing that trees proposed to be removed are already dead, dying, or fatally diseased and such report is provided to and approved by the city prior to such removal, mitigation shall not be required. The building official, or his designee, can request any other information he deems necessary to prove the trees are dead, dying, or fatally diseased. 
(3)  Necessary approvals for removal of protected trees. Unless otherwise included in an exception listed in subsection (2) above, removal of protected trees or clearcutting: (1) for development purposes, may only be done in accordance with an approved final plat with construction plans and/or engineering site plan; or (2) for any other purposes, may only be done in accordance with an approved tree survey and mitigation plan submitted in compliance with section 6-125 and approved by the building official, or his designee. The building official, or his designee, may only approve a tree survey and mitigation plan if it complies with this article and if the existing natural landscape character of the site shall be preserved to the extent reasonable and feasible. In an area of the street frontage containing a stand of recommended trees, the owner shall use his best and good faith effort to preserve such trees. 
(4)  Necessary approval for removal of unprotected trees. Generally, removal of unprotected trees shall be allowed without prior approval by the city, but not withstanding anything to the contrary, no more than ten percent of any trees greater than five caliper inches may be removed from one tract of land without prior written authorization by the building official. The building official shall approve such removal so long as a certified arborist has shown that such trees proposed for removal are unprotected. The building official or his designee may request any other information he deems necessary to prove the trees are unprotected. 
The area within the Old Town center design district shall be exempt from all landscape requirements contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Only trees from the list provided in this section will be considered to meet the requirement of this chapter. For every recommended tree in healthy, thriving condition that is preserved, the developer/owner, the developer/owner shall be given credits as outlined below. Tree caliper shall be measured one foot from the base of the tree. Multi-trunk trees shall count as one tree. Multi-trunk measurements shall be considered as an aggregate total of each trunks individual diameter. Credits for trees saved in the required ten-foot landscape strip will only be applicable for trees required in the landscape strip area. Credits for trees saved in parking areas will be applicable only for trees required in the parking area. 
Size of Existing Trees from Recommended List 	Credits 
5—9" Caliper 	2 
10—14" Caliper 	3 
15—24" Caliper 	4 
25+" Caliper 	5 
Points granted for trees of greater size will be considered on a case-by-case basis by community development staff. 
 
(c)  Where conflict exists regarding existing protected trees versus site layout and parking lot design, developers are encouraged to protect trees. 
(d)  The requirements of this section shall apply to all properties subject to approval of an Old Town development plan. 
(e)  A landscape plan including a tree schedule shall be submitted as part of the any required Old Town development plan. 
(f)  Where the location of existing overhead utility lines conflict with the required landscaping strip, planting of trees that mature at a lesser height shall be required, i.e., Chinese Pistache, Japanese Black Pine and Aristocrat Pear. Where easements containing underground utilities conflict with the required landscaping strip, required tree planting shall be outside the easement on the property owner's side. 
(g)  Required landscaping must be permanently maintained in a healthy growing condition at all times. The property owner is responsible for regular weeding, mowing of grass, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning and other permanent maintenance of all plantings, as needed. 
(h)  Approved tree list. 
(1)  Approved tree list for required landscaping on public right-of-way: 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Size at Maturity 
Pinus nigra 	Austrian Pine 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Pinus eldarica 	Afghan Pine 	>25 ft. (40 ft.) 
Quercus macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Quercus virginiana 	Live Oak 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Quercus shumardii 
(a.k.a. texana) 	Shumard Red Oak (a.k.a. Texas Red Oak) 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Quercus muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Ulmus crassifolia 	Cedar Elm 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Ulmus parvifolia 	Lacebark Elm 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Pinus thunbergii 	Japanese Black Pine 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Carya illinoinensis 	Pecan 	>25 ft. (100 ft.) 
Cercis candensis 	Eastern Red Bud 	<25 ft. (20 ft.) 
Taxodium distichum 	Bald Cypress 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
 
(2)  Approved tree list for required landscaping on private property: 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Size at Maturity 
Chilopsis linearis 	Desert Willow 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Diospyrus texana 	Texas Persimmon 	<25 ft. (10-30 ft.) 
Fraxenis texensis 	Texas Ash 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Liquidambar styraciflua 	Sweetgum 	>25 ft. (70 ft.) 
Pinus nigra 	Austrian Pine 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Pinus eldarica 	Afghan Pine 	>25 ft. (40 ft.) 
Quercus macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Quercus virginiana 	Live Oak 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Quercus shumardii 
(a.k.a. texana) 	Shumard Red Oak 
(a.k.a. Texas Red Oak) 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Quercus muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Ulmus crassifolia 	Cedar Elm 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
Ulmus parvifolia 	Lacebark Elm 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Pinus thunbergii 	Japanese Black Pine 	>25 ft. (30 ft.) 
Carya illinoinensis 	Pecan 	>25 ft. (100 ft.) 
Magnolia grandiflora 	Southern Magnolia 	>25 ft. (60 ft.) 
Acer saccharum "Caddo" 	Caddo Maple 	>25 ft. (60 ft.) 
Quercus accutissima 	Sawtooth Oak 	>25 ft. (50 ft.) 
Taxodium accendens 	Pond Cypress 	>25 ft. (70 ft.) 
Taxodium distichum 	Bald Cypress 	>25 ft. (80 ft.) 
 
(3)  Approved shrubbery list for required landscaping on private property: 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Size at Maturity 
Abelia grandiflora 	Abelia 	#-8 ft. 
Aucuba japonica "Variegata" 	Aucuba 	#-8 ft. 
Berberis thunbergil 	Japanese Barberry 	5-6 ft. 
Eleagnus pungens "Fruitlandi" 	Eleagnus 	#-8 ft. 
Euonymous sp. 	Euonymous 	Up to 12 ft. 
Hibiscus syriacus 	Althea/Rose of Sharon 	8-12 ft. 
Llex comuta "Burford" 	Holly 	#-12 ft. 
Jasminum humile 	Italian Jasmine 	4-6 ft. 
Juniperus sp. 	Juniper 	4-5 ft. 
Lagerstroemia indica 	Crepe Myrtle 	Up to 20 ft. 
Leucophyllum frutescens 	Texas Sage 	4-7 ft. 
Ligustum japonicum 	Waxleaft Ligustrum 	#-10 ft. 
Mahonia bealei 	Leatherleaf Mahonia 	4-6 ft. 
Nandina domestica 	Nandina 	4-6 ft. 
Photina × fraseri 	Photinia (Fraser) 	10-15 ft. 
Pittosporum sp. 	Pittosporum 	15 ft. 
Pyracantha coccinea 	Pyracantha 	#-15 ft. 
Ternstroemia gymnanthera 	Celyera 	#-8 ft. 
Vibumum odoratissimum 	Vibumum 	5-15 ft. 
 
(i)  Protected tree list. Only trees from the list provided in this section will be considered to meet the requirement of a protected tree for this chapter. 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Minimum Caliper 
Carya Illinoinensis 	Pecan 	5" 
Carya Texana 	Texas Hickory 	5" 
Fraxenis Texensis 	Texas Ash 	5" 
Juglans Nigra 	Black Walnut 	5" 
Quercus Macrocarpa 	Bur Oak 	5" 
Quercus Virginiana 	Live Oak 	5" 
Quercus Shumardii 
(a.k.a. Texana) 	Shumard Red Oak 
(a.k.a. Texas Red Oak) 	5" 
Quercus Muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 	5" 
Quercus Accutissima 	Sawtooth Oak 	5" 
Quercus Stellata 	Post Oak 	5" 
Quercus Marilandica 	Black Jack Oak 	5" 
Ulmus Crassifolia 	Cedar Elm 	5" 
Ulmus Parvifolia 	Lacebark Elm 	5" 
 
(j)  Mitigation/replacement costs. 
(1)  City-authorized removal of protected trees. Protected trees, if removed, shall be replanted on a 1:1 ratio per caliper inch and shall be from the protected tree list. If protected trees are removed and not replaced, penalties for removal shall be paid according to the following chart: 
Size of Caliper Removed 	Cost of Removing Protected Trees* 
5—9" 	$500.00 
10—14" 	$1,000.00 
15—24" 	$1,500.00 
25"+ 	$2,000.00 
 
* Per tree 
a.  Payment for tree removal shall be due prior to the approval of the applicable tree survey. Funds received for tree removal shall be designated to a general beautification fund as determined by the city. 
b.  Required tree planting for interior landscaping and any landscape strip will not count towards replanting or the cost assessed for removing protected trees. (See figures 34-37 as examples). 
(2)  Unauthorized removal of trees. 
a.  Any person who removes a tree without the required city authorization set forth in this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each tree removed, and each and every day such violation shall continue until mitigation is provided as set forth in subsection 9.5-121(j)(2)b. 
b.  Any person who removes a tree without the required city authorization set forth in this chapter shall replace such tree on a 2:1 caliper basis or pay the applicable mitigation costs for the equivalent amount of caliper inches. Replacement trees shall be from the city's approved tree list and shall be at least six feet tall. Replacement trees shall be planted in locations as approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 4277-05-2016 , §§ VI—X, 5-16-16)  
Sec. 9.5-122. - Single-family residential landscaping requirements. 
(a)  These standards shall apply to all residential lots, excluding multi-family. These standards may be met by saving existing trees on the site or planting new trees from the approved list. 
(b)  All required trees must be planted prior to request for final building inspection of dwelling units. 
(c)  One shade tree (three-inch caliper minimum) shall be provided for all single-family residential lots less than 6,000 square feet. 
(d)  Two shade trees (three-inch inch caliper minimum) shall be provided for all single-family residential lots of 6,000 square feet to less than 9,000 square feet. 
(e)  Three shade trees (three-inch caliper minimum) shall be provided for all single-family residential lots of 9,000 square feet or more. 
 

Figure 29—Scenario 1, All Trees Removed 
 

Figure 30—Scenario 2, All Trees Saved 
 

Figure 31—Scenario 3, Save Protected Tree, Removed Unprotected Approved Tree 
 

Figure 32—Scenario 4, Remove Protected Tree, Save Unprotected Approved Tree 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 9.5-123. - Multi-family and non-residential landscaping requirements. 
(a)  These standards shall apply to all multi-family residential uses as well as all non-residential uses. These standards may be met by saving existing trees on the site or planting new trees from the approved lists. 
(b)  Landscaping shall be provided utilizing one of two options, or a combination of both. The first option is the planting of a landscaped strip adjacent to all public and private streets. The landscaped strip shall be located within any such street setback and shall begin at the right-of-way line and extend to the front of the building or a maximum depth of ten feet, whichever is greater. Within the landscaped strip, one approved shade tree (2.5" caliper minimum) shall be provided per every 50 linear feet, or any portion thereof, or one approved shrub (five gallon minimum) shall be provided per every ten linear feet, or any portion thereof, of landscaped strip. The first option must be used when a front building setback of larger than ten feet is provided. 
The second option is the planting of approved trees in tree wells provided in the public rights-of-way adjacent to the property being developed. These tree wells shall be flush with the sidewalk surface and of a size to accommodate the selected tree species at maturity. Tree grates shall be provided and shall be a minimum of five feet × five feet in size and constructed of cast iron. Where sidewalk width allows, trees may also be planted in raised beds also of a size to accommodate a mature tree. One shade tree (2.5-inch caliper minimum) shall be provided per every 50 feet, or any portion thereof, of street frontage. Planting of such trees shall also comply with "landscaping of dedicated streets, medians, or other pubic rights-of-way" found elsewhere in this article. 
(c)  Interior parking areas shall be landscaped in addition to any landscaped strip. Trees must be provided in each parking lot spaced at a ratio of one shade tree (2.5-inch caliper minimum) for each 15 parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. These trees must be spaced a maximum of 15 parking spaces apart. Additionally, interior parking lot landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the following table. 
(d)  The required landscaping for parking lots shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout the parking lot, although adjustments may be approved by the community development department where the shape or size of the parking lot, the location of existing trees or other natural constraints reasonably prevent such distribution. 
(e)  All landscaped areas, including the permeable areas and drip lines around trees and planting beds used for visual screening which abut any parking lot or vehicular travel area, shall be protected with curbs, parking blocks or similar barriers sufficient to protect them from vehicular intrusion. 
(f)  An automatic irrigation system is required for all landscaping. Water conservation is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 9.5-124. - Landscaping of dedicated streets, medians or other public rights-of-way. 
(a)  General provisions. All unpaved public medians and parkways shall be landscaped with a minimum of four inches of topsoil, sodded with Bermuda grass and irrigated with a properly designed and installed system. Refer to section 6-97 (h) with regard to irrigation meters. One tree (minimum 2.5-inch caliper from the approved tree list for public right-of-way) shall be planted for every 750 square feet, or any portion thereof in accordance with items (1)—(6) listed below. The location of trees shall be coordinated with the city to avoid conflict with any utilities within the medians and traffic movement. These landscape areas shall be maintained by the developer or owner until adequate coverage is attained at a maintenance level compatible with like areas in other parts of the city, unless other contractual arrangements are made between the developer and the city. The city will assume responsibility after one year. This allows the landscaping materials to go through a full cycle of season change. All water usage shall be metered and paid for by the developer. Individuals installing water meters shall pay administration fees, meter costs, meter deposits, but shall be exempt from capital recovery fees associated with meters installed on city rights-of-way. Within medians, no plantings or irrigation facilities shall be permitted within areas five feet in width or less. All such areas shall be covered with stamped concrete in accordance with city regulations. 
(1)  Trees must not be planted within 30 feet of intersections or utility poles. 
(2)  Trees shall be spaced 45 feet apart when planted in rows and 30 feet apart when planted in groups. 
(3)  Only trees with a mature height of less than 30 feet may be planted directly under utility lines. Trees with mature heights greater than 30 feet must be planted a minimum of 15 feet from the outside edge of the last energized line. 
(4)  Ornamental tree spacing will be evaluated based on the desired effect. 
(5)  Trees must be planted a minimum of ten feet from the edge of the curb. 
(6)  Areas where median cuts are made, solid sod (Bermuda grass) will be used to repair any disturbed area. Stamped concrete will be used to cover median noses to the radius point (maximum) or as defined by the city. 
(b)  Submittal of plans. Landscape construction plans shall be submitted as part of the overall construction plans associated with a related plat or engineering site plan, whichever is applicable. The plans shall include the following: 
(1)  A scale drawing (1 inch = 40 feet) clearly indicating the location, type, size and description of all proposed landscape materials and existing utilities. Planting design of materials must be submitted to ensure adequate coverage. 
(2)  The name of the subdivision or addition, and the name and address of the developer. 
(3)  A north arrow, scale, and date of preparation. 
(4)  A clear indication of the configuration, location, type and size of all irrigation, piping, heads and controllers, including the name, address and license seal of the designer. 
(5)  Such other information reasonably deemed necessary by the community development department. 
(c)  Landscape and irrigation criteria. In areas to be maintained by the city, all landscape and irrigation materials to be used by the developer shall be designed to conserve water and be of low maintenance. All landscape and irrigation improvements shall conform to the requirements of the city governing sight distance for traffic safety and other ordinances of the city. 
A list of all plant types and irrigation plans shall be submitted as part of the engineering site plan for review and approval. The developer shall furnish, or cause to be furnished at its sole expense, all labor, equipment, accessories, and services necessary to install all landscaping materials and irrigation facilities in accordance with the plans as approved by the city. All installation will be inspected by the city. All planting, if maintained by the city, must be approved by the city. 
Irrigation facilities within medians or adjacent to curbs shall be designed and installed with low gallonage and low angle nozzles in such a way as to avoid water overflow into the street. A freeze sensor will be placed in each controller to prevent the irrigation system from activating to create unsafe spillage on roads and/or sidewalks. 
(d)  Maintenance requirement and agreement. Developer, at its sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished, all labor, materials, equipment, accessories, and services necessary to maintain all plant materials when and as they become damaged or die. The developer shall also provide a maintenance fee to the city for ten percent (ten percent) of the total value of the proposed improvements prior to initial acceptance of the project (prior to building permit issuance). The purpose of the maintenance fee is to ensure the proper maintenance and replacement of all landscaping and irrigation facilities beyond the one-year agreement. 
A one-year maintenance agreement shall be executed between the city and the developer to identify the developer's landscaping maintenance responsibility. The agreement shall incorporate the time period between initial acceptance of public improvements associated with the development and final acceptance of landscaping. The one-year agreement shall be executed prior to initial acceptance. Initial acceptance shall be defined, for the purposes of this section, as that time period related to completion and acceptance of all public improvement construction associated with the development. 
In commercial developments, developer, commercial property owners association, or abutting property owners may permanently maintain all landscape and irrigation materials installed in dedicated streets or other public right(s)-of-way (per agreement with the city). 
When a homeowners association or commercial property owners association, or other entity is created for the responsibility of maintaining any areas landscaped under the "median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement," association documents shall be submitted for review and approval by city staff. 
Upon installation, all landscape and irrigation materials within medians or right(s)-of-way shall become the property of the city. 
The city shall periodically inspect the areas landscaped under the "median and right-of-way landscape and irrigation agreement," to determine that such areas are being properly maintained by the developer, or other entity. If the city finds that the developer or other entity is not properly maintaining such areas, the city shall notify the developer or other entity in writing, specifying the deficiencies. If the developer or entity does not remedy such deficiencies within 15 days following receipt of such notice, the city shall have the option of performing the necessary maintenance work itself and bill the developer or other entity for all costs for such maintenance. 
(e)  Miscellaneous median construction. If existing trees are removed, they shall be replaced on a 1:1 basis. 
(f)  Sequencing and final landscaping acceptance. Sequencing and final landscaping acceptance related to public R.O.W. landscaping is required as follows: 
(1)  Landscape construction plans shall be submitted as part of the overall construction plans associated with a related plat or engineering site plan. 
(2)  Obtain city approval of plans. 
(3)  Upon construction completion, the developer, contractor, or responsible party shall pay the ten-percent landscape maintenance fee to the city, have an executed one-year maintenance agreement approved by the P.A.L.S. department, and must obtain an initial acceptance inspection. 
(4)  The developer shall maintain all landscaping features including but not limited to all plantings (grass, trees, etc.) and irrigation systems in accordance with the executed one-year maintenance agreement. 
(5)  At the end of the one-year maintenance agreement (or other timeframes specified in a particular agreement), the P.A.L.S. department shall inspect the R.O.W. for final landscaping acceptance. 
(6)  Upon final acceptance, the city will assume maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-125. - Tree survey and mitigation requirements. 
This section shall apply to all new construction in single-family and commercial developments. 
A tree survey and mitigation plan shall be prepared by a civil engineer, arborist, landscape architect or surveyor. A tree survey and mitigation plan shall be required with single-family preliminary plats, single-family final plats with construction plans, engineering site plan submittals and with individual building permit applications for single-family residential development (new lots). Trees within rights-of-way and city easements do not have to be shown. 
Tree surveys, protection and inspection shall include the following: 
(1)  Single-family: Protected trees (both caliper size and species) outside the building area. 
(2)  Commercial: Protected trees (both caliper size and species) outside the building pad, driveways and mutual accesses. 
(3)  Established drip lines that fall within or encroach onto building areas for single-family parcels of land or building pads for commercial parcels of land, shall be considered as establishing the tree within the "exempted area." 
All protected trees shall be protected during construction by marking protected trees, fencing drip lines and inspections by the developer. All tree protection measures shall be in place and approved prior to the commencement of any on-site construction. Protection measures such as fencing shall be maintained at all times during construction. 
If determined by a registered arborist and the city that a protected tree is diseased, it shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy a third party inspection shall be conducted verifying on-site compliance with the approved plan, paid for by the developer. The results must be submitted to and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 9.5-126—9.5-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SCREENING DEVICES 
 
Sec. 9.5-141. - General provisions. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to provide for visual screening of non-single-family parking lots and trash container areas. 
(b)  A screening device shall be a solid wood, brick, stone or decorative block masonry wall not less than six feet in height measured at the highest finished grade. Brick, stone or decorative block masonry walls shall be designed by a state-licensed engineer. A screening hedge as outlined in this section may also be used as a screening device. Construction and location details of the required screening devices shall be shown as part of the Old Town development plan Old Town development plan for all multi-family and nonresidential uses. The required screening device shall be constructed prior to any building permits being issued for multi-family and non-single-family developments. 
In areas where multi-family development or non-single-family development is proposed adjacent to established single-family residential dwellings, the screening device shall be constructed prior to issuance of a building permit. The developer/owner will not be allowed to escrow the screening device portion of the project costs under the performance escrow policy. 
(c)  A four-foot screening wall maintenance easement shall be provided on private property for all city maintained screening walls adjacent to a city right-of-way. The developer is responsible for obtaining any required off-site easements. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-142. - Screening wall between single-family residential and multi-family residential uses. 
There shall be constructed a screening device along any portion of a multi-family parking lot or trash container area which adjoins any portion of a single-family detached and attached residential use. The construction of the screening wall is the responsibility of the multi-family property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-143. - Screening wall between non-residential and residential uses. 
There shall be constructed a screening device along any portion of a non-residential development parking lot or trash container area which adjoins any portion of a single-family detached or attached residential, townhouse, or multi-family residential use. The construction of the screening wall is the responsibility of the commercial property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-144. - Screening of parking lots and trash container areas. 
Where parking lots or trash container areas are adjacent to the landscape strip along a street right-of-way, evergreen shrubs must be provided for screening. The shrubs must be a minimum of five-gallon size at time of planting. The screening must extend along the entire street frontage of the parking lot, exclusive of driveways. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-145. - Screening hedges. 
When a screening hedge is used as a required screening device plants from the following recommended shrubbery list may be used. Plants shall not be less than five-gallon size at the time of planting, growing to not less than six feet high within one year. The property owner/developer, at its sole expense, shall furnish or cause to be furnished, all labor, materials, equipment, accessories, meters and irrigation and services necessary to maintain all plant materials when and as they become damaged or die. 
Recommended list of shrubbery plants: 
(1)  Arborvitae. 
(2)  Cherry Laurel. 
(3)  Hollies. 
(4)  Junipers. 
(5)  Oleander. 
(6)  Photinia (Chinese, Fraser). 
(7)  Pittosporum. 
(8)  Privet. 
(9)  Viburnum. 
(10)  Wax Myrtle. 
Other varieties complying with height and spacing requirements may be acceptable when approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-146. - Screening requirement for outside storage. 
In the Old Town design district and the Old Town center design district where outside storage of equipment, material, goods and supplies is allowed, all outside storage shall be screened from the view of any adjacent public street by a screening wall not less than six feet in height. Any portion of the storage yard within 25 feet of a street right-of-way shall be screened with a six-foot brick, stone or decorative block masonry wall. Materials and supplies may not be stacked higher than the height of the wall. The wall shall be placed beyond the required ten-foot landscaped strip. Other portions of the storage yard not adjacent to or fronting a street, may be fenced with a solid, opaque fence. 
A detail of the proposed opaque fence in section and elevation and/or a manufacturer's detail and specifications must be provided on the engineering site plan for a project and/or as part of the fence permit process. The fence must be constructed with a manufacturer approved fencing material. The fence must completely conceal outside storage. 
This provision does not apply to display of goods for sale incidental to a retail use, plant nursery, sales and rental of motor vehicles, mobile homes, boats or trailers. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-147. - Screening requirements for roof projections. 
Screening shall also be required for approved projections above the building roofline. These shall include but are not limited to such projections as satellite dishes, communication towers, and heating and air conditioning units. The screening shall consist of materials similar to that used in the front facade of the building and shall be constructed to a height appropriate for screening the allowed projection from view at ground level within 60 feet of the subject building. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-148. - Maintenance requirement. 
(a)  Required screening walls shall be maintained in good condition by the property owner. 
(b)  Required screening walls which are to be maintained by the city when within the right-of-way or within a wall maintenance easement, at the time of initial development, the developer shall pay 20 percent of the total cost of initial construction, to be placed in the city's screening wall maintenance account for future repair and upkeep of the screening walls within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 9.5-149—9.5-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 9.5-161. - General provisions. 
Parking which is provided shall be shown on an Old Town development plan when such a plan is required. All parking and loading or unloading facilities, approaches, access driveways and standing or storage parking spaces for vehicles shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. 
In the Old Town design district there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered, off-street parking spaces. All parking and loading or unloading facilities, approaches, access driveways and standing or storage parking spaces for vehicles shall be paved with concrete or asphalt. This provision shall also apply to any use located on the property with no building or structure, i.e. public or private parking lots. Trailers are defined as vehicles. Single-family residential RV and boat storage are addressed in sections 15-134 and 15-135 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-162. - Parking requirements based on use. 
(a)  Old Town center design district. There shall be no required on-site parking for uses in the Old Town center design district. Businesses are encouraged to provide as many spaces as possible utilizing parking formulas in this section. Parking which is provided shall be shown on an Old Town development plan, when such a plan is required. 
(b)  Old Town design district. All required off-street parking shall be in accordance with the following requirements. 
(1)  Business or professional office: One parking space for each 500 square feet of gross leaseable area. 
(2)  Assembly or exhibition hall: Two parking spaces for each 200 square feet of floor area used thereof. With fixed seating, one parking space for each four seats or bench seating spaces. 
(3)  Day care or school: One parking space for each 500 square feet of floor area plus a minimum three car off-street drive through for pick-up and delivery of children. 
(4)  Dwellings, single-family attached or detached: A minimum of one car garage plus one additional concrete space shall be provided. 
(5)  Dwellings, multi-family: Two parking space for each dwelling unit. 
(6)  Hospital: One space per bed, plus additional parking as required for other listed categories. 
(7)  Hotel, motel or inn: One parking space for each two sleeping rooms or suites plus one space for each 400 square feet of commercial floor area contained therein. 
(8)  Manufacturing or industrial establishment: One parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area. 
(9)  Retail store or personal service establishment: One parking space for each 250 square feet of gross leaseable area. 
(10)  Restaurant, night club, cafe or similar recreation or amusement establishment: One parking spaces for each 100 [200] square feet of floor area. 
(11)  Warehouse or storage: One parking space for each 2,000 square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-163. - Rules for computing number of parking spaces. 
(a)  "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to the nearest whole number. 
(b)  The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. 
(c)  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this chapter is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwellings units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this chapter is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. 
(d)  In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-164. - Location of parking spaces. 
(a)  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed 500 feet from any other nonresidential building served. 
(b)  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes, shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned and shall be filed with the site plan application. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of property used for detached single family or duplex residential use to allow a driveway or parking surface in the front yard to exceed 27 feet in width on lots 60 feet wide or greater or 45 percent of the lot width for lots less than 60 feet in width. For purposes of this requirement, the lot width shall mean the width of the lot measured at the front property line. In no case shall the parking or driveway area cover more than 45 percent of the front yard of the lot. Driveways shall be paved with concrete except that expansion of an existing driveway may be with concrete or a continuation of an existing nonconforming material adjacent to the side of the driveway being expanded, provided that the total parking area complies with the width requirements herein and the 45 percent maximum coverage requirements herein. A permit is required for all driveway and parking surface improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3405-01-2007, § 2, 1-22-07; Ord. No. 3559-04-2008, § 1, 4-7-08)  
Sec. 9.5-165. - Minimum dimensions for off-street parking. 
(a)  The minimum dimensions for off-street parking shall be as follows: 
(1)  90-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide or less than 18 feet in length. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 24 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(2)  60-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 17 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 20 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(3)  45-degree angle parking: Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 16 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 18 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
(4)  Parallel parking: Each parking space shall be not less than ten feet wide nor less than 24 feet in length. Parallel parking will not be considered except when it can be situated in such a manner that persons entering and exiting vehicles will be out of the flow of traffic. 
(b)  When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of said alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement. Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts herein specified, or when off-street parking facilities are provided but not required by this chapter, said off-street parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space herein specified. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-166. - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Handicapped parking spaces and/or loading zones shall be provided by the building or facility owner, agent, or occupants. All other requirements shall be established by the state or federal authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-167. - Fire lanes. 
When required, all fire lanes shall conform to the current edition of the latest addition of the International Fire Code and amendments adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 9.5-168—9.5-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - MISCELLANEOUS DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 9.5-181. - Exterior finish requirements. 
The Old Town center design district and the Old Town design district encourage the use of traditional exterior building materials such as brick, stone, and wood. The use of appropriate exterior finish materials for the architectural style utilized is strongly recommended and will be reviewed by the Old Town design review committee for appropriateness. Modern materials that resemble traditional building materials, such as cementitious wallboard siding, are allowable as building exterior finishes, when the overall application and design is done in such a manner as to be appropriate in Old Town. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-182. - Hotel/motel/extended stay facilities. 
(a)  General provisions. The purpose of this section is to establish minimum standards for all hotels, motels and extended-stay facilities constructed or modified in such a manner that requires the creation of or modification to a development plan as outlined in this chapter. 
(b)  Minimum guest room size. The minimum guest room or suite size shall be 400 square feet of livable floor space. This requirement shall be exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways and entry halls. A room size summary table shall be included on the Old Town development plan for all hotel, motel and extended stay facilities. 
(c)  Guest room access. All guest rooms or suites shall be accessible from a common interior corridor. 
(d)  On-site staffing. At least one staff member shall be available on-site 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-183. - Color requirements. 
Color may be used to embellish building facade elements and should enhance the attractive details of the building and not disguise or overpower them. Colors should compliment neighboring buildings and reflect a historic color palette. Extremely bright, fluorescent or neon colors shall not be permitted as the primary color on the facades of buildings in the Old Town center design district and the Old Town design district. Only colors similar to or comparable to the current color palette certified by the National Trust for Historic Preservation will be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Secs. 9.5-184—9.5-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - OLD TOWN DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
Sec. 9.5-190. - General provisions. 
The Old Town area of the city has served as the cultural and economic center of the community for decades and retains many buildings that convey its early character. This area contains numerous buildings with traditional architectural styles that enhance the community's quality of life as well as the economy of the community. Maintaining and enhancing an Old Town look and feel is critical to the success of Old Town. 
In recent years, citizens and business leaders have come to recognize that the character of development in this area is of community interest. This area contains the original downtown or commercial center for the city as well as the original residential neighborhoods that surround and supported the downtown. Major commercial streets lead through the downtown and the area also incorporates some blocks of buildings that were originally residential and have been adapted to commercial uses. 
These design guidelines are written to assure that providing direction for future improvements in the Old Town area enhances revitalization efforts and protects property investments. The city wishes to protect those historic resources that exist in Old Town and to revitalize the area by encouraging new development and building rehabilitation. However, new development and building rehabilitation must be done in a manner that compliments and supports the area's existing look and feel. 
Towards this goal, the Old Town design district and Old Town center design district have been established to protect and enhance the older architectural styles found in the Old Town area of the city. The boundaries of the district are College Street as the northern boundary, Railroad Street on the east, Purnell Street as the southern boundary, and Stemmons Freeway (IH 35E) on the west (appendix A). 
This section provides basic requirements as well as guidance for improvements to all properties and types of work within the Old Town design district and Old Town center design district. The guidelines are for property and business owners planning exterior alterations, additions to or the rehabilitation of existing buildings. They also apply to the design and construction of new single-family residential, multi-family residential, commercial, office, medical and industrial buildings. 
The guidelines will assist interested parties in understanding the aesthetic character of the buildings and environment in which they live, and assist owners when they are faced with decisions about renovation, repair, maintenance, rehabilitation and new construction. The guidelines are not a rigid set of rules and do not require that buildings be restored to an historic period or style. Rather, their purpose is to provide: 
(1)  Guidance to property owners and tenants about buildings, their distinctive characteristics and how to maintain them; 
(2)  Various appropriate ways to address design, repair and rehabilitation issues; 
(3)  Good maintenance practices; and 
(4)  Appropriate ways to design new, compatible infill buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-191. - Why have design guidelines? 
The design guidelines provide a basis for making decisions about the appropriate treatment of traditional resources and compatible new construction. They also serve as a planning tool for property and business owners and design professionals who seek to make improvements that may affect older resources. While the design guidelines are written such that they can be used by the layman to plan improvements, property owners are strongly encouraged to enlist the assistance of qualified design and planning professionals, including architects and engineers. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-192. - How are the guidelines used? 
(a)  The Old Town design review committee is authorized to enforce these Old Town design standards for new construction and renovations by hearing and deciding applications for letters of design approval. While the design committee may be flexible in applying these standards to projects, the intent of these regulations is ensure that new construction and renovations have the appearance of belonging in Old Town. Property owners, real estate agents, developers, tenants and architects should use the guidelines contained in this document when considering a project. For any project subject to review, the applicant should refer to these guidelines early in the project planning, to avoid planning efforts that later may prove to be inappropriate. It is also important to recognize that, in each case, a unique combination of design variables is at play and, as a result, the degree to which each relevant guideline must be met may vary. In making its determination of the appropriateness of a project, OTDRC's overall concerns are that: 
(1)  The proposed work generally complies with the criteria in these standards. 
(2)  The integrity of an individual historic structure is preserved, as much as possible. 
(3)  New buildings or additions are designed to be compatible with surrounding properties. 
(4)  The overall character of Old Town is protected. 
(b)  The design review process is "reactive," in that it only applies to proposed actions initiated by a property owner. While it guides an approach to certain design problems by offering alternative solutions, it does not dictate a specific outcome and it does not require a property owner to instigate improvements that are not contemplated. While ordinary repair and maintenance does not usually require approval, a Letter of design Approval is necessary for any change to the exterior of a building that requires a building permit. Seemingly unimportant changes, like enclosing a porch, can have a dramatic effect on the visual character of an existing resource and therefore are of concern to the city. 
(1)  The proposed work generally complies with the criteria in these standards. 
(2)  The integrity of an individual historic structure is preserved, as much as possible. 
(3)  New buildings or additions are designed to be compatible with surrounding properties. 
(4)  The overall character of Old Town is protected. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04)  
Sec. 9.5-193. - Old Town center design district. 
(a)  Goal statement. The Old Town center design district should continue to develop in a coordinated manner so that an overall sense of visual continuity is achieved. The dominant character of this area should be that of a retail-oriented, commercial environment, with an active street edge that is inviting to pedestrians while also accommodating automobiles. Development should include a mix of building types, including older structures and compatible newer ones. Each should reflect the design trends of its own time, while also contributing to a sense of visual continuity and strengthening the pedestrian experience. In addition, a combination of uses is encouraged, including residential, office and retail. 
(b)  Key principles. 
(1)  Building setbacks. Buildings in commercial areas are aligned immediately at the inside edge of the sidewalk. This contributes to a sense of visual continuity. A typical building in the Old Town center also has its primary entrance oriented to the street. This helps establish a "pedestrian-friendly" quality. In most cases, similar entryways are evenly spaced along a block, creating a rhythm that also contributes to the sense of visual continuity. These entrances are also typically recessed from the sidewalk edge and have a clearly defined primary entrance. For most commercial buildings, this should be a recessed entryway. Secondary public entrances to commercial spaces are also encouraged on a larger building. 
Structures in the Old Town center should contribute to a strong "building wall" along the street. A new building should align at the front lot line and be built out to the full width of the parcel (i.e., to the side lot lines). Although small gaps can occur between some structures, these are exceptions. 
(2)  Mass and scale. Patterns are created along the street by the repetition of similarly sized building elements. For example, uniform facade widths evenly spaced in downtown create a rhythm that contributes to the visual continuity of the area. 
(3)  Building form. One of the most prominent unifying elements of the Old Town center is the similarity in building form. Commercial buildings are simple rectangular solids, deeper than they are wide. This characteristic is important and should be continued. Also, commercial roof forms appear flat, although there is typically a slight pitch to it for water to drain. This characteristic is important and should be preserved. 
(4)  Materials. Building materials of new structures should contribute to the visual continuity of the area. They should appear similar to those seen traditionally to establish a sense of visual continuity. Brick and cast stone are the dominant materials and their use in new construction is preferred. 
(5)  Architectural character. The street level floors of traditional commercial buildings are clearly distinguishable from the upper floors. First floors are predominantly fixed plate glass with a small percentage of opaque materials. Upper floors are the reverse: opaque materials dominate, and windows appear as smaller openings puncturing the solid walls. The floor-to-floor height on the street level is also generally taller than the upper floors. This feature should also be expressed in new construction. 
(c)  Design elements. This section presents design guidelines for individual building elements that are influential to the overall character of Old Town buildings. When the elements are appropriately use in combination with one-another buildings will reflect an appropriate look and feel that is consistent with the goals of the Old Town center. Within each element are individual goals and design guidelines statements upon which the city will base its decisions as to the appropriateness of any new or remodeled structure. 
(1)  The architectural style of all new and rehabilitate buildings in the Old Town center should be consistent and compatible with traditional buildings of the area. 
While it is important that buildings be compatible with the surrounding traditional commercial context, it is not necessary that they imitate older building styles. The property owner is encouraged to use the one of the styles listed below, or an appropriate variation, in designing the overall character of their building. 
a.  New interpretations of traditional building styles are encouraged. 
b.  A new design that draws upon the fundamental similarities among older buildings in the area without copying them is preferred. This will allow the building to be seen as a product of its own time and yet be compatible with its historic neighbors. 
c.  Buildings that are similar in scale and overall character to those seen historically are strongly encouraged. 
d.  Infill should be a balance of new and old in design. 
e.  This applies to architectural details as well as the overall design of a building. 
Italianate—Circa 1885—1900. Originally inspired by farmhouses found in Northern Italy, this blending of classical and romantic features became one of the most popular of the picturesque styles in the United States. Because of its ornate details, such as bracketed cornices, this style was easily adapted to simple buildings and storefronts. As the details and features of this style were capable of being interpreted in wood, masonry or iron, it was also very adaptable in the various regions of the country. With this adaptability and the sensibilities of the times, its popularity grew for commercial buildings. 
Characteristics. 
Tall, narrow, double-hung windows, often with arched or round arch heads (commonly referred to as "punched" windows as opposed to "ribbon" windows) 
Windowpanes are either one-over-one or two-over-two 
Protruding sills 
Quoins at building corners 
Double doors with glass panels 
Transom, often curved, above the front door 
Brackets, modillions and dentil courses 
Flat roof with ornate cornices 
Decorative paired brackets 
Vernacular commercial storefronts—Circa 1900—1920. Usually between one and four stories, the vernacular commercial building is divided horizontally into two distinct bands. The first floor is more commonly transparent, so goods can be displayed, while the second story is usually reserved for residential or storage space. A steel beam that spans the glass opening typically supports the upper floor. However, many one-story examples also exist. A kick plate is found below the display window while above the display window, a smaller band of glass, a transom, is seen. Also, the main door is frequently recessed. 
These buildings have stone and brick facades. Ornamental detail exists, but is simple, limited to a shallow molding such as a cornice. Some cornices were made of masonry, while others were made of stamped metal. Many carry simplified Italianate detailing. In essence, these buildings lack distinctive detail, contrasting them with the revival styles that were also popular during this period. 
Characteristics. 
Cast-iron supported storefronts 
Large display windows 
Transom lights 
Kickplate 
Recessed entry 
Tall second story windows 
Cornice 
(2)  The use of traditional building materials found in the area should be continued. 
a.  Materials shall appear to be similar to those used traditionally. 
b.  Brick and cast stone were the traditional materials and are preferred. 
c.  A simple material finish is encouraged for a large expanse of wall plane. 
d.  A matte, or non-reflective, finish is preferred. 
e.  Polished stone should be avoided as a primary material. 
f.  Use the gentlest means possible to clean the surface of a structure. Harsh cleaning methods, such as sandblasting, can damage the historic materials, changing their appearance. Such procedures are inappropriate. 
g.  Original building materials or features shall not be covered. Synthetic stucco, panelized brick, vinyl, aluminum or other composite siding materials are not appropriate. 
h.  Removing later covering materials that have not achieved historic significance is encouraged. 
i.  In some instances a later covering may have achieved historic significance, especially if it was applied early in the building's history. When this is the case, the later covering may be maintained on the structure. 
j.  An applicant may not re-side a building with another covering material if one already exists. Removing the covering to expose the original material is appropriate in such a case. Once the covering siding has been removed, repair the original underlying material. 
The appropriate use of color can be used to embellish building facade elements and enhance the attractive details of commercial buildings and should not disguise or overpower them. Colors should compliment neighboring buildings and reflect a traditional color palette. Extremely bright, fluorescent or neon colors shall not be permitted as the primary color on the facades of buildings in the Old Town design district. Only colors similar to or comparable to the palette adopted by the National Trust for Historic Preservation will be allowed. 
(3)  Maintain the traditional mass, size and form of buildings seen along the street (i.e., a building should be a rectangular mass that is one- to three-stories in height). 
A building's mass and size is its exterior bulk and form is its shape in its relationship to its adjoining buildings and to its users-pedestrians. 
a.  They are rectangular in shape, deeper than wide. 
b.  Building heights vary in the Old Town center and yet there is a strong sense of similarity in scale. 
c.  Facades and sidewalls are rectangular. 
d.  Sidewalls should avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted walls. 
e.  Building wall offsets, including projections, recesses, changes in floor level, or changes of materials should be used to add architectural variety and interest, and to relieve the visual impact of a blank wall. 
f.  Individual buildings are attached, often sharing interior sidewalls. 
g.  While buildings may span several of the 20- to 30-foot wide properties, the individual lot width is still expressed as a distinct bay or module. Buildings should reflect this pattern. 
h.  Traditional floor heights should be expressed with horizontal moldings, alignment of windows and other architectural details. 
i.  Floor-to-floor heights shall appear to be similar to those seen traditionally. In particular, the windows in a building should appear similar in height to those seen traditionally. Windowsills, moldings and cornices are among those elements that may be seen to align. 
j.  The character of the roof is a major feature for most historic structures. When repeated along the street, the repetition of similar roof forms contributes to a sense of visual continuity for the Old Town center. 
k.  Roofs are flat, hidden by a parapet wall which add architectural character. 
l.  Parapets on side facades should step down towards the rear of the building. 
m.  Gable roof forms may also be considered if they are obscured by a "false front" storefront similar to those seen historically. 
 

False Front (Pediment and Flat Roof with Parapet 
n.  A parapet wall should not be altered, especially those on primary elevations or highly visible facades. 
o.  When a parapet wall becomes deteriorated, there is sometimes a temptation to lower or remove it. Avoid doing this because the flashing for the roof is often tied into the parapet, and disturbing it can cause moisture problems. 
p.  Avoid waterproofing treatments, which can interfere with the parapet's natural ability to dry out quickly when it gets wet. 
(4)  Design commercial buildings with architectural elements similar to those seen traditionally (i.e., a commercial building should include: recessed entries, display windows, kickplates, transom windows, midbelt cornices, cornices or pediments and vertically oriented upper-story windows), 
Architectural elements are the individual components of a building, including walls, doors, windows, cornices, parapets, roofs, pediments, and other features. Ornamentation and details of elements such as cornices and parapets are original components that "dress up" a building and give it a sense of style and character. Ornamental items include hoodmolds, trim at doors and windows; plaques and medallions; signboards or sign panels; date or name stones; and simple geometric shapes in metal, stone, or concrete. For a commercial storefront building, a rehabilitation or new project should preserve or include as many as possible these defining elements. 
Cornices, which are usually found at the top of building walls, and ornamental moldings or belt courses, which are located just above storefronts, are horizontal projecting elements that provide a visual break in or termination to a wall. A parapet is an upward extension of a building wall above the roofline, sometimes ornamental, capped with brick, stone or tile, and frequently decorative elements or panels are placed in it, and sometimes plain, used to give a building a greater feeling of height or a better sense of proportion. 
Commercial buildings should, for the most part, all relate to the street and to pedestrians in the same manner: with a clearly defined primary entrance and large display windows. The repetition of these standard elements creates a visual unity on the street that should be preserved. 
a.  Display windows: The main portion of glass on the storefront, where goods and services are displayed. This will help maintain the interest of the street to pedestrians by providing views to goods and activities inside first floor windows. 
b.  Transom: The upper portion of the display window, separated by a frame. 
c.  Kickplate: Found beneath the display window. Sometimes called a bulkhead panel. 
d.  Entry: Usually set back from the sidewalk in a protected recess. 
e.  Upper-story windows: Windows located above the street level. These usually have a vertical orientation. 
f.  Cornice molding: A decorative band at the top of the building. 
 

Design Elements 
Storefronts. 
a.  Alternative designs that are contemporary interpretations of traditional storefronts may be considered. 
b.  Where the original is missing and no evidence of its character exists, a new design that uses the traditional elements may be considered. However, the new design should continue to convey the character of typical storefronts, including the transparent character of the display window. 
c.  Retain the kickplate as a decorative panel. The kickplate, located below the display window, adds interesting detail to the streetscape and should be preserved. If the original kickplate is covered with another material, consider exposing the original design. If the original kickplate is missing, develop a sympathetic replacement design. Wood is an appropriate material for replacements on most styles. However, ceramic tile and masonry may also be considered when appropriately used with the building style. 
 

Kickplate replacement 
d.  Significantly increasing (or decreasing) the amount of glass will negatively affect the integrity of a structure. 
e.  On traditional storefronts, first floors should be more transparent than upper floors. Upper floors should appear more solid than first floors. 
f.  Avoid a blank wall appearance that does not provide interest to pedestrians. 
g.  Large surfaces of glass are inappropriate on the upper floors and sides of commercial buildings. If necessary, divide large glass surfaces into smaller windows that are in scale with those seen traditionally. 
Entrances. 
a.  Maintain recessed entries where they are found. 
b.  The repetition of recessed entries provides a rhythm of shadows along the street, which helps establish a sense of scale. 
c.  These recessed entries were designed to provide protection from the weather and the repeated rhythm of these shaded areas along the street helps to identify business entrances. Typically, recessed entries were set back between three and five feet. 
d.  Restore the historic recessed entry if it has been altered. 
e.  Avoid doors that are flush with the sidewalk, especially those that swing outward. 
f.  Where entries were not recessed historically, maintain them in their original position. However, one may also need to comply with other code requirements, including door width, direction of swing and construction. In some cases, entries must comply with accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Note, however, that some flexibility in application of these other regulations is provided for historic properties. 
g.  Building entrances should appear similar to those used traditionally in the block. 
h.  Clearly define the primary entrance with an awning, canopy or other architectural or landscape feature. 
i.  Secondary public entrances are also encouraged on a larger building or along an alley if there is parking in the rear of the site. 
Windows and doors. Windows and doors are some of the most important character-defining features of older structures. They give scale to buildings and provide visual interest to the composition of individual facades. Distinct window and door designs in fact help define many building styles. Windows and doors often are inset into relatively deep openings or they have surrounding casings and sash components that have a substantial dimension that cast shadows which also contributes to the character of the historic style. A typical, upper-story window is twice as tall as it is wide. These proportions are within a limited range; therefore, upper-story windows in new construction should relate to the window proportions seen traditionally. Features important to the character of a window include its clear glass, frame, sash, muntins, mullions, glazing, sills, heads, jambs, moldings, operation, location and relation to other windows. Features important to the character of a door include the door itself, doorframe, screen door, threshold, glass panes, paneling, hardware, detailing, transoms and flanking sidelights. 
a.  Retain the original shape of the transom glass in historic storefronts. Transoms, the upper glass band of traditional storefronts, introduced light into the depths of the building, saving on light costs. These bands should not be removed or enclosed. 
b.  The shape of the transom is important to the proportion of the storefront, and it should be preserved in its historic configuration. 
c.  If the original glass is missing, installing new glass is preferred. 
d.  Preserve the position, number, size and arrangement of historic windows and doors in a building wall. Many windows are "one-over-one," in that a single pane of glass is in both the upper and lower sashes. Others are "two-over-one," with two panes (or lights) in the upper sash and one is in the lower sash. These arrangements are preferred. 
e.  Enclosing an historic opening in a key character-defining facade is inappropriate, as is adding a new opening. 
f.  Do not close down an original opening to accommodate a smaller window. Restoring original openings which have been altered over time is encouraged. 
g.  Traditionally, windows had a vertical emphasis. The proportions of these windows contribute to the character of each residence and commercial storefront. 
h.  If it is broken or has been removed in the past, consider replacing it with new glass. If security is a concern, consider using wire glass, tempered glass, or light metal security bars (preferably on the interior). 
i.  Installing window air-conditioners in windows on building fronts is inappropriate. 
j.  A new or replacement window or door should match the appearance of the original. While replacing an entire window or door is discouraged, it may be necessary in some cases. Although wood is preferred as a replacement material, metal is common on the market today and sometimes is suggested for replacement. It is possible to consider alternative materials, if the resulting appearance matches the original as closely as possible. The substitute also should have a demonstrated durability in this climate. 
k.  Very ornate windows or doors that are not appropriate to the building's architectural style are inappropriate. 
l.  Windows should align with others in a block. Windows, lintels and their trim elements should align with those on adjacent older buildings. 
Architectural embellishment. 
a.  Preserve the character of the cornice line. Most historic commercial buildings have cornices to cap their facades. Their repetition along the street contributes to the visual continuity on the block. 
b.  Reconstruct a missing cornice when historic evidence is available. Use historic photographs to determine design details of the original cornice. 
c.  Replacement elements should match the original in every detail, especially in overall size and profile. 
d.  The substitution of another old cornice for the original may be considered, provided that the substitute is similar to the original. 
e.  Appropriate materials include stone, brick and stamped metal. 
Awnings and canopies. 
a.  An awning or canopy should be similar to those seen traditionally. Traditionally, awnings and canopies were noteworthy features of buildings in downtown and their continued use is preferred. 
b.  An awning compatible in material and construction to the style of the building is encouraged. 
c.  Canvas awnings are inappropriate in the Old Town center. 
d.  Use awning colors that are compatible with the overall color scheme of the facade. Solid colors or simple, muted-stripe patterns are appropriate. 
e.  The awning should fit the opening of the building. 
f.  Simple shed shapes are appropriate for rectangular openings. 
g.  Odd shapes, bull nose awnings and bubble awnings are inappropriate on most historic structures. 
h.  Internal illumination of an awning is inappropriate. Lights may be concealed in the underside of a canopy, however. 
i.  A fixed metal canopy may be considered. 
j.  Appropriate supporting mechanisms are wall-mounted brackets, chains and posts. 
k.  Mount an awning or canopy to accentuate character-defining features. It should be mounted to highlight moldings that may be found above the storefront and should not hide character-defining features such as transom windows. Its mounting should not damage significant features and traditional details. 
(5)  To design a project that reinforces the retail oriented function of the street and enhances its pedestrian character: 
a.  Maintain the distinction between the street level and the upper floor. 
b.  The first floor of the primary facade should be predominantly transparent glass. 
c.  Upper floors should be perceived as being more opaque than the lower floor. 
d.  Highly reflective or darkly tinted glass is inappropriate. 
e.  Express the traditional distinction in floor heights between street level and upper levels through detailing, materials and fenestration. The presence of a belt course is an important feature in this relationship. 
 

Example 
(6)  To promote friendly, walkable streets (i.e., projects that support pedestrian activity and contribute to the quality of life are encouraged). 
(7)  To provide site amenities, such as benches, lights, waste receptacles, landscaping, etc., to enhance the pedestrian experience. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-194. - Old Town design district commercial, multi-family residential and mixed use. 
(a)  Goal statement. The commercial component of Old Town outside the Old Town center design district should develop in a manner that is inviting to pedestrians while also accommodating automobiles and architecturally complementary to the Old Town center. Development should include a mix of building types, including older structures and compatible newer ones. Each should reflect the design trends of its own time, while also contributing to a sense of visual continuity and strengthening the pedestrian experience. In addition, a combination of uses within a single structure or development is encouraged, including residential, office and retail. 
(b)  Key principles. 
(1)  Building setbacks. A wide variety of building setbacks can be seen throughout the Old Town design district. Much of this variety is due to the influence of the automobile and need to provide on-site parking and development in a post-zoning ordinance era. This parking typically has been provided in front of the building for consumer convenience. However, this trend has caused an erosion of the edge of buildings located along a sidewalk like that seen historically. Therefore, it is strongly encouraged that new developments should build on this original tradition of building placement and locate parking in the side and rear when feasible. That being stated, it is a vital interest to the city to preserve the mature tree canopy within the area as much as possible and locate buildings in a manner that preserves the natural character of the area. 
(2)  Mass and scale. A variety of building sizes exist in this area. While contemporary design approaches are encouraged, developments should continue to exhibit a variety in sizes, similar to the buildings seen traditionally. 
(3)  Building materials. Building materials of structures should contribute to the visual continuity of the area. They should appear similar to those seen traditionally to establish a sense of visual continuity. 
(4)  Architectural character. The Old Town center is made up of architectural styles from the early 1900s. The city wishes to build upon these architectural styles by expanding their use outside the Old Town center. Commercial, office, medical, retail and industrial buildings throughout the Old Town design district should build upon these styles utilizing their architectural features and details on new structures. They should also relate to one another through the consistent use of similar building materials, storefronts, recessed entries and the alignment of these different elements along a block. This tradition is strongly encouraged for new developments in the district. The neighborhoods of the design district represent a number of different architectural styles and reflect the time periods in which they were constructed. Commercial construction within the district may utilize residential architectural design thus blending the uses and the visual harmony of differing construction eras. 
(5)  Pedestrian environment. The design district should provide a controlled, organized automobile system that provides a safe pedestrian environment. Development should include direct, well marked linkages from the sidewalk to a well defined front door entry. Streets, sidewalks and landscaping should define the road edge and encourage walking, sitting and other pedestrian activities. Projects that occur in the area will also have automobile activity associated with them. This should not, however, make it an unsafe environment for the pedestrian. Automobile circulation patterns, both internal and external, should be clearly identified and should not interfere with pedestrian circulation systems. 
(c)  Design elements. This section presents design guidelines for individual building elements that are influential to the overall character of buildings in Old Town. When the elements are appropriately use in combination with one-another buildings will reflect an appropriate look and feel that is consistent with the goals of the Old Town design district. Within each element are individual goals and design guidelines statements upon which the city will base its decisions as to the appropriateness of any new or remodeled structure. 
(1)  The architectural style of all new and rehabilitated buildings in the Old Town design district should be designed to reflect either traditional Old Town center commercial buildings or be consistent and compatible with that of the traditional residential styles of the area. 
Buildings that are designed to reflect a traditional commercial style of Old Town should utilize an architectural style that gives the appearance of belonging in Old Town. While it is important that buildings be compatible with the surrounding traditional commercial context, it is not necessary that they exactly imitate older building styles. Buildings that are designed to reflect a traditional residential style should incorporate an individual style and not blend various styles found in the area. The property owner is encouraged to use the one of the styles listed below, or an appropriate variation, in designing the overall character of their building. 
a.  New interpretations of traditional building styles are encouraged. 
b.  A new design that draws upon the fundamental similarities among older buildings in the area without copying them is preferred. This will allow the building to be seen as a product of its own time and yet be compatible with its historic neighbors. 
c.  Buildings that are similar in scale and overall character to those seen historically are strongly encouraged. 
d.  Infill should be a balance of new and old in design. 
e.  This applies to architectural details as well as the overall design of a building. 
Italianate—Circa 1885—1900. Originally inspired by farmhouses found in Northern Italy, this blending of classical and romantic features became one of the most popular of the picturesque styles in the United States. Because of its ornate details, such as bracketed cornices, this style was easily adapted to simple buildings and storefronts. As the details and features of this style were capable of being interpreted in wood, masonry or iron, it was also very adaptable in the various regions of the country. With this adaptability and the sensibilities of the times, its popularity grew for commercial buildings. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Tall, narrow, double-hung windows, often with arched or round arch heads (commonly referred to as "punched" windows as opposed to "ribbon" windows) 
b.  Windowpanes are either one-over-one or two-over-two 
c.  Protruding sills 
d.  Quoins at building corners 
e.  Double doors with glass panels 
f.  Transom, often curved, above the front door 
g.  Brackets, modillions and dentil courses 
h.  Flat roof with ornate cornices 
i.  Decorative paired brackets 
Vernacular commercial storefronts—Circa 1900—1920. Usually between one and four stories, the vernacular commercial building is divided horizontally into two distinct bands. The first floor is more commonly transparent, so goods can be displayed, while the second story is usually reserved for residential or storage space. A steel beam that spans the glass opening typically supports the upper floor. However, many one-story examples also exist. A kick plate is found below the display window while above the display window, a smaller band of glass, a transom, is seen. Also, the main door is frequently recessed. 
These buildings have stone and brick facades. Ornamental detail exists, but is simple, limited to a shallow molding such as a cornice. Some cornices were made of masonry, while others were made of stamped metal. Many carry simplified Italianate detailing. In essence, these buildings lack distinctive detail, contrasting them with the revival styles that were also popular during this period. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Cast-iron supported storefronts 
b.  Large display windows 
c.  Transom lights 
d.  Kickplate 
e.  Recessed entry 
f.  Tall second story windows 
g.  Cornice 
Queen Anne Victorian Style Residential—Circa 1880—1910. Decorative detailing is one of the main characteristics of this architectural style. Houses typically have irregular shaped, hipped roofs often with steep pitches. Typically the buildings are asymmetrical in shape with one dominant front-facing gable. Extensive detailing is utilized to avoid a smooth-wall appearance. Detailing can take multiple forms such as patterned shingles; "gingerbread" type spindlework; and cutaway bay windows and towers. Porches are partial or full-width and often extend along one sidewall. Spindlework is also used extensively on porches and friezes. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Steeply pitched, hipped roofs of irregular shape 
b.  Dominant front-facing gable 
c.  Irregular shapes utilizing cutaway bay window and towers 
d.  Extensive detailing to avoid a smooth-walled appearance 
e.  Asymmetrical faced with partial or full-width porch 
f.  Extensive use of spindlework on porches and friezes 
Folk Victorian Style Residential—Circa 1870—1910. This style is defined by the presence of Victorian decorative detailing on simple folk house forms and are typically much less elaborate than the Victorian styles that they mimicked. The primary areas for the detailing are the porch and cornice line. There are a number of subtypes but the most common one in Old Town is the asymmetrical gable front with wing and covered porch. Porch supports are commonly either turned spindles or square posts with beveled corners. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Simple folk house form 
b.  Gable front with wing 
c.  Single story with covered porch 
d.  Spindle work porch detailing 
Prairie Style Residential—Circa 1900—1920. This style is sometimes referred to as the Prairie Box or American Foursquare. It has a simple square or rectangular plan, low pitched hipped roof and symmetrical facade. One story wings, porches or carports are common and subordinate to the principal two story mass. The entrance is often a conspicuous focal point of the facade. Hipped dormers are common as are full-width front porches. Characteristic horizontal decorative elements often consist of contrasting caps on porch or balcony railings as well as piers and chimneys. Other elements include contrasting wood trim between stories and horizontal siding. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Low-pitched roof usually hipped. 
b.  Widely overhanging eaves 
c.  Two stores with one story wings or porches 
d.  Eaves, cornices, and facade detailing with horizontal lines 
e.  Massive, square porch supports 
f.  Hipped dormers 
Craftsman Style Residential—Circa 1905—1930. This particular style originated in California and is often referred to as a bungalow, especially in the single story version. Front gabled porches and house are most common. Porches may be either full or partial width and may be covered by either the main roof or a separate, extended roof. Single story is the most common but one and one half are not uncommon. Columns for porch roofs are typically shorter, square upper columns resting upon more massive piers. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Low-pitched, gabled roof (occasionally hipped). 
b.  Wide, unenclosed eave overhang 
c.  Roof rafters usually exposed 
d.  Decorative beams or braces commonly added under gables 
e.  Full or partial width covered porches 
f.  Tapered square porch columns 
Multi-family residential. New or renovated multi-family projects in the Old Town design district should utilize a style that is consistent with commercial buildings located in the Old Town center design district. Buildings should align closer to the street than a typical single-family detached structure, providing resident parking in the rear to enhance the pedestrian nature of the area and to showcase the architectural features of the structure. 
(2)  The use of traditional building materials found in the area should be continued. 
Brick and stone-used for building walls, chimneys, porch supports and foundations-were the primary materials used. Wood siding also occurred on residential-type structures with painted, horizontal clapboard being the most popular. In each case, the distinct characteristics of the building material, including the scale of the material unit, its texture and finish, contribute to the historic character of a building. 
The best way to preserve or rehabilitate older building materials is through well-planned maintenance. Wood surfaces, for example, should be protected with a good application of paint. In some cases, historic building materials may be deteriorated. When deterioration occurs, repairing the material rather than replacing it is preferred. Frequently, damaged materials can be patched or consolidated using special bonding agents. In other situations, however, some portion of the material may be beyond repair and may be replaced. The new material should match the original in appearance. Rather than replace original materials, some property owners may consider covering them. Aluminum and vinyl siding are examples of materials that are often discussed and are not allowed. 
a.  Materials shall appear to be similar to those used traditionally. 
b.  Brick and cast stone were the traditional materials of commercial style buildings 
c.  Brick, cast stone and horizontal lap siding were the traditional materials of residential style buildings. When horizontal siding is required a modern material such as hardi-plank may be used to achieve the desired look while providing a material that is more durable and requires less maintenance. 
d.  A simple material finish is encouraged for a large expanse of wall plane. 
e.  A matte, or non-reflective, finish is preferred. 
f.  Polished stone should be avoided as a primary material. 
The appropriate use of color can be used to embellish building facade elements and enhance the attractive details of commercial buildings and should not disguise or overpower them. Colors should compliment neighboring buildings and reflect a traditional color palette. Extremely bright, fluorescent or neon colors shall not be permitted as the primary color on the facades of buildings in the Old Town design district. Only colors similar to or comparable to the palette adopted by the National Trust for Historic Preservation will be allowed. 
(3)  Maintain the traditional mass, size and form of buildings seen within the area. A building's mass and size is its exterior bulk and form is its shape in its relationship to its adjoining buildings and to its users-pedestrians. 
a.  Building heights vary in the Old Town and yet there is a strong sense of similarity in scale. 
b.  Building wall offsets, including projections, recesses, changes in floor level, or changes of materials should be used to add architectural variety and interest, and to relieve the visual impact of a blank wall. 
c.  While single buildings may span several of the 20- to 30-foot wide properties, the individual lot width is still expressed as a distinct bay or module. Buildings should reflect this pattern. 
d.  Traditional floor heights should be expressed with horizontal moldings, alignment of windows and other architectural details. 
e.  Floor-to-floor heights shall appear to be similar to those seen traditionally. In particular, the windows in a building should appear similar in height to those seen traditionally. Windowsills, moldings and cornices are among those elements that may be seen to align. 
Roofs. The character of the roof is a major feature for most historic structures. When repeated along the street, the repetition of similar roof forms contributes to a sense of visual continuity for the neighborhood. In each case, the roof pitch, its materials, size and orientation are all distinct features that contribute to the character of a roof. Gabled and hip forms occur most frequently in residential areas while flat roofs appear on older commercial buildings in the city. Although the function of a roof is to protect a structure from the elements, it also contributes to the overall character of the building. The Old Town design district has seen the construction of various roof forms, as illustrated below.  

Roof Forms 
Porches. Many residential styles and building types developed with the porch as a prime feature of the front facade. Because of their historical importance and prominence as character-defining features, porches should be preserved and they should receive sensitive treatment during exterior rehabilitation. Porches vary as much as architectural styles. They differ in height, scale, location, materials and articulation. Some are simple one-story structures, while others may be complex with elaborate details and finishes. These elements often correspond to the architectural style of the house and therefore the building's design character should be considered before any major rehabilitation work is begun. 
a.  Maintain the existing location, shape, details, and columns of the porch. 
b.  Missing or deteriorated decorative elements should be replaced with new wood, milled to match existing elements. Match the original proportions and spacing of balusters when replacing missing ones. 
c.  Unless used historically, wrought iron porch posts and columns are inappropriate. 
d.  Enclosing a porch with opaque materials that destroy the openness and transparency of the porch is inappropriate. When a porch is enclosed or screened, it shall be done with a clear transparent material. This material should be placed behind porch columns. 
(4)  Include architectural elements similar to those seen traditionally (i.e., recessed entries, display windows, kickplates, transom windows, cornices, vertically oriented upper-story windows, awnings). 
For non-residential styled buildings, individual building architectural elements play a critical role in the overall appearance. The following design elements are intended for use on that type structure and not on buildings that are designed to model a residential style. Architectural elements are the individual components of a building, including walls, doors, windows, cornices, parapets, roofs, pediments, and other features. Ornamentation and details of elements such as cornices and parapets are original components that "dress up" a building and give it a sense of style and character. Ornamental items include hoodmolds, trim at doors and windows; plaques and medallions; signboards or sign panels; date or name stones; and simple geometric shapes in metal, stone, or concrete. For a commercial storefront building, a rehabilitation or new project should preserve or include as many as possible these defining elements. 
Cornices, which are usually found at the top of building walls, and ornamental moldings or belt courses, which are located just above storefronts, are horizontal projecting elements that provide a visual break in or termination to a wall. A parapet is an upward extension of a building wall above the roofline, sometimes ornamental, capped with brick, stone or tile, and frequently decorative elements or panels are placed in it, and sometimes plain, used to give a building a greater feeling of height or a better sense of proportion. 
Commercial buildings should, for the most part, all relate to the street and to pedestrians in the same manner: with a clearly defined primary entrance and large display windows. The repetition of these standard elements creates a visual unity on the street that should be preserved. 
a.  Display windows: The main portion of glass on the storefront, where goods and services are displayed. This will help maintain the interest of the street to pedestrians by providing views to goods and activities inside first floor windows. 
b.  Transom: The upper portion of the display window, separated by a frame. 
c.  Kickplate: Found beneath the display window. Sometimes called a bulkhead panel. 
d.  Entry: Usually set back from the sidewalk in a protected recess. 
e.  Upper-story windows: Windows located above the street level. These usually have a vertical orientation. 
f.  Cornice molding: A decorative band at the top of the building. 
 

Architectural Elements 
Storefronts. 
a.  While commercial structures in the Old Town design district may be setback from the street edge is important to provide a storefront that defines the main entry from the street for both the pedestrian and the automobile. 
b.  Alternative designs that are contemporary interpretations of traditional storefronts may be considered. 
c.  Where the original is missing and no evidence of its character exists, a new design that uses the traditional elements may be considered. However, the new design should continue to convey the character of typical storefronts, including the transparent character of the display window. 
d.  Significantly increasing (or decreasing) the amount of glass will negatively affect the integrity of a structure. 
e.  On traditional storefronts, first floors should be more transparent than upper floors. Upper floors should appear more solid than first floors. 
f.  Avoid a blank wall appearance that does not provide interest to pedestrians. 
g.  Large surfaces of glass are inappropriate on the upper floors and sides of commercial buildings. If necessary, divide large glass surfaces into smaller windows that are in scale with those seen traditionally. 
Entrances. 
a.  Maintain recessed entries where they are found. 
b.  The repetition of recessed entries provides a rhythm of shadows along the street, which helps establish a sense of scale. 
c.  These recessed entries were designed to provide protection from the weather and the repeated rhythm of these shaded areas along the street helps to identify business entrances. Typically, recessed entries were set back between three and five feet. 
d.  Restore the historic recessed entry if it has been altered. 
e.  Where entries were not recessed historically, maintain them in their original position. However, one may also need to comply with other code requirements, including door width, direction of swing and construction. In some cases, entries must comply with accessibility requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Note, however, that some flexibility in application of these other regulations is provided for historic properties. 
f.  Clearly define the primary entrance with an awning, canopy or other architectural or landscape feature. 
g.  Secondary public entrances are also encouraged on a larger building or along an alley if there is parking in the rear of the site. 
Windows and doors. Windows and doors are some of the most important character-defining features of older structures. They give scale to buildings and provide visual interest to the composition of individual facades. Distinct window and door designs in fact help define many building styles. Windows and doors often are inset into relatively deep openings or they have surrounding casings and sash components that have a substantial dimension that cast shadows which also contributes to the character of the historic style. A typical, upper-story window is twice as tall as it is wide. These proportions are within a limited range; therefore, upper-story windows in new construction should relate to the window proportions seen traditionally. Features important to the character of a window include its clear glass, frame, sash, muntins, mullions, glazing, sills, heads, jambs, moldings, operation, location and relation to other windows. Features important to the character of a door include the door itself, doorframe, screen door, threshold, glass panes, paneling, hardware, detailing, transoms and flanking sidelights. 
a.  Retain the original shape of the transom glass in historic storefronts. Transoms, the upper glass band of traditional storefronts, introduced light into the depths of the building, saving on light costs. These bands should not be removed or enclosed. 
b.  The shape of the transom is important to the proportion of the storefront, and it should be preserved in its historic configuration. 
c.  If the original glass is missing, installing new glass is preferred. 
d.  Preserve the position, number, size and arrangement of historic windows and doors in a building wall. Many windows are "one-over-one," in that a single pane of glass is in both the upper and lower sashes. Others are "two-over-one," with two panes (or lights) in the upper sash and one is in the lower sash. These arrangements are preferred. 
e.  Enclosing an historic opening in a key character-defining facade is inappropriate, as is adding a new opening. 
f.  Do not close down an original opening to accommodate a smaller window. Restoring original openings which have been altered over time is encouraged. 
g.  Traditionally, windows had a vertical emphasis. The proportions of these windows contribute to the character of each residence and commercial storefront. 
h.  If it is broken or has been removed in the past, consider replacing it with new glass. If security is a concern, consider using wire glass, tempered glass, or light metal security bars (preferably on the interior). 
i.  Installing window air-conditioners in windows on building fronts is inappropriate. 
j.  A new or replacement window or door should match the appearance of the original. While replacing an entire window or door is discouraged, it may be necessary in some cases. Although wood is preferred as a replacement material, metal is common on the market today and sometimes is suggested for replacement. It is possible to consider alternative materials, if the resulting appearance matches the original as closely as possible. The substitute also should have a demonstrated durability in this climate. 
k.  Very ornate windows or doors that are not appropriate to the building's architectural style are inappropriate. 
l.  Windows should align with others in a block. Windows, lintels and their trim elements should align with those on adjacent older buildings. 
 

Illustration 
Architectural embellishment. 
a.  Preserve the character of the cornice line. Most historic commercial buildings have cornices to cap their facades. Their repetition along the street contributes to the visual continuity on the block. 
b.  Reconstruct a missing cornice when historic evidence is available. Use historic photographs to determine design details of the original cornice. 
c.  Replacement elements should match the original in every detail, especially in overall size and profile. 
d.  The substitution of another old cornice for the original may be considered, provided that the substitute is similar to the original. 
e.  Appropriate materials include stone, brick and stamped metal. 
Awnings and canopies. 
a.  An awning or canopy should be similar to those seen traditionally. Traditionally, awnings and canopies were noteworthy features of buildings in downtown and their continued use is preferred. 
b.  An awning compatible in material and construction to the style of the building is encouraged. 
c.  Canvas awnings are inappropriate in the Old Town center. 
d.  Use awning colors that are compatible with the overall color scheme of the facade. Solid colors or simple, muted-stripe patterns are appropriate. 
e.  The awning should fit the opening of the building. 
f.  Simple shed shapes are appropriate for rectangular openings. 
g.  Odd shapes, bull nose awnings and bubble awnings are inappropriate on most historic structures. 
h.  Internal illumination of an awning is inappropriate. Lights may be concealed in the underside of a canopy, however. 
i.  A fixed metal canopy may be considered. 
j.  Appropriate supporting mechanisms are wall-mounted brackets, chains and posts. 
k.  Mount an awning or canopy to accentuate character-defining features. It should be mounted to highlight moldings that may be found above the storefront and should not hide character-defining features such as transom windows. Its mounting should not damage significant features and traditional details. 
(5)  To promote friendly, walkable streets (i.e., projects that support pedestrian activity and contribute to the quality of life are encouraged). The Old Town area should continue to develop as a pedestrian-oriented environment. Streets and sidewalks should encourage walking, sitting and other outdoor activities. Buildings also should be visually interesting to invite exploration by pedestrians. Existing pedestrian routes should be enhanced. These are important concepts because pedestrians experience buildings at close proximity. 
Develop the ground floor level of a project to encourage pedestrian activity. 
a.  Sidewalks are required from the front street sidewalk to the front door of the building which should provide the main entrance. Secondary entrances can be in the rear or side of the building to allow for ease of access from side or rear parking areas. 
b.  Avoid a blank wall or vacant lot appearance. 
c.  A building should have a clearly defined primary entrance oriented toward the street. 
d.  Clearly identify the road edge and project entrances for both automobiles and pedestrians. This can be accomplished by landscape features, brick entry pillars, sidewalk paver bands at the sidewalk or driveway edge. 
e.  Use landscaping and lighting accents to identify entrances. 
f.  Place parking areas to the rear of a site when feasible or disburse throughout the site. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-195. - Old Town design district single-family residential use. 
(a)  Goal statement. The residential component of the Old Town design district should develop in a manner that is inviting to pedestrians while retaining the feel of older neighborhoods. Development should include a mix of building types, including older structures and newer structures constructed in an architectural style that contributes to a sense of visual continuity and strengthening the residential experience. Where appropriate, a combination of uses is encouraged, including single-family, townhouses and multi-family. 
(b)  Key principles. 
(1)  Building setbacks. A wide variety of building setbacks can be seen throughout the Old Town design district . Much of this variety is due to the influence of the automobile and need to provide on-site parking and development in a post-zoning ordinance era. This parking typically has been provided in front of the building for consumer convenience. However, this trend has caused an erosion of the edge of buildings located along a sidewalk like that seen historically. Therefore, it is strongly encouraged that new developments should build on this original tradition of building placement and locate parking in the side and rear when feasible. That being stated, it is a vital interest to the city to preserve the mature tree canopy within the area as much as possible and locate buildings in a manner that preserves the natural character of the area. 
(2)  Building materials. Building materials of structures should contribute to the visual continuity of the area. They should appear similar to those seen traditionally to establish a sense of visual continuity. 
(3)  Architectural character. The Old Town center is made up of architectural styles from the early 1900s. The neighborhoods of the design district represent a number of different architectural styles and reflect the time periods in which they were constructed. 
(4)  Pedestrian environment. The design district should provide a controlled, organized automobile system that provides a safe pedestrian environment. Development should include direct, well marked linkages from the sidewalk to a well defined front door entry. Streets, sidewalks and landscaping should define the road edge and encourage walking, sitting and other pedestrian activities. 
(c)  Design elements. This section presents design guidelines for individual building elements that are influential to the overall character of Old Town residential buildings. When the elements are appropriately used in combination with one-another buildings will reflect an appropriate look and feel that is consistent with Old Town. Within each element are individual goals and design guidelines statements upon which the city will base its decisions as to the appropriateness of any new or remodeled structure. 
(1)  The architectural style of all new and rehabilitated residential buildings in the Old Town design district should be designed to be consistent and compatible with that of the traditional residential styles of the area. 
Buildings that are designed to reflect a traditional style of Old Town should utilize an architectural style that gives the appearance of belonging in Old Town. While it is important that buildings be compatible with the surrounding structures, it is not necessary that they exactly imitate older building styles. Buildings that are designed to reflect a traditional residential style should incorporate an individual style and not blend various styles found in the area. The property owner is encouraged to use the one of the styles listed below, or an appropriate variation, in designing the overall character of their building. 
a.  New interpretations of traditional building styles are encouraged. 
b.  A new design that draws upon the fundamental similarities among older buildings in the area without copying them is preferred. This will allow the building to be seen as a product of its own time and yet be compatible with its historic neighbors. 
c.  Buildings that are similar in scale and overall character to those seen historically are strongly encouraged. 
d.  Infill should be a balance of new and old in design. 
e.  This applies to architectural details as well as the overall design of a building. 
Queen Anne Victorian Style Residential—Circa 1880—1910. Decorative detailing is one of the main characteristics of this architectural style. Houses typically have irregular shaped, hipped roofs often with steep pitches. Typically the buildings are asymmetrical in shape with one dominant front-facing gable. Extensive detailing is utilized to avoid a smooth-wall appearance. Detailing can take multiple forms such as patterned shingles; "gingerbread" type spindlework; and cutaway bay windows and towers. Porches are partial or full-width and often extend along one sidewall. Spindlework is also used extensively on porches and friezes. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Steeply pitched, hipped roofs of irregular shape 
b.  Dominant front-facing gable 
c.  Irregular shapes utilizing cutaway bay window and towers 
d.  Extensive detailing to avoid a smooth-walled appearance 
e.  Asymmetrical faced with partial or full-width porch 
f.  Extensive use of spindlework on porches and friezes 
Folk Victorian Style Residential—Circa 1870—1910. This style is defined by the presence of Victorian decorative detailing on simple folk house forms and are typically much less elaborate than the Victorian styles that they mimicked. The primary areas for the detailing are the porch and cornice line. There are a number of subtypes but the most common one in Old Town is the asymmetrical gable front with wing and covered porch. Porch supports are commonly either turned spindles or square posts with beveled corners. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Simple folk house form 
b.  Gable front with wing 
c.  Single story with covered porch 
d.  Spindle work porch detailing 
Prairie Style Residential—Circa 1900—1920. This style is sometimes referred to as the Prairie Box or American Foursquare. It has a simple square or rectangular plan, low pitched hipped roof and symmetrical facade. One story wings, porches or carports are common and subordinate to the principal two story mass. The entrance is often a conspicuous focal point of the facade. Hipped dormers are common as are full-width front porches. Characteristic horizontal decorative elements often consist of contrasting caps on porch or balcony railings as well as piers and chimneys. Other elements include contrasting wood trim between stories and horizontal siding. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Low-pitched roof usually hipped. 
b.  Widely overhanging eaves 
c.  Two stores with one story wings or porches 
d.  Eaves, cornices, and facade detailing with horizontal lines 
e.  Massive, square porch supports 
f.  Hipped dormers 
Craftsman Style Residential—Circa 1905—1930. This particular style originated in California and is often referred to as a bungalow, especially in the single story version. Front gabled porches and house are most common. Porches may be either full or partial width and may be covered by either the main roof or a separate, extended roof. Single story is the most common but one and one half are not uncommon. Columns for porch roofs are typically shorter, square upper columns resting upon more massive piers. 
Characteristics. 
a.  Low-pitched, gabled roof (occasionally hipped). 
b.  Wide, unenclosed eave overhang 
c.  Roof rafters usually exposed 
d.  Decorative beams or braces commonly added under gables 
e.  Full or partial width covered porches 
f.  Tapered square porch columns 
Townhouse development. Any attached townhouse project should utilize an architectural design that is compatible or a similar variation of a residential design listed above. Other designs are appropriate when key elements are taken into consideration, such as porches, windows, doors, roofs, materials, and overall design, and each unit is designed in a manner that fits with the overall Old Town look and feel that is desired by the city. When multiple units are attached, it is important that each unit stands apart by using individual porches, variations in exterior facade materials or colors, minor changes in front set-backs to create a human scale to the grouping of units and not a sense of one large building. 
(2)  The use of traditional building materials found in the area should be continued. 
Brick and stone-used for building walls, chimneys, porch supports and foundations-were the primary materials used. Wood siding also occurred on residential-type structures with painted, horizontal clapboard being the most popular. In each case, the distinct characteristics of the building material, including the scale of the material unit, its texture and finish, contribute to the historic character of a building. 
The best way to preserve or rehabilitate older building materials is through well-planned maintenance. Wood surfaces, for example, should be protected with a good application of paint. In some cases, historic building materials may be deteriorated. When deterioration occurs, repairing the material rather than replacing it is preferred. Frequently, damaged materials can be patched or consolidated using special bonding agents. In other situations, however, some portion of the material may be beyond repair and may be replaced. The new material should match the original in appearance. Rather than replace original materials, some property owners may consider covering them. Aluminum and vinyl siding are examples of materials that are often discussed and are not allowed. 
a.  Materials shall appear to be similar to those used traditionally. 
b.  Brick, cast stone and horizontal lap siding were the traditional materials of residential style buildings. When horizontal siding is required a modern material such as hardi-plank may be utilized to achieve the desired look while providing a material that is more durable and requires less maintenance. 
c.  A simple material finish is encouraged for a large expanse of wall plane. 
d.  A matte, or non-reflective, finish is preferred. 
e.  Polished stone should be avoided as a primary material. 
The appropriate use of color can be used to embellish building facade elements and enhance the attractive details of commercial buildings and should not disguise or overpower them. Colors should compliment neighboring buildings and reflect a traditional color palette. Extremely bright, fluorescent or neon colors shall not be permitted as the primary color on the facades of buildings in the Old Town design district. Only colors similar to or comparable to the palette adopted by the National Trust for Historic Preservation will be allowed. 
(3)  Include architectural elements similar to those seen traditionally (i.e., recessed entries, transom windows, cornices, vertically oriented upper-story windows, awnings). 
Roofs. The character of the roof is a major feature for most historic structures. When repeated along the street, the repetition of similar roof forms contributes to a sense of visual continuity for the neighborhood. In each case, the roof pitch, its materials, size and orientation are all distinct features that contribute to the character of a roof. Gabled and hip forms occur most frequently in residential areas while flat roofs appear on older commercial buildings in the city. Although the function of a roof is to protect a structure from the elements, it also contributes to the overall character of the building. The Old Town design district has seen the construction of various roof forms. 
a.  In residential areas, most roof forms are pitched, such as gabled and hipped. 
b.  Avoid altering the angle of an older roof. Instead, maintain the perceived line and orientation of the roof as seen from the street. 
c.  Retain and repair roof detailing. 
d.  Often repairing a basically sound roof can be much less expensive than a complete replacement. If a new roof is necessary, try to match the color, material, and pattern of the old as closely as possible. 
e.  Water from downspouts should drain away from the building properly. 
f.  If this is not possible, a downspout should empty onto a metal or concrete splash block that slopes downward and away from the building. 
 

Roof Types 
Porches. Many residential styles and building types developed with the porch as a prime feature of the front facade. A porch protects an entrance from rain and provides shade in the summer. It also provides a sense of scale to the building and provides a space for residents to sit and congregate. A porch provides stylistic details to the house, and in some cases is an integral part of an architectural style. Because of their historical importance and prominence as character-defining features, porches should be preserved and they should receive sensitive treatment during exterior rehabilitation. Porches vary as much as architectural styles. They differ in height, scale, location, materials and articulation. Some are simple one-story structures, while others may be complex with elaborate details and finishes. These elements often correspond to the architectural style of the house and therefore the building's design character should be considered before any major rehabilitation work is begun. 
a.  Maintain the existing location, shape, details, and columns of the porch. 
b.  Missing or deteriorated decorative elements should be replaced with new wood, milled to match existing elements. Match the original proportions and spacing of balusters when replacing missing ones. 
c.  Unless used historically, wrought iron porch posts and columns are inappropriate. 
d.  Enclosing a porch with opaque materials that destroy the openness and transparency of the porch is inappropriate. When a porch is enclosed or screened, it shall be done with a clear transparent material. This material should be placed behind porch columns. 
(4)  To establish a sense of scale in buildings and streetscape design that residents and pedestrians can enjoy. 
(5)  To minimize the visual impacts of automobiles. 
(6)  To strengthen the pedestrian network of sidewalks and paths. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-196. - Institutional design in the districts. 
The design guidelines focus on principles for rehabilitation and infill of commercial and mixed-use projects that should reinforce the existing building fabric and enhance the pedestrian environment in general. To do so, they draw upon principles established in traditional commercial buildings. While these are the majority of property types that will occur in the area, institutional facilities should be a part of the urban mix as well. These institutional facilities include churches, schools, libraries, courts and governmental offices. Traditionally, buildings for these uses have contrasted with the framework of storefronts. An example is an historic courthouse: It stands apart from the rows of commercial buildings, framed by a lawn as a foreground. Its entrances are more prominent. While it stands apart as a structure, however, it clearly is a part of the downtown, with its entrances oriented to the street and walkways promoting pedestrian use. This helps to convey its civic function as a gathering place. At the same time, the basic principles of urban design outlined in this document should still apply. Among them are these key principles: 
(1)  Institutional facilities should be located such that they encourage pedestrian traffic to nearby downtown businesses. 
(2)  Institutional facilities should be designed to reinforce the downtown fabric of streets and sidewalks. 
(3)  Convenient pedestrian connections should link abutting Institutional buildings. 
(4)  The edges of a Institutional property should be inviting to pedestrians. 
(5)  The visual impacts of automobiles should be minimized. 
(6)  Primary entrances should face the street, not to parking lots. 
(7)  A sense of human scale should be conveyed. 
(8)  Impacts on adjacent historic resources should be minimized. 
(9)  Outdoor spaces designed for public use should be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-197. - Design guidelines for additions and alterations. 
(a)  Goal statement. The Old Town design district and Old Town center design district both contain a significant number of structures that are important to the original fabric of the community. Special consideration should be given to preserve these buildings and utilize them whenever possible. Utilization of these buildings often requires additions and alterations to adapt a residential structure into a commercial building or a commercial building into a residential use and should be done carefully so not to visually impact the significant nature of the original building. 
(b)  Key principles. 
(1)  Design of alterations. Alterations may be considered for historic buildings; however, alterations should occur in a manner that will not diminish the historic integrity of the property and they should be reversible for future property owners. 
(2)  Additions. Many buildings have experienced additions over time, as need for additional space occurred, particularly with a change in use. An historic addition typically was subordinate in scale and character to the main building. The height of the addition was usually positioned below that of the main structure and it was often located to the side or rear, such that the primary facade remained dominate. An addition was often constructed of materials that were similar to those in use historically. In some cases, owners simply added on to an existing roof, creating more usable space without increasing the footprint of the structure. This tradition of adding on to buildings is anticipated to continue. It is important, however, that new additions be designed in such a manner that they maintain the character of the primary structure. 
(3)  Adaptive use. The adaptive use of a residence for a commercial or office use is a distinct possibility in Old Town. However, when such adaptations must occur, they should be designed to have the least impact on the historic character of a neighborhood-some of which is residential in character. Although for commercial use, these adapted properties should not be commercial in character. This means that the overall form of a building (with a sloping roof) and the landscaped front lawn should not be altered. 
(c)  Design elements. This section presents design guidelines for alterations and additions to existing buildings and should be considered in conjunction with design elements found elsewhere in this section pertaining to individual building elements that are influential to the overall character of Old Town. When the elements are appropriately used in combination with one-another buildings will reflect an appropriate look and feel that is consistent with Old Town. Within each element are individual goals and design guidelines statements upon which the city will base its decisions as to the appropriateness of any new or remodeled structure. 
(1)  Design an alteration to be compatible with the original character of the property. 
a.  Avoid alterations that would damage historic features. 
b.  Avoid alterations that would hinder the ability to interpret the design character of the original building. 
c.  Alterations that seek to imply an earlier period than that of the building are inappropriate. 
For example, mounting a sign panel in a manner that causes decorative moldings to be chipped or removed would be inappropriate. 
(2)  Minimize the visual impacts of an addition to a commercial building. Two distinct types of additions are considered to be appropriate, ground level or rooftop. 
First, a ground-level addition that involves expanding the footprint of a structure may be considered. Such an addition should be to the rear or side of a building. This will have the least impact on the character of a building, but there may only be limited opportunities to do this. 
a.  An addition shall be compatible in scale, materials and character with the main building. 
b.  An addition shall relate to the building in mass, scale and form. It should be designed to remain subordinate to the main structure. 
c.  An addition to the front of a building is inappropriate. However, where a building is set back from the front property line, the first consideration for the placement of an addition should be to fill the gap between the existing building and sidewalk. This will maintain the consistent "street wall" desired in the Old Town center design district. 
d.  An addition shall not damage or obscure architecturally important features. For example, loss or alteration of a cornice line should be avoided. 
 

Addition to Commercial Building 
Second, an addition to the roof may be designed that is simple in character and set back substantially from the front of a building. In addition, the materials, window sizes and alignment of trim elements on the addition should be compatible to those of the existing structure. An addition may be made to the roof of a commercial building if it does the following: 
a.  An addition should be set back from the primary, character-defining facade, to preserve the perception of the historic scale of the building. 
b.  Its design should be modest in character, so it will not attract attention from the historic facade. 
c.  The addition should be distinguishable as new, albeit in a subtle way. 
Another option, which will only be considered on a case-by-case basis, is to design an addition to the front wall plane of the existing building. This option may only be considered on a "newer" or more contemporary building that was originally constructed set back from the front property line or sidewalk edge. 
(3)  Design an addition to a residential structure to be compatible with the primary building. An addition to a structure can radically change its perceived scale and character if inappropriately designed. When planning an addition, consider the effect the addition will have on the building itself. When creating an addition, keep the size of the addition small, in relation to the main structure. If an addition must be larger, it should set apart from the main structure and connected with a smaller linking element. A design for a new addition that would create an appearance inconsistent with the character of the building, especially an historic one, is discouraged. 
 

Illustration 
One also should consider the effect the addition may have on the character of a street or neighborhood, as seen from the public right-of-way. For example, a side addition may change the sense of rhythm established by side yards in the block. Locating the addition to the rear could be a better solution in such a case. 
a.  Design a new addition such that the original character can be clearly seen. In this way, a viewer can understand the history of changes that have occurred to the building. An addition shall be compatible in scale, materials and character with the main building. 
b.  An addition should be made distinguishable from the original building, even in subtle ways, such that the character of the original can be interpreted. 
c.  Creating a jog in the foundation between the original and new structures may help to define an addition. 
d.  Even applying a new trim board at the connection point between the addition and the original structure can help define the addition. 
e.  Place an addition at the rear of a building or set it back from the front to minimize the visual impacts. 
f.  Locating an addition at the front of a structure is inappropriate. 
g.  Do not obscure, damage, destroy or remove original architectural details and materials of the primary structure. 
h.  An addition shall relate to the historic building in mass, scale and form. It should be designed to remain subordinate to the main structure. 
i.  While a smaller addition is visually preferable, if a residential addition would be significantly larger than the original building, one option is to separate it from the primary building, when feasible, and then link it with a smaller connecting structure. 
j.  An addition should be simple in design to prevent it from competing with the primary facade. 
k.  Consider adding dormers to create second story spaces before changing the scale of the building by adding a full second floor. 
l.  The roof form of a new addition shall be in character with that of the primary building. 
m.  Typically, gable, hip and shed roofs are appropriate for residential additions. Flat roofs are appropriate for commercial buildings. 
n.  Repeat existing roof slopes and materials. 
o.  If the roof of the primary building is symmetrically proportioned, the roof of the addition should be similar. 
(4)  When adapting a residence to a commercial use, respect the residential character of the building. Seek uses that are compatible with the historic character of the building. The openness of a front yard should be preserved for example. Converting a building to a new use that is different from that which its design reflects is considered to be "adaptive use." When residential use ceases to be viable, the first preference is to choose new uses that minimize the negative changes in building features. Often there are new uses that are inherently less disruptive to residential structures such as a bed and breakfast, professional offices, small specialty restaurants and personal service businesses. 
a.  Seek uses that are compatible with the historic character of the building. 
b.  The primary goal should be preserving the original residential character, appearance and scale of the structure. 
c.  Avoid altering porches and original windows and doors. 
(Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03)  
Sec. 9.5-198. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3454-06-2007, § 1, adopted June 4, 2007, repealed § 9.5-198, which pertained to Signage in Old Town and derived from Ord. No. 2944-06-2003, § 1, 6-2-03. 
Appendix 1 
• OLD TOWN CENTER DESIGN DISTRICT AND OLD TOWN DESIGN DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. 
• LOCATIONAL MAP OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES. 
The Old Town Center Design District is defined as all land located within the area bounded by the following: Beginning at the southeast corner of the intersection of West Church Street and North Charles Street, running easterly along the southern right-of-way of Church Street to the southwest corner of the intersection of East Church Street and North Kealy Street, then southerly along the western right-of-way of Kealy Street to the north property line of Lot 1 A, Block A of the Christian Community Action Addition, then westerly along the north property line of Lot 1 A to the northeast corner of Lot 1 R, Block A of the MHJ Sonic Addition, then westerly along the north property line of Lot 1 R to the easterly right-of-way of South Mill Street, continuing westerly across South Mill Street to the western right-of-way of South Mill Street, then southerly to the northwest corner of Elm Street and South Mill Street, then westerly along the northern right-of-way of Elm Street to the northeast corner of the intersection of Elm Street and South Charles Street, then northerly along the eastern right-of-way of Charles Street to the southeast corner of the intersection of North Charles Street and West Church Street. 
The Old Town Design District is defined as all land located within the area bounded by the following: Beginning at the southeast corner of the intersection of West College Street and Degan Avenue, running easterly along the southern right-of-way of College Street to the southwest corner of the intersection of East College Street and the railroad right-of-way, formerly owned by M.K.T., then southerly along the western railroad right-of-way to the northwest corner of the intersection with Purnell Street, then westerly along the northern right-of-way of the Purnell Street to the northeast corner of the intersection with South Edna Avenue, then northerly along the eastern right-of-way of South Edna Avenue to the southeast corner of the intersection with West Main Street, then westerly along the southern right-of-way of West Main Street to the southeast corner of the intersection with Degan Avenue, then northerly along the eastern right-of-way of Degan Avenue to the southeast corner of the intersection of West College Street and Degan Avenue. The Old Town Center Design District as defined above is excluded from this section. 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 7(Exh. 4), 6-4-18) 
 
Appendix 2 
• Title block for plats and development plans 
•Staff and utility company signature blocks for development plans 
•Owner's certificate of dedication 
•Signature blocks for preliminary plats 
•Signature blocks for final plats  

Title Blocks for Plats and Development Plans 
 

Old Town Development Plan Title Block 
 

Staff and Utility Company Signature Blocks for Development Plans 
(Ord. No. 3120-09-2004, § I, 9-20-04) 
 

Owner's Certificate of Dedication 
 

Signature Blocks for Preliminary Plats 
 

Signature Blocks for Final Plats 
 

Signature Blocks for Final Plats (cont'd) 
Appendix 3 
•Certificate of abandonment form 
•Certificate of correction form  

Certificate of Abandonment 
 

Certificate of Correction 
Appendix 4 
•Agreement for payment of construction cost 
•Agreement for performance escrow for public improvement construction  

Agreement for Payment in lieu of Construction 
 

Agreement for Payment in lieu of Construction (cont'd) 
 

Agreement for performance escrow for Public Improvement Construction 
 

Agreement for performance escrow for Public Improvement Construction (cont'd) 
Appendix 5 
•List of other development ordinances and regulations 
The following is a list of other ordinances and regulations, which, although not specifically a part of this chapter, may be applicable for development projects within the city. Copies of and information about these regulations are available from the department of community development. 
Air quality control (state authority having jurisdiction) 
Assessment policy 
Capital recovery ordinance 
Comprehensive drainage study 
Design criteria for sewage systems (state authority having jurisdiction) 
Drainage maintenance ordinance (1331) 
Fee ordinance 
Fence ordinance 
Flood damage prevention ordinances (1330, 1345) 
Lewisville Code of Ordinances 
Manual on uniform traffic control devices 
Master thoroughfare plan 
National Electric Code 
Storm water management park dedication ordinance 
Abandonment of real property 
Rules and regulations for public water systems (state authority having jurisdiction) 
Sign ordinance 
Standard fire hydrant specifications 
Standard specifications for public works construction (North Central Texas Council of Governments) 
Texas department of licensing and regulations (public accessibility) 
International Mechanical Code 
International Plumbing Code 
International Fire Code 
International Building Code 
International Energy Code 
Wastewater system collection master plan 
Water and sewer regulations 
Water distribution system master plan 
Water well regulations (state authority having jurisdiction) 
Water and sanitary sewer connection ordinance (1442) 
Zoning ordinance 
Appendix 6 
• Fees 
Following is a summary of fee schedules for permits and requirements pertaining to this Code. Additional fees may be required, in the course of development, at the time of applying for other city services. This list is for reference only. Please confirm fees with city staff. Items include and are not limited to: 
Application fee for abandonments 	$150.00 
Board of adjustment (each request) 	100.00 
Development and construction variance fee 	250.00 
Driveway permit: 	
  City permits 	25.00 
  State permits 	50.00 
Development plan: 	
  Less than 1 acre 	250.00 
  1 to 4.99 acres 	400.00 
  5 to 24.99 acres 	400.00 plus $30.00 per acre 
  25 acres and up 	750.00 plus $30.00 per acre 
  Old Town development ordinance book 	25.00 
Grading plan: 	
  Less than 1 acre 	125.00 
  1 to 4.99 acres 	200.00 
  5 acres and up 	200.00 plus $15.00 per acre 
Preliminary plat/final plat/replat: 	
  Single-family 	200.00 plus $5.00 per lot 
  Commercial, industrial, and multi-family 	200.00 plus $30.00 per acre 
(Checks for filing documents at Denton County, based on current schedule, must be made in the exact amount to the Denton county clerk.) 
Public works inspection 	3.5 percent of construction costs 
State permit fees for water and sewer connections 	50.00 
Traffic control devices: 	
  Per linear foot per lane line (painting) 	0.25 
  Per street intersection (signage) 	150.00 
  Per divided street intersection (signage) 	300.00 
Tree preservation: 	
  Size of caliper removed 	Cost of removing protected trees (per tree) 
5—9" 	500.00 
10—14" 	$1,000.00 
15—24" 	$1,500.00 
25"+ 	$2,000.00 
Zoning change requests: 	
  Less than ½ acre 	150.00 
  ½ acre to 4.99 acres 	250.00 
  5 acres to 24.99 acres 	400.00 
  25 acres to 49.99 acres 	750.00 
  50 acres to 99.99 acres 	1,000.00 
  100 acres and more 	1,500.00 
  
Sec. 9.5-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - SIGNAGE IN OLD TOWN 
 
Sec. 9.5-200. - Definitions 
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall have the following definitions ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Animated. Having a rapid display of a sequence of images to create the illusion of movement. 
Balloon. Any object filled with air or gas placed to draw attention to a business, product, service, or premises, regardless of whether or not it contains an advertised message. 
Change of copy. The changing of letters, numbers, or figures on an integrated changeable display (e.g., marquees, gas prices, chalkboards, or whiteboards). 
Corner lot. A lot which has the entire length of at least two adjacent sides abutting a public street or right-of-way, provided the interior angle at the intersection is less than 135 degrees. 
Display surface. The surface upon which a sign or message is presented including borders, frames, and other similar features. The display surface does not include structural elements. 
Exterior wall. The exterior boundaries of a building that has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the horizontal plane. 
Flag. A piece of fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl, canvas, leather, or other similar material attached to a flagpole on one end used as a symbol of a nation, state, city, or other local government entity. Flags shall not include corporate logos. 
Flagpole. A staff or pole designed specifically to fly a flag. Cell towers, antennas, monopoles, or similar structures not primarily designed for use as a flagpole shall not be allowed as such. 
Indirect lighting. A source of external illumination not connected to the sign itself. 
Internal-indirect lighting. A source of illumination entirely within the sign (generally a freestanding letter) which makes the sign visible at night by means of lighting the background upon which the freestanding character is mounted. 
Internal lighting. A source of illumination within a sign that makes its contents visible at night by means of a translucent or transparent material, but wherein the source of the illumination is not visible. 
Letter of design approval. A written document granting permission by the Old Town Design Review Committee to complete specific improvements within the Old Town District. 
Logo. A design, insignia, or other marking used to identify a company, business, or product. 
Neon (electrical discharge tubing). A source of external illumination composed of tubing filled with an inert gas that emits light when exposed to an electrical charge located on a noncombustible surface. 
Notice. Notice required by this article shall be sufficient if it is affected by personal delivery, electronic mail, registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or depositing the notice in the United States mail. 
Old Town Center District. The Old Town Center District is designated as listed in the Old Town Development Ordinance, Chapter 9.5 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances, Appendix 1, but generally defined as the area bounded by Church, Charles, Elm, and Kealy Streets. 
Old Town Design District. The Old Town Design District is defined as listed in the Old Town Development Ordinance, Chapter 9.5 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances, Appendix 1, but generally defined as the area bounded by College Street, Railroad Street, Purnell Street, South Edna Avenue, West Main Street and Degan Avenue. 
Old Town Design Review Committee (OTDRC). The Old Town Design Review Committee is defined as listed in the Old Town Development Ordinance, Chapter 9.5 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances. 
Old Town District. The Old Town District shall include both the Old Town Center District and the Old Town Design District. 
Pennant. Any device made of cloth, canvas, plastic, foil, or any flexible material that moves or is designed to move freely in the wind, with or without a frame or other supporting structure, used for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a business, commodity, service, sale, or product. 
Premises. The area of real property designated as a lot on a final plat approved by the city and filed with the county clerk's office or an unplatted tract of land as shown on an abstract. 
Primary facade. The side of a building facing the street from which it draws its address, except as modified by written request from the property owner and approved by the city. 
Searchlight. Any apparatus capable of projecting a beam or beams of light. 
Secondary facade. Any side of a building not facing the street from which it draws its address, or which has been designated as the primary facade. 
Sign. A name, identification, description, display, or illustration which is affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon, a building, structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, institution, or business, or any medium, including its structure and component parts, which is used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising purposes. 
•  Abandoned sign. A sign that: (1) fails to display any written or visual message on its display surface; (2) previously had a permit, but the permit has been expired for 30 or more consecutive days; (3) fails to identify or advertise a currently existing or operating business, lessor, service, owner, or product; or (4) only identifies or advertises an event or activity that has already occurred. A legal nonconforming sign, however, shall only be deemed abandoned if any of these conditions have been met for a consecutive 180-day period of time. 
•  Audible sign. Any sign that emits music, talking, words, or other sound or amplification. 
•  Awning, canopy, and/or marquee sign. A sign that is mounted on or integral to an awning, canopy, or marquee. 
•  Balloon sign. Any object filled with air or gas containing a message designed to advertise a product or premises. 
•  Banner sign. A flexible material such as cloth, paper, or vinyl on which a sign is painted or printed, intended for temporary purposes. 
•  Bench sign. A sign affixed to or painted on a bench located in or visible from a public right-of-way. 
•  Billboard. See "Off-Premises Sign." 
•  Building markers or historic designation tablets. Tablets approved by a governmental entity, address stones, building naming stones, or foundation stones typically indicating date of construction, architect, or founders. 
•  Business park entry sign. A sign meeting the requirements for low profile/monument signage that may be located on a common lot and represents the name of the development. 
•  Commercial real estate sign. A sign that advertises the sale, lease, financing, development, transfer, rental, or exchange of commercial property. 
•  Construction sign. A temporary sign erected on the premises where construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names and/or contact information for the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar design professionals, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the project. 
•  Customary identification sign. A sign indicating the name, type of business, hours of operation, and/or similar identification information. 
•  Directional sign. A sign limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, located at a property's point on ingress or egress. 
•  Electric/electrical sign. Any sign containing electrical wiring and internal illumination, but not including signs illuminated solely by an exterior light source. 
•  Feather flag. A sign designed to move freely that is attached to a pole or staff driven into the ground for support. 
•  Flashing sign. A blinking, scrolling, or animated sign, or a sign with intermittent or varying intensity of illumination or color, whether deliberate or as a consequence of a defect in the sign or the illumination source. 
•  Freestanding sign. A sign wholly unattached to a building or structure, and supported by its own internal or external structural members. 
•  Garage sale sign. A sign used to advertise a garage sale, yard sale, estate sale, or any other event defined under "occasional sales" pursuant to Chapter 7, Article VI, of the Lewisville City Code at an occupied residential property. 
•  Governmental sign. A sign installed, erected, maintained, or endorsed by a municipal, state, or federal governmental body for the purpose of public instruction regarding health, safety, or welfare, street or highway designation, or control of traffic. 
•  Grand opening sign. A commemoration that promotes the opening of a new business with balloons, balloon signs, inflatable signs, pendants, and/or streamers. 
•  Hanging sign. A sign suspended under an awning, canopy, or marquee. 
•  Human sign. A sign held by or attached to a human being, on-site at a business location. A human sign includes a person dressed in costume for the purposes of advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product. Human signs do not include ideological or political signs. 
•  Ideological sign. A sign communicating a message or idea for noncommercial purposes that are not otherwise specifically addressed separately by this article (i.e., political signs are addressed separately and will be regulated as a political, rather than ideological sign). 
•  Inflatable sign. Any object, the structure of which holds its shape through the use of a continuous operation fan supplying ambient air to the structure. Inflatable signs may contain an advertised message. 
•  Kiosk sign. A freestanding structure located in the city right-of-way that features the city identification panel at the top and displays directional information as set forth in the current City of Lewisville Kiosk Sign Program and Agreement. 
•  Legal nonconforming sign. A sign that is not in conformance with current regulations, but which was legally established at a prior date at which time it was in conformance with the then applicable standards. A legal nonconforming sign may be continued subject to the provisions of this article. 
•  Low-profile sign. A freestanding sign typically directed toward slower moving vehicular traffic with poles or supports partly or completely revealed. 
•  Menu board sign. A sign erected in conjunction with a use that incorporates a drive-through or drive-in and is generally used to provide service, product, and/or pricing for patrons who remain in their vehicle. Menu boards may contain two-way audible communication. 
•  Model home sign. A freestanding sign located on the premises of a single-family or multifamily model home. 
•  Monument sign. A freestanding sign having a low profile that shall be solid from the ground up with concealed poles or supports. 
•  Multi-tenant wall sign. A wall sign displaying the name of a business located in a building containing multiple tenants that utilize a mutual entrance. 
•  Off-premises construction sign. A temporary sign erected off the premises where construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names and/or contact information for the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar design professionals, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the project. 
•  Off-premises sign. A sign that is not an on-premises sign. 
•  On-premises sign. A sign identifying, advertising, or otherwise directing attention to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product when such sign is installed and maintained on the same premises where that business, person, organization, activity, event place, service, and/or product is principally located, manufactured, or sold. 
•  Political sign. A sign primarily pertaining to any national, state, county, or local election. 
•  Portable display sign. A sign that is fixed to a temporary display structure, with or without wheels, which is moved from location to location at periodic intervals. 
•  Prohibited sign. Any sign listed as a prohibited sign in this article, signs that do not comply with this or other applicable ordinances, and signs that are otherwise prohibited. Prohibited signs may only be allowed as approved by the city council through a variance or appeal process. 
•  Projecting sign. A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building or wall for support and projects more than 12 inches from such building or wall, generally at a right angle. 
•  Property protection sign. A sign used to advise visitors of a policy in place by the property owner (e.g., "No Smoking", "No Soliciting") or to warn of potential dangers (e.g., "Beware of Dog", "High Voltage"). 
•  Residential real estate sign. A sign that advertises the sale, lease, financing, development, transfer, rental, or exchange of residential property. 
•  Restaurant menu case. A weather-tight device containing a copy of the regular menu for a restaurant, cafe, bar, or similar. Restaurant menu cases are accessory signs intended to be read from a pedestrian level. 
•  Roof sign. A sign located on or above a roof of a building or structure. 
•  Sandwich board sign. A sign of A-frame or similar design intended for placement in the pedestrian area in front of the business being advertised. 
•  Signs advertising illegal activities. A sign which advertises activities that are illegal under federal, state, or local law. 
•  Signs on public property or utility easements. Any sign, whether temporary or permanent, placed on public property or recorded utility easements including public rights-of-way. 
•  Signs required by law. A sign that is required for health, safety, welfare, accessibility, or other reason by national, state, or local codes or laws (e.g., fire lane delineations, maximum occupant load postings, accessible parking spaces). 
•  Single tenant wall sign. A wall sign utilized by a business that is the sole occupant of a building. 
•  Subdivision identity sign. A permanent sign, meeting the requirements for low-profile/monument signage, which may be located on a common lot and generally identifies a residential development and refers to the name of the subdivision. 
•  Sub-standard sign. Any sign with a missing, broken, bent, cracked, decayed, dented, harmful, hazardous, illegible, leaning, splintered, ripped, torn, twisted, or unsightly surface element, background, or support. 
•  Temporary sign. A sign that does not have a permanent foundation and is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
•  Temporary window sign. An interchangeable promotional sign that is attached, painted, or placed in or on a building window intended to advertise a particular product or event for a limited time. 
•  Variable message electronic readerboard. A sign that utilizes alternating electronic data control components such as computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs, LCDs, or a flipper matrix. 
•  Vehicle sign. An advertising sign, trailer, or billboard that is attached to a motorized vehicle. 
•  Vertical pole banner sign. A sign located on a vertical light pole on a platted lot or public property that is not otherwise allowed as a freestanding sign and shall be limited to cloth, flexible plastic, vinyl, or similar material (i.e., no cardboard, wood, rigid plastics, etc.). 
•  Wall sign. A sign attached to or painted on a wall, parapet, or facade of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign on a plane parallel to the plane of such wall. 
•  Window sign. A sign that is applied to the exterior or interior of a window or within three feet of the interior of the window. A window sign does not include merchandise or models of products or services incorporated in the window display. 
•  Zoning change sign. An official sign issued by the City indicating a pending zoning change. 
Sign area. The measurement of a sign's display surface. 
Sign plan. A scaled plan showing building and sign locations, dimensions, and similar information to ensure the proper placement of the sign (See "Permit requirements"). 
Sign structure. Any structure which supports, or is capable of supporting, a sign. A sign structure may or may not be an integral part of the building. 
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any configuration artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Vehicle. Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13; 0032-18-ORD , § 4, 6-4-18)  
Sec. 9.5-201. - General requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to permit signs that will not by their size, location, and construction endanger the public health and safety of individuals, or confuse, mislead, or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety, or decrease the value of surrounding properties. Also, this article is intended to create a more aesthetically pleasing community for Old Town visitors and residents by preventing the over concentration and improper placement of signs and by requiring all signs to be properly maintained. 
The Old Town District contains the original downtown commercial center as well as the original residential neighborhoods that surround and support the area. In recent years, citizens and business leaders have come to recognize the historic, turn-of-the-century character of this community as unique in Lewisville and worthy of preserving and enhancing. Signs are integral to the overall character of the Old Town streetscape. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all signs located within the Old Town District. For requirements not referenced in this article, the standards listed in Chapter 11, Signs, shall apply. 
Photographs and illustrations depicted in this article are intended to be used for representative purposes only, and may not be in compliance with all applicable provisions. 
 
Bank at corner of Main and Mill Street 
 
(c)  The Old Town Design Review Committee (OTDRC). In order to provide for the preservation and enhancement of the Old Town character, the city council created the OTDRC composed of Old Town business owners and residents. One of the duties the OTDRC is to review the design of new signs and the alteration, renovation, or rehabilitation of existing signs requiring a permit in order to preserve and enhance the Old Town character. 
(d)  Guidelines for signage in Old Town. The guidelines for signage in Old Town (Appendix A) apply to signs located within the Old Town District. The guidelines are intended to encourage the highest level of design quality and provide flexibility for creativity in sign design. The guidelines should be followed to the greatest extent possible. To that end, city staff and the OTDRC shall work with the sign owner to explore designs that maximize conformance with the guidelines. The OTDRC shall not deny a letter of design approval solely because a sign fails to comply with the guidelines. 
(e)  Compliance with other codes. All signs shall comply with any and all codes incorporated by reference or contained within the City of Lewisville Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  Consent of property owner. The city will not issue a sign permit to a person proposing to place a sign on property owned by another party unless that person provides the city with a written consent from the property owner or the property owner's authorized agent. 
(g)  Enforcement authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this article. 
(h)  Responsibility. All property owners, tenants, contractors, and/or representatives listed on the sign permit application shall be responsible for reproduction and installation of signage as specified by this article or approved by the OTDRC. 
(i)  Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty required by this article. 
(j)  Maintenance. All signs and sign structures together with their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and in a proper state of preservation. The display surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. 
(k)  Weatherproofing. All signs shall be constructed so as to prevent the accumulation of rain water in or on the sign. 
(l)  Identification of manufacturer; installer. Each sign shall be identified by a label, nameplate, or trademark identifying the manufacturer and/or installer of the sign, except those signs that do not require the submittal of a sign plan. 
(m)  Sexually oriented businesses. Any sign advertising a sexually-oriented business, as defined by the City Code, shall conform to all the requirements of this article and shall not advertise, either graphically or verbally, by explicit or literal expression, connotation, or implied reference, any specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area. 
Because of the objectionable characteristics and a deleterious effect upon the quality of life in surrounding neighborhoods that a sexually oriented business may produce, the allowable square footage of such signs are limited to 150 square feet aggregate total per building. 
(n)  Legal nonconforming signs. 
(1)  A legal nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged, expanded, replaced, refaced, or otherwise modified. Ordinary repairs and maintenance of a legal nonconforming sign are allowed, but any repairs and/or maintenance that make structural alterations and/or otherwise extend the normal life of the legal nonconforming sign are strictly prohibited. 
(2)  A legal nonconforming sign whose structure or display surface is damaged or destroyed shall be made to comply with the requirements of this article or shall be removed. A sign is considered damaged or destroyed only if the cost of repairing the sign is more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. 
(3)  If a legal nonconforming sign qualifies as an abandoned sign per this article, such sign shall be removed or otherwise made to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-202. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit required. No sign other than those exceptions listed in this article shall be erected, reerected, constructed, altered, refaced, or maintained except as provided by this article and only after a permit for the same has been issued by the building inspection division of the community development department. A separate permit shall be required for each sign for a business entity and a separate permit shall be required for each group of signs on a single sign structure. In addition, electrical permits shall be obtained for illuminated and/or permanently wired signs. 
(b)  Information required with a permit application. Application for a permit required under this article shall be made upon forms furnished by the building inspection division of the community development department. Such application shall contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and address of the sign owner and the sign contractor. The building official may require the filing of plans or other pertinent information where in his opinion such information is necessary to ensure compliance with this article. All signs shall require the submittal of a scaled sign plan showing the following information: 
(1)  Building locations, dimensions and elevations; 
(2)  Size, location, and type of both existing and proposed signs; 
(3)  Identification of the facade (primary or secondary) on which the sign is proposed; 
(4)  Nearest street intersections and driveway locations; 
(5)  Zoning designation; 
(6)  Name of applicant, sign owner, and sign constructor; 
(7)  Corner "clear vision areas", if applicable; 
(8)  Engineering data on signs and/or sign structures exceeding 20 feet in height or when required to ensure compliance with this article; and 
(9)  Any easements on the property. 
(c)  Time to review permit. The permit application for a sign permissible under this article shall be reviewed and notice of any deficiencies, approval, or denial given to the applicant by the building inspection division of the community development department within ten working days from the receipt of a complete application. Signs requiring a letter of design approval shall be scheduled for the next available regular meeting of the OTDRC upon receipt of a complete application from the building inspection division of the community development department. 
(d)  Letter of design approval. 
(1)  [Approval characteristics.] The OTDRC may approve applications for a letter of design approval and requests for modifications in one or more of the characteristics listed in Table 1. 
Table 1 
Sign Characteristics Allowable 
for Modification by the OTDRC 
?  Sign area 
?  Sign height 
?  Sign width 
?  Sign material 
?  Number of signs 
?  Lighting type 
?  Location on building or premises 
(2)  Standards and limits of approval by OTDRC. 
a.  The OTDRC may approve an application for a letter of design approval if the intent of this article is served and the character of Old Town in enhanced. 
b.  The OTDRC shall not grant approval if the sign: 
1.  Is prohibited by, or conflicts with, the requirements specified in this article; 
2.  Is not allowed in the Old Town District; 
3.  Conflicts with the building code or other city ordinances; 
4.  May be injurious or detrimental to neighboring properties; or 
5.  May threaten the public health, safety or welfare. 
(3)  Signs not requiring a letter of design approval. The following signs do not require a letter of design approval but do require a permit and must comply with all the requirements of this article: 
a.  Temporary banner signs. 
b.  Commercial real estate signs. 
c.  Construction signs. 
d.  Kiosk signs (in compliance with the City of Lewisville Kiosk Sign Program and Agreement). 
(4)  Signs requiring approval by the city council. In the event an application for a letter of design approval is recommended for denial by city staff but approved by the OTDRC, the application shall require approval from the city council. 
(5)  Right to appeal a decision of the OTDRC. An applicant for a sign permit whose request is denied by the OTDRC may appeal such decision to the city council by submitting an appeal request to the building inspection division of the community development department within ten calendar days from the date of the denial notification. The decision of the city council is final and nonappealable. 
(e)  To whom issued. No permit for the erection of any sign, with the exception of banner and vertical pole banner signs, shall be issued to any person other than those licensed by the state and registered and insured in the city in accordance with this article. 
(f)  Prohibited locations. No permit shall be issued for a new or modified sign when an illegal sign exists on the premises unless the illegal sign is removed or brought into full compliance prior to permit issuance. 
(g)  Permit expiration. Any permit issued pursuant to this article shall become null and void if the work authorized is not commenced within 60 days from the date of issuance, or if the work is suspended or abandoned for a cumulative period of 120 days at any time after the work is commenced. A new permit shall be required for any project exceeding these timeframes. 
(h)  Suspension and revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article whenever such permit is issued in error or issued on the basis of incorrect information or where the work is done in violation of any ordinance, regulation, or any provision of this article. 
(i)  Fees. The fees for sign permits shall be set forth in the Lewisville City Code, Article VIII, section 2-201. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-203. - License requirements. 
(a)  License and registration required. No person shall install, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit until verification of a current state license and registration with the city as a contractor is submitted and approved by the building official. 
(b)  Expiration of registration. Any registration issued under the terms of this article shall expire 365 days after registration. 
(c)  Improper use of registration. It shall be unlawful for any registered sign contractor to allow his name or registration to be used by any other person, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit or for performing work under such registration. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-204. - Inspection requirements. 
All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(a)  Footing inspections may be required for all signs having footings. 
(b)  All signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of the governing electrical code, and the electrical components used shall bear the label of an approved testing agency. 
(c)  All signs may be reinspected at the discretion of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-205. - Sign structure. 
(a)  Construction of sign supports. The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property, except as modified by this article, and shall be securely built, constructed, and erected in conformance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Anchoring. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of a building. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead-load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
(1)  Signs attached to masonry, concrete, or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts, or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to safely support the loads applied. 
(2)  No wooden blocks, plugs, or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case of signs attached to wood framing. 
(c)  Wind loads. Signs and sign structures shall be designed to resist wind forces as specified in the current city building code. Copies of all sections referenced herein will be furnished upon request to the building inspection division of the community development department. 
(1)  Vertical design loads except roof live loads shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind loads. 
(2)  For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. 
(3)  All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. 
(4)  The overturning moment produced from the lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds of the dead load resisting moment. 
(d)  Allowable stresses. 
(1)  The design of wood, concrete, steel, or aluminum members shall conform to the requirements of the current city building code. 
(2)  Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in the current city building code. 
(3)  The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed 25 percent of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners. 
(4)  Working stresses for wind loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in the current city building code. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-206. - Sign materials. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall, at a minimum, be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the current city building code. 
(2)  In all signs and sign structures the materials shall, in the absence of specified requirements, conform to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Allowable sign materials. 
(1)  All permanent signs shall be made of metal, masonry, stone, wood, molded polyurethane, or glass approved by the OTDRC. 
(2)  All temporary signs shall be made of metal, masonry, wood, glass, or a flexible material such as cloth, paper, vinyl or other similar material. 
(3)  Lettering shall be made of painted, vinyl, engraved, or mounted letters. 
(4)  Structural steel shall be of such quality as to conform to the current city building code. Secondary members in contact with or directly supporting the display surface may be formed of light gauge steel provided such members are designed in accordance with the specifications of the design of light gauge steel as specified in the current city building code and shall be galvanized. Secondary members, when formed integrally with the display surface, shall be not less than 0.024 inch in thickness. When not formed integrally with the display surface, the minimum thickness of the secondary members shall be 0.10 inch. The minimum thickness of hot-rolled steel members furnishing structural support for signs shall be one-fourth inch, except that, if galvanized, such members shall be not less than one-eighth inch thick. Steel pipes shall be of such quality as to conform to the current city building code. 
(5)  Wood anchors and supports embedded in the soil shall be cedar or other naturally decay-resistant wood or pressure treated with an approved preservative and shall be marked or branded by an approved agency as such. 
(6)  Plastic is not an approved material for use in the Old Town District. 
(7)  Glass or other transparent panels in signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in any one section. 
(8)  Glass without coatings or tints shall be used for windows and doors of all ground floor retail buildings. Use of reflective glass or coverings to obscure transparency is not permitted. 
(c)  Restrictions on combustible materials. Low-profile/monument signs may be constructed of metal, masonry, wood, or cementitous fiberboard. Wall signs, projecting signs, and awning, canopy, and/or marquee signs shall be of noncombustible materials. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  No combustible materials shall be used in the construction of electric signs. 
(2)  Nonelectric wall signs may be constructed of combustible materials on walls allowed to be of unprotected combustible construction. 
(3)  Nonstructural trim may be composed of wood, metal, or any combination thereof. 
(4)  Signs attached to the surface of fabric awnings may be allowed when in conformance with the city building code. 
(5)  Signs erected within five feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within the area of the sign shall be constructed of noncombustible material. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-207. - Sign requirements. 
(a)  Color palette. Materials or paints that are extremely bright, fluorescent, or neon in color shall not be permitted; however, limited use of neon lighting on signs is allowed. Only historic colors certified by the National Trust for Historic Preservation and compatible with other colors on the building shall be allowed for use on signage. 
(b)  Illumination. The light from any source intended to illuminate a sign shall be shaded, shielded, or directed so that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding uses or negatively impact safe vision of pedestrians or vehicle operators moving on public or private streets, driveways, or parking areas. 
Two types of artificial lighting for signs may be allowed in the Old Town District subject to review and approval by the Old Town Design Review Committee: 
(1)  Indirect lighting. Indirect lighting shall be directed at the sign and not produce glare or other atmospheric influence beyond the boundaries of the property. 
(2)  Neon lighting (electrical discharge tubing). Exposed neon lighting shall only be used as lettering or perimeter trim limited to no more than two charged tubes. 
(c)  Number of signs. The allowable number of signs for businesses in the Old Town District shall be per the requirements listed for each sign type in section 9.5-211, but generally: 
(1)  Of the following signs, only one is allowed per building or premises: 
a.  Low-profile/monument sign. 
b.  Single-tenant wall sign. 
(2)  For the following, more than one sign type may be allowed per tenant or building according to the requirements of this section: 
a.  Window sign. 
b.  Temporary window sign. 
c.  Vertical pole banner sign. 
d.  Awning, canopy, or marquee sign. 
e.  Projecting sign. 
f.  Directional sign. 
g.  Building marker or historical designation tablet. 
(3)  For the following signs, one of each type is allowed per tenant: 
a.  Restaurant menu case. 
b.  Sandwich board. 
c.  Multi-tenant wall sign. 
d.  Banner sign. 
e.  Hanging sign. 
(d)  Required signage. All businesses registered with the City of Lewisville are required to have a minimum of one sign listing the company's name. 
 
This graphic is intended for illustrative purposes only. Signs are subject to the requirements listed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-208. - Measurement of sign area and height. 
(a)  Area of a sign. The area of a sign shall be measured as follows: 
(1)  For signs in the shape of a square, rectangle, circle, or similar standard geometric shape, the area shall be calculated by using the standard mathematical formula (i.e., height multiplied by width, 3.14 multiplied by radius squared, etc.). 
Examples: 
 
(2)  For signs whose shape is irregular or composed of individually mounted letters, the area shall be calculated by enclosing the sign elements within a polygon of straight line segments. 
Example: 
 
(3)  The area of a spherical, cylindrical, or other three-dimensional sign shall be measured by calculating the area of a two-dimensional drawing of the largest elevation of the sign. 
(4)  Where a sign has two faces, the area of the largest sign face shall be used to determine the area of the sign, provided the two faces are within five degrees of parallel. Where a sign has two or more faces that are greater than five degrees from parallel, the sign area shall either be calculated as the sum of the area of each face, or the sign shall constitute two signs. 
(b)  Height of a sign. The height of all freestanding signs shall be measured from the top edge of the sign and/or support structure to the average finished grade of the ground below the sign and/or support structure. If a sign is located on a mound, berm, valley or other similar area, the height of the sign shall be measured from the grade of the nearest pavement or top of pavement curb, whichever is more restrictive. 
For projecting signs, the height shall be measured by the display surface and shall not include structural supports integral to the sign, except as modified by this article. 
Example: 
 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-209. - Required clearances and projection limits. 
(a)  General. Clearances required by this article shall be measured as the shortest distance between the leading edge of the sign and the object or surface requiring clearance. The clearances required by this section represent the minimum standards required. The building official shall have the authority to increase these standards as he deems necessary for safety purposes. 
(b)  Sign projection. No sign shall project above the highest point of the building on which it is placed. The highest point of the building excludes any rooftop mechanical structures, chimneys, elevator shafts, ventilators, or other such appurtenances. Additionally, no sign shall project closer than one foot to the back of a street curb. 
(c)  Clearance of conductors. Signs shall conform to the clearance and projection requirements for conductors as listed in Appendix C or the current city electrical code, whichever is more restrictive. 
(d)  Visibility at intersections. 
(1)  No sign shall obstruct the view in any direction at the intersection of a street or with an alley or driveway. 
a.  Vision at all intersections where streets intersect at or near right angles shall be clear at elevations between two and one-half feet and nine feet above the street grade, within a triangular area formed by extending the two curb lines from their point of intersection 45 feet and connecting these points with an imaginary line, as illustrated in Figure 1. If there are no curbs existing, the triangular area shall be formed by extending the property lines from their point of intersection 25 feet and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle. 
 
Figure 1 
b.  For streets that do not intersect at right angles, this triangular area may be increased. In such cases, the city engineer or his designee shall have the authority to vary such requirements as deemed necessary to provide safety for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(e)  Setbacks required. Setbacks for all other sign locations are provided for in other sections of this article. Setbacks shall be measured from the leading edge of the sign to the property line. 
(f)  Other clearances required. 
(1)  Clearance from fire escapes, exits, or standpipes. No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit, standpipe, or fire department connection. 
(2)  Obstruction of openings. No sign shall obstruct any opening to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by the current city building code. 
(3)  Above travel paths. The lowest point of any sign, which extends over an area intended for vehicular use, shall not be less than 14 feet above the finished grade below it. The lowest point of any sign, which extends over an area intended for pedestrian use, shall not be less than seven feet above the finished grade below it. 
a.  Exception: Signs indicating allowable clearances (e.g., drive-through lanes, bridge clearances). 
(g)  Lighting fixture projection. Electrical lighting fixtures and lamps intended to illuminate the face of the sign may be attached to the sign and project beyond the building line or zoning setback for a distance not to exceed six feet, but in no case shall such lighting fixtures extend into clearances required in this article. 
(h)  Right-of-way projection. No sign may project into the public right-of-way, except as modified in this article, but in no case may any sign project closer than one foot to the back of curb. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-210. - Permit exempt signs. 
(a)  General. Certain signs do not require a sign permit. These exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign, device, or decoration from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance in compliance with the provisions of this article and all other laws or ordinances regulating the same. All exempt signs or devices shall not be used or installed in any manner that may result in a potential safety hazard of any type. The signs and devices listed in this section shall not require a sign permit. 
(b)  Building or other decoration. Temporary holiday or festival decorations shall not be considered a sign as defined in this article. Temporary holiday or festival items can only be used during normal calendar holidays. Electrical decorations may require a permit as required by the electrical code. Merchandise or models of products or services incorporated into a window display shall also not be considered a sign as defined in this article. 
(c)  Time, place, and manner regulations. The time, place, and manner regulations in the tables of this section are the only time, place, and manners in which such signs may be erected and maintained. Further, any sign failing to meet these applicable time, place, and manner regulations shall be in violation of this article. 
(d)  Building markers or historic designation tablets. 
EXAMPLES 
Historic Designation Tablet 
 
Building Marker 
 
Historic Designation Tablet 
 
Table 2 
Building Markers or Historic Designation Tablets 1 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	No restrictions 
	Placement on building or premises 	No restrictions 
Manner 	Dimensions 	Building markers shall be of a size and shape consistent with other architectural elements on the building 
	Design standards 	Building markers shall be made of natural or cast stone or cast metal 
1  Historic designation tablets shall conform to the requirements of the governmental entity approving their use. 
 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
 
 
(e)  Commercial real estate signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 3 
Commercial Real Estate Sign Requirements 
Time 	Removed within 14 days of the sale or lease of the property identified 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	No restrictions 
	Placement on building or premises 	10 feet from all property lines or on the building identified for sale or lease 
	Spacing 	No minimum 
Manner 		Lots < 5 acres 	Lots > 5 acres 1 
	Maximum area 	16 square feet 	32 square feet 
	Maximum height 	10 feet 	15 feet 
	Quantity 	1 per premises 	2 per premises 
1  For lots greater than 5 acres, 1 sign with a maximum area of 64 square feet may be substituted for 2 signs per premises at 32 square feet each. 
 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
 
 
(f)  Garage sale signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 4 
Garage Sale Signs 
Time 	Garage sale signs shall be removed upon expiration of the occasional sales permit 
Place 	Location on premises 	No restrictions 
	Placement on premises 	No restrictions 
Mannner 	Maximum area 	Pursuant to the requirements listed in Chapter 7, Article VI: Occasional Sales 
	Maximum height 	
	Quantity 	1 per premises 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(g)  Governmental signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 5 
Governmental Signs 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on premises or building 	No restrictions 
	Placement on premises or building 	No restrictions 
Manner 	Maximum area 	No restrictions 
	Maximum height 	
	Quantity 	
 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
 
 
(h)  Ideological signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 6 
Ideological Signs 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on premises or building 	No restrictions 
	Placement on premises or building 	No restrictions 
Manner 	Maximum area 	6 square feet 
	Maximum height 	No restrictions 
	Quantity 	
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(i)  Political signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 7 
Political Sign Requirements 
Time 	Political signs located on private real property must be removed within 30 days after the election is decided. Political signs located on property other than private real property may be erected no earlier than 60 days before the election and must be removed no later than 30 days after the election. The City may remove any political sign on property other than private real property remaining beyond 30 days after the election and a $5.00 fee shall be charged for each sign retrieved from the city. 
Place 1,2 	On-premises 	Political signs may only be placed on private real property with the consent of the property owner. 
	Off-premises 	Political signs may only be placed in the city parkway between the curb and property line provided they do not create a safety hazard of any type. 
Manner 	Maximum area 	36 square feet per premises or city right-of-way 
	Maximum height 	8 feet 
	Design standards 	Political signs may not be illuminated or have moving parts, and must be kept in good repair. 
1  Political signs shall not be placed in roadway medians or on city-owned property such as city parks, fire stations, libraries, City Hall, etc. 
2  These restrictions do not apply to existing billboard signs upon which political advertising may be placed. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(j)  Property protection signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 8 
Property Protection Signs 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on premises or building 	No restrictions 
	Placement on premises or building 	No restrictions 
Manner 	Maximum area 	2 square feet aggregate per facade 
	Maximum height 	No restrictions 
	Quantity 	
 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
 
 
(k)  Residential real estate signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 9 
Residential Real Estate Signs 
Time 	Residential real estate signs shall be removed upon the sale, lease, or rental of the property advertised 
Place 	Location on premises or building 	No restrictions 
	Placement on premises or building 	No restrictions 
Manner 	Maximum area 	6 square feet 
	Maximum height 	No restrictions 
	Quantity 	1 per premises 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(l)  Restaurant menu cases. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 10 
Restaurant Menu Cases 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building 	Allowed on any facade 
	Placement on building 	Adjacent to a restaurant entrance 
Manner 	Maximum area 	5 square feet 
	Maximum height 	No restrictions 
	Quantity 	1 per restaurant 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(m)  Sandwich board signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
Table 11 
Sandwich Board Signs 1 
Time 	Sandwich board signs may be displayed during the hours of operation for the business being advertised 
Place 	Location on premises 	Allowed on primary facade 
	Placement on premises 	Within 10 feet of the front door and maintaining a clear pedestrian route per applicable accessibility standards 
Manner 	Maximum area 	6 square feet per side 
	Maximum width 	2 feet 
	Quantity 	1 per tenant 
1  Sandwich board signs shall have a chalkboard display surface mounted in a weather-resistant frame or constructed of other materials as approved by the OTDRC. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(n)  Signs required by law. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 12 
Signs Required by Law 
Time 	No restrictions, except as required in the originating national, state, or local law. 
Place 	
Manner 	
 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
 
 
(o)  Temporary window signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 13 
Temporary Window Sign Requirements 
Time 	30 consecutive days, twice per 12-month period. The interval between display periods shall be at least 30 days 
Place 	Location on building 	Allowed on any facade 
	Placement on building 	On the interior or exterior of a window 1 
Manner 	Maximum area 	30% of the total glass area of the window on which the sign is placed 2 
	Maximum height 	Per the window on which it is placed 
1  Signs located inside a building and within 3 feet of a window shall be considered a window sign. 
2  Temporary window signs shall be calculated as part of the maximum area for signage. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(p)  Vertical pole banner signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
Table 14 
Vertical Pole Banner Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Allowed in commercial zoning districts and on public property 
Manner 	Maximum area 1 	24 square feet per pole, 300 square feet aggregate per premises 
	Minimum pole height 1,2 	18 feet 
	Minimum banner clearance 	12 feet 
	Materials 	Horizontal and/or vertical supports shall be made of metal 
1  Minimum pole height and maximum area shall not apply to city-owned vertical pole banner signs, located in rights-of-way and on city-owned property. 
2  The pole on which a vertical pole sign is placed must be used for lot lighting. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(q)  Zoning change signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 15 
Zoning Change Sign Requirements 
Time 1,2 	Zoning change signs must be posted a minimum of 10 days prior to the planning and zoning commission hearing date and remain in place until action is taken by city council. 
Place 	The sign(s) must be located on the subject property facing the street. If more than 1 street bounds the property, the sign must be placed at the corner or on the street most heavily traveled. 
Manner 	One sign must be posted for each 5 acres in the area of requested zoning change with a minimum of 1 sign and a maximum of 5 signs per premises. City staff may authorize a reduction in the number of required signs if warranted. 
1  If the zoning change application is withdrawn in writing prior to a notice of city council public hearing being submitted to the city's official newspaper, the sign must be removed within 24 hours of submission of the written notice to the city. If written notice is received after the city has submitted the notice of public hearing to the official newspaper, the sign must remain on the property until action is taken by the city council. 
2  After the city council has made a decision on the application, the sign(s) must be removed from the property within 10 days. After 10 days, the city may remove the signs. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-211. - Signs requiring a permit. 
All signs requiring a permit shall comply with the requirements in this article. The time, place, and manner regulations in the tables of this section are the only time, place, and manners in which such signs may be erected and maintained. Further, any sign failing to meet these applicable time, place, and manner regulations shall be in violation of this article. 
(a)  Awning, canopy, or marquee signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 16 
Awning, Canopy, or Marquee Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building 	Allowed on any facade 
	Placement on building 	Over first floor window or door openings on the corresponding sign structure 
Manner 	Maximum area 	20 square feet aggregate 1 
	Maximum height 	2 feet 
	Quantity 	1 per window or door opening 
	Design standards 	Canvas awnings are permissible, but permits must be renewed every 2 years. Plastic awnings are prohibited 
1  Lettering along the valance is permissible in addition to any other sign allowed by this article, if it does not exceed 80% of the length of the awning or canopy and six inches in height. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(b)  Construction signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 17 
Construction Sign Requirements 
Time 	Removed within 14 days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy 
Place 	Location on premises 	No restrictions 
	Placement on premises 	Clearances per requirements in this article 
Manner 	Maximum area 	32 square feet 
	Maximum height 	10 feet 
	Quantity 	2 per building site 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(c)  Directional signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
Table 18 
Directional Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	No restrictions 
	Placement on building or premises 	3 feet from all property lines and driveways 
Manner 	Maximum area 	4 square feet 
	Maximum height 	2 feet 
	Quantity 	1 per driveway 
 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
 
 
(d)  Grand opening signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
Table 19 
Grand Opening Sign Requirements 
Time 	May be displayed for 14 consecutive days within 30 days of the opening of a new business 
Place 	Location on building 	No restrictions 
	Placement on building 	Firmly anchored or secured to the building structure 
Manner 	Maximum area 	Per OTDRC 
	Maximum height 	Per OTDRC 
	Design standards 	Per OTDRC 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(e)  Hanging signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
 
Table 20 
Hanging Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building 	Allowed on any facade 
	Placement on building 	Under an awning or similar cover and aligned perpendicular with a building entrance 
Manner 	Maximum width 	3 feet 
	Maximum height 	2 feet, with a minimum of 7 feet of clearance 
	Quantity 	1 per entrance per tenant 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(f)  Low-profile/monument signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 21 
Low-Profile/Monument Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	Allowed on the same side as the primary facade 
	Placement on building or premises 	3 feet from all property lines 
Manner 	Maximum area 	40 square feet 
	Maximum height 	4 feet 
	Quantity 	1 per premises 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(g)  Model home signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
Table 22 
Model Home Sign Requirements 
Time 	Shall be removed when the model home ceases to be used as a model 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	No restrictions 
	Placement on building or premises 	10 feet from all property lines 
Manner 	Maximum area 	32 square feet 
	Maximum height 	10 feet 
	Quantity 	1 per subdivision 1 
1  Only 2 directional signs are allowed in addition to the model home sign, but they must be removed when the model home sign is removed. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(h)  Multi-tenant wall signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
Table 23 
Multi-Tenant Wall Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	Allowed on any facade 
	Placement on building 	As determined by the OTDRC 
Manner 		Buildings less than 4,000 s.f. 	Buildings more than 4,000 s.f. 
	Maximum area 	12 square feet 1,2 	20 square feet 1,2 
	Maximum height 	The highest point of the building to which the sign is attached, excluding appurtenant elements 
	Quantity 	1 per tenant 
1  The total sign area of all wall signs (single and multi-tenant) on a facade shall not exceed 1 square foot per 1 linear foot of exterior wall of that facade. 
2  For a tenant who occupies 50% or more of the gross leasable area of the building, the maximum area of the sign may be 40 square feet. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(i)  Off-premises construction signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
Table 24 
Off-Premises Construction Sign Requirements 1 
Time 	Off-premises construction signs shall be removed within 14 days after the last lot for sale in the subdivision is sold or if construction of new units ceases for a period of 3 months or within 24 months, whichever occurs first 
Place 	Location on premises 	No restrictions 
	Placement on premises 	10 feet minimum from all property lines 
Manner 	Maximum area 	20 square feet 
	Maximum height 	10 feet 
	Quantity 	3 per subdivision 
1  Off-premises construction signs shall require written landowner permission prior to permitting. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(j)  Projecting signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 25 
Projecting Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	Allowed on any facade with a public entrance 
	Placement on building 	Above a first floor public entrance 
	Spacing 	1 per 25 feet 
Manner 	Maximum area 	15 square feet 
	Maximum height 	The highest point of the building to which the sign is attached, excluding appurtenant elements 
	Maximum width 	6 feet from attachment to wall and no closer than 1 foot to back of curb 
	Maximum depth 	5 feet 
	Quantity 	1 per public entrance 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(k)  Single-tenant wall signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
 
Table 26 
Single-Tenant Wall Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	Allowed on any facade 
	Placement on building 	Within a sign band or similar area delineated by the building architecture 
Manner 	Maximum area 	50 square feet on the primary facade and 25 square feet on secondary facades 
	Maximum height 	The highest point of the building to which the sign is attached, excluding appurtenant elements 
	Quantity 	1 on the primary facade and 1 on a secondary facade per building 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(l)  Temporary banner signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
 
Table 27 
Temporary Banner Sign Requirements 
Time 	30 consecutive days beginning from the permit issue date, 2 times per 12-month period; the interval between periods of display shall be a minimum of 30 days 
Place 	Location on building 	Allowed on any facade 
	Placement on building 	Over first floor building openings and firmly attached to the building structure 
	Spacing 	1 per 75 feet 
Manner 	Maximum area 	20 square feet aggregate 
	Maximum height 	Not applicable 
	Quantity 	1 per building 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(m)  Window signs. 
EXAMPLES 
 
 
Table 28 
Window Sign Requirements 
Time 	No restrictions 
Place 	Location on building or premises 	Allowed on any facade 
	Placement on building 	On the interior or exterior of a window 1 
Manner 	Maximum area 	30% of the total glass area of the window on which the sign is placed 2 
	Maximum height 	Per the window on which it is placed 
1  Signs located inside a building and within 3 feet of a window shall be considered a window sign. 
2  Temporary window signs and customary identification shall be calculated as part of the maximum area for signage. 
 
ILLUSTRATION 
 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Sec. 9.5-212. - Prohibited signs. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the following signs are expressly prohibited by this article. 
(a)  Abandoned signs. 
(b)  Audible signs. Exception: Two-way communication integrated into a menu board sign. 
(c)  Balloons, balloon signs, inflatable signs, pennants and/or streamers. Exception: Balloons, balloon signs, inflatable signs, pennants and/or streamers may be used as part of a grand opening sign permit. 
(d)  Bench signs. 
(e)  Billboards. 
(f)  Feather flags, wind movement or wind devices. Exception: Feather flags, wind movement or wind devices may be used as part of a grand opening sign permit. 
(g)  Flashing signs. 
(h)  Off-premises signs. Exception: Off-premises construction signs. 
(i)  Lighted signs in single-family, two-family (duplex), and OTMU-1 zoning districts. 
(j)  Merchandise, equipment, products, vehicles, or other items which are not available for purchase or rental, but are intended to attract attention, or for identification or advertising purposes. 
(k)  Portable displays. Exception: Sandwich board signs that conform to the requirements of this article are allowed. 
(l)  Searchlights. 
(m)  Signs advertising illegal activities. 
(n)  Signs containing words or symbols that would cause confusion because of their resemblance to highway traffic control or directional signals. 
(o)  Signs on public property or utility easements. Any sign placed on public property or recorded utility easements, including public rights-of-way, without city approval or otherwise allowed by this article shall be removed without notice. 
(p)  Signs on retaining walls, fences, rocks, or natural features. 
(q)  Signs or banners on a pole. Exception: Vertical pole banner signs that conform to the requirements of this article. 
(r)  Temporary signs, unless otherwise permitted by this article. 
(s)  Variable message electronic reader boards. 
(t)  Vehicle signs remaining stationary for a period exceeding 48 hours. 
(u)  Vending machines outside a building. 
(v)  Any other sign not specifically allowed by this ordinance is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
ARTICLE XIII. - VALET PARKING 
 
Sec. 9.5-213. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article applies to valet parking services conducted within the boundaries of the Old Town entertainment district, as defined in section 9-1 of the city Code. 
(b)  This article does not apply to occasional valet parking services provided: (1) at a private residence; (2) in connection with a social or non-profit fundraising activity; (3) pursuant to a special event permit; or (4) in connection with a city or city-sponsored event. This article also does not apply to a valet parking service that operates (including maneuvering or queuing of vehicles) exclusively on private property. 
( 0011-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 2-5-18)  
Sec. 9.5-214. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
Block face means one side of a street between two consecutive intersecting streets. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article, or the director's designated representative. 
Host business means a real property owner or lessee of real property at which a business is operated that intends to provide valet parking service adjacent to its real property. A host business does not include a valet operator. A host business must be an owner or lessee of real property immediately adjacent to the valet parking service area designated on the site map provided with the valet parking license application. 
Right-of-way means any area dedicated for public use as a public street, pedestrian way, or other thoroughfare, including, but not limited to, streets, roadways, parkways, alley, sidewalks, and pedestrian ways. 
Valet operator means a business whose primary purpose is providing valet parking service operations. 
Valet parking service means, regardless of whether a fee is charged: (1) accepting possession of a vehicle on the right-of-way for the purpose of parking the vehicle for the valet operator; (2) retrieving a parked vehicle and returning it to the valet operator on the right-of-way; or (3) using the right-of-way in any manner to maneuver a vehicle for the valet operator. 
( 0011-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 2-5-18)  
Sec. 9.5-215. - License. 
(a)  License required. A city-issued valet parking license is required to operate a valet parking service. 
(b)  License application. An application for a valet parking license shall be made by a host business in writing on a form prescribed by the director. All information requested in the application must be provided for an application to be considered complete. Only completed applications shall be processed by the director. 
(1)  License agreement required. A written license agreement between the city and the host business is required to obtain a valet parking license. 
a.  The director may place conditions in a license agreement if he determines such conditions are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare; to mitigate traffic impacts; and/or to protect surrounding uses. Such conditions shall be made a part of the valet parking license. 
b.  No license agreement shall be valid unless approved by the director. 
c.  The host business and its employees, contractors and agents operating the valet parking service shall comply at all times with the terms contained in the license agreement and this article. 
(2)  Property owner permission required. An applicant that is a lessee of the host business property shall obtain written permission of the property owner to apply for a valet parking license. 
(3)  Written notice to surrounding property owners and businesses required. A host business shall give written notice to all property owners and businesses within 200 feet of the host business property and within 360 feet along the same block face as a requirement for obtaining a license from the city. This notice shall also provide a contact number for the city, where that property owner or business can call to express any concerns or support of the valet parking license application. 
(4)  Fees required. 
a.  Application fee. A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set forth in section 2-201 of the city Code must accompany each application for a valet parking license. 
b.  Fee for queuing spaces. An annual fee in an amount set forth in section 2-201 of the city Code per parallel parking space used for queuing within the right-of-way shall be paid by the host business prior to the issuance of a valet parking license or renewal. 
(c)  Specific requirements. 
(1)  Valet parking services may only operate between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m., unless further restricted by the license agreement with the city. 
(2)  A minimum of 75 feet for queuing shall be provided. If the proposed queuing area is in the right-of-way, at least three parallel parking spaces of at least 25 feet in length shall be required for operation of the valet parking service. The director, however, may determine that because of specific traffic conditions a greater or lesser number of spaces is required to efficiently operate a valet parking service. 
(3)  Under no circumstance shall a public parking space be designated or reserved for parking a vehicle. Use of such spaces for parking vehicles shall only be allowed on a first-come, first-serve basis. 
(4)  Under no circumstance shall a valet parking service use on-street parking to park vehicles. 
(5)  Queuing spaces and/or stands for a valet parking service may not: 
a.  Be within 20 feet of a crosswalk, intersection, traffic control device or stop sign; 
b.  Be within the right-of-way and within 360 feet in the same block face as another valet stand location or valet queuing located within the right-of-way; 
c.  Be within ten feet of a fire hydrant, fire call box, police or other emergency facility; 
d.  Be within five feet of a driveway; 
e.  Reduce the unobstructed space for the passage of pedestrians to less than four feet; 
f.  Be within three feet in front of or 15 feet behind a sign marking a designated bus stop; or 
g.  Be located in front of a residential lot. 
(6)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, only one valet parking service shall be permitted for every 360 feet per block face. Licenses shall be issued to eligible applicants on a first-come, first-serve basis. A valet parking service, however, shall be required to provide valet parking to any customers visiting businesses located within at least 360 feet of that valet parking service on that same block face. 
(d)  Approval. An application for a valet parking license shall be approved if the director finds: 
(1)  The proposed valet operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
(2)  The applicant and/or the proposed valet operator have not violated any conditions of a previous or existing valet parking license within the past three years; 
(3)  The proposed valet parking service operation will not endanger the safety of any person or property; and 
(4)  The proposed valet parking service operation is permitted under this article and all federal (including ADA accessibility requirements), state and local laws. 
(e)  Expiration of license. A valet parking license expires one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner terminated by the director. To renew the license, a new application must be submitted and the requisite fees remitted pursuant to this article. 
(f)  Modification and revocation. The director may, at any time and for any reason, modify the terms of or revoke a valet parking license issued pursuant to this article. 
(g)  Temporary suspension. The director may temporarily suspend the operations of a valet parking service if the right-of-way used by the valet parking service is needed for an emergency or temporary use, including, but not limited to, city-sponsored special events and the construction, maintenance, or repair of a street or utility. 
(h)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director under this article may appeal the decision to city manager by filing a notice of written appeal to the director within ten business days of the director's decision. 
(i)  No rights established. Nothing in this article is intended to establish any legal real property interest in operating a valet parking service or any legal property interest in a valet parking license. 
( 0011-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 2-5-18)  
Sec. 9.5-216. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to provide or engage in valet parking services without a valid valet parking license issued pursuant to this article. A valet parking license that has expired or that has been suspended or revoked is not a valid license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a valet parking operator to stop or direct traffic. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense. Each and every day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
( 0011-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 2-5-18)  
Secs. 9.5-217—9.5-240. - Reserved.  
APPENDIX A. - GUIDELINES FOR SIGNAGE IN OLD TOWN 
(a)  Intent. This section presents guidelines for the design of new and renovated signs in Lewisville's Old Town District. Organized into a series of relevant design topics, these guiding principles help to frame the prescriptive requirements of the Old Town Sign Ordinance. Within each category, individual policies and design guidelines are presented, which the Old Town Design Review Committee may reference in determining the appropriateness of the work proposed. 
(b)  Overview. Signs are an integral part of the built environment and if designed well, can provide direction, encourage business growth, and enhance an area's image. If designed poorly, they can confuse viewers, stifle business, and detract from the appearance and perception of the public realm. 
(c)  Purpose. A sign typically serves two functions: to attract attention and to convey information, essentially identifying the business or services offered within a building. Architectural elements of a building, window displays, outdoor seating, and other streetscape elements can also work to supplement signage. For example, the building front alone can serve as an attention-getting function, allowing the sign to be focused on conveying information. 
 
 
 
(d)  Core Principles. In the determination of appropriate sign design, the following principles should be observed: 
(1)  Signs are subordinate to the building architecture 
(2)  Signs are part of a larger streetscape 
(3)  Signs are intended for different speeds of traffic 
Consider the building front as part of an overall sign program. Signs should be coordinated within the overall facade composition so that it is in proportion to the building and does not dominate the appearance. 
Additionally, a master sign plan for the entire building should be developed to guide design decisions for individual signs. This is especially important where the use of contemporary building forms and styles in conjunction with several colorful, attention-getting signs are the norm. Typical "strip-commercial" development patterns are inappropriate in Old Town. 
A sign should appear to be in scale with the facade. Locate signage on a building so that it emphasizes design elements of the facade. Mount signs to fit within existing architectural features and use the shape of the sign to reinforce the horizontal lines of moldings and transoms seen from the street. 
The placement or location of a sign is perhaps the most critical factor in maintaining the order and integrity of Old Town. Consistent placement of signs according to building type, size, location, and even materials, creates a visual pattern that its audience can easily interpret and utilize to the mutual benefit of merchants, tourists, and customers. 
 
 
 
(e)  Design Elements. 
(1)  Color. The color palette for signs should be drawn from those approved by the National Trust for Historic Preservation. Colors should relate to each other as well as their surroundings. For example, a very light or white background on a sign may be too stark for its context and compete with the architectural elements of the building. Also limit the number of colors used on a sign. In general, no more than three to five colors are recommended. 
(2)  Typeface. Typical typefaces found in Old Town are constructed from serif-style fonts. Serif-style fonts tend to be more legible at larger sizes while sans-serif fonts are more appropriate for supporting detail text. A mixture of fonts and lettering sizes can add interest to a sign, provided that no more than two are used. Avoid hard-to-read or overly intricate typeface styles. 
 
(3)  Shape. Signs in Old Town should have detailed edges. For example, rectangular signs may have notched or rounded edges, and should relate to the architectural character of the building. An elliptical sign may be more appropriate as a projecting sign than as a wall sign if the shape of the sign is discordant with the architecture of the building. However, the same elliptical sign could be used to highlight the rhythm of architectural elements by locating it over a column or centered within a structural bay. 
 
(4)  Materials. Sign materials should be consistent with those listed in the Old Town Sign Ordinance. Additionally, monument signs should reflect the architectural style of the buildings on the same lot. For example, a monument sign for a brick building should be made of brick as well. Plastic is not an allowed material in Old Town. 
(5)  Lighting Type. Lighting types should also be consistent with those listed in the Sign Ordinance. Period style lighting fixtures should be considered. For projecting or wall signs, goose-neck style fixtures are recommended. 
 
(6)  Legibility. Care should be given to the intended audience of a sign and its readability. Positive contrast, or lighter text on a darker background, tends to be easier to read. Negative contrast, or darker text on a lighter background, can sometimes cause the lettering to develop a fuzzy edge. [2] 
Studies show that seven words are the most a viewer can effectively read. [3] 
 
(7)  Variety and Creativity. Variety in sign design should be encouraged. Most businesses choosing to locate in Old Town, particularly in the Old Town Center, are small family-owned enterprises each with their own personalized way of operating. This social context offers the community an opportunity to develop signs that are home-grown and unique. [4] 
Quality and craftsmanship should be a part of every sign in Old Town. Using a symbol for a sign is encouraged. Symbols add interest to the street, can be read quickly, and are remembered better than written words. 
 
(8)  Sign Quality. Business signage can be the first impression a potential customer receives, and should incorporate the same level of care and quality found inside the business. A quality sign typically includes a balance of font styles and sizes, colors, graphics, durable materials, and supports the building architecture. 
 
(9)  Audience. Sign design should consider the viewer or "end user" of the sign. Larger signs are more appropriate for faster moving traffic, such as vehicles, where the time the viewer has to identify the sign, understand it, and react to it is shorter than pedestrian traffic. For vehicular-oriented signs, greater spacing between text and larger lettering is appropriate. For pedestrian-oriented signs, text may be smaller and still achieve legibility. 
 
(10)  Sign Hierarchy. Signs should work together in a hierarchical relationship. The larger, primary signs of a business such as a monument sign or a wall sign would most likely express the main idea of the business, including the name and perhaps an iconic graphic representing the industry or character of the place. Secondary signs, such as window and hanging signs, strengthen the overall theme offering supporting information. For example, a cafe may contain the name of the business on the wall sign and then in smaller lettering on the window, list items offered (e.g., coffee, tea, pastries, etc.). In this way, the information is organized in the same format it is processed by the viewer: first locating the destination, then selecting options at that location. Duplicating information on the same facade does not utilize the allowable sign area to its full potential and is discouraged in Old Town. 
(11)  Historic Context. Traditionally, a variety of signs existed within the Old Town District: 
 
•  Small, freestanding signs mounted on a pole or post; located near the sidewalk because the primary structure or business was set back from the street (e.g., an area with residential character), printed on both sides. 
•  Medium-sized, square or rectangular-shaped signs that projected from the building above the awnings or canopies, printed on both sides. 
•  Small horizontally-oriented rectangular signs that protruded from the building below the awnings or canopies but above pedestrians' heads, printed on both sides. 
•  Medium to large, horizontally oriented rectangular signs attached flat against the building, above and/or below the awnings, printed on one side only. 
•  Window signs, painted on glass, used at the street level and on upper floors. 
 
Signs that were historically mounted on a building's exterior advertised the primary business or service. Typically, this use occupied a street-level space and sometimes upper floors as well. In the case of a large structure that included several businesses on upper floors, the name of the building itself was displayed on an exterior sign and tenants relied on a directory placed at the street level. Signs were designed to fit within architectural features and in many cases, were mounted flush above the storefront, just over moldings. Others were located between columns or centered in "panels" on a building face. This method enabled the viewer to see the design and character of individual structures. Generally, signs allowed in Old Town fall into one of three categories: primary, secondary, and temporary. 
 
•  A primary sign represents the owner's largest sign expense and is likely the most important of the sign types. Only one primary sign is allowed per business, per building. 
•  Secondary signs are utilized in addition to the primary building sign and generally tied to an architectural feature. Typically, a secondary sign is an awning, projecting, or window sign. The secondary sign is generally intended to capture the attention of a pedestrian walking on the sidewalk, while the primary sign's audience is typically driving past in a vehicle. 
•  Tertiary signs are also intended for pedestrian view and may consist of hanging, sandwich board, or restaurant menu cases. These signs are allowed for each tenant of a building. 
(f)  Design of Sign Types. 
(1)  Awning, Canopy, or Marquee Signs. Awning and canopy structures should be of a visually uniform style on a building. For example, it would be inappropriate to have metal canopies, canvas awnings, and bullnose-style awnings on the same facade or along two facades sharing a corner. However, different styles of awning or canopy structures could be located on opposite facades where they cannot be seen at the same time. 
 
 
(2)  Wall Signs. In many cases, turn-of-the century building types common in Lewisville have a sign band. This is the ideal location for the primary building sign. The sign band is typically located above the transom and below the second-floor windows. When utilizing the sign band as the sign placement location, it is important to respect the borders. The sign should not overlap or crowd the top, bottom, or ends of the sign band. When feasible, place a wall sign so that it aligns with others on the block. 
 
(3)  Window Signs and Displays. While window displays are not reviewed by the OTDRC, their use is very important to retailers. The attractiveness of a display is likely the highest contributing factor to whether or not a pedestrian will enter a store, and its design should be carefully planned. 
 
The OTDRC will recognize and assume oversight of signs within a store that are obviously intended to be viewed through the window. 
Use of reflective, tinted, or coated glass is not appropriate for windows and doors of ground floor commercial buildings in Old Town. Additionally, window coverings should not be used to obscure transparency. 
(4)  Hanging Signs. A small hanging sign may be easier for a pedestrian to read than other sign types, and is encouraged. Hanging signs should be located near the business entrance, just above the door or to the side of it. A hanging sign should be mounted perpendicular with the building facade. 
 
(5)  Projecting Signs. Projecting signs should be larger than hanging signs, mounted higher, and centered on the facade or positioned at the corner of a building. For buildings located at a street intersection, a projecting sign not exceeding 30 square feet may be considered at the corner facing the street intersection, provided there are no projecting signs on the building facades facing the intersecting streets. 
 
(6)  Multi-Tenant Wall Signs. Where several businesses share a building, the signs should be coordinated. If several smaller signs are used, they should be located in harmony with the building architecture, taking into account bay spacing, windows, or other elements that establish an architectural rhythm. Use similar forms or backgrounds for the signs to tie them together visually and make them easier to read. Consistency among the signs should be balanced with sign originality to maintain legibility and character. 
 
(7)  Low-Profile/Monument Signs. Low-profile/monument signs should match the architectural style and material of buildings on the same lot. 
 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
APA brief "Context-Sensitive Signage Design", pg. 32 

--- (3) --- 
Allston Village Design Guidelines, Allston, MA 

--- (4) --- 
APA brief "Context-Sensitive Signage Design", pg. 68 
 
APPENDIX B. - OLD TOWN BOUNDARIES 
 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13; 0032-18-ORD , § 6(Exh. 3), 6-4-18)  
APPENDIX C. - REQUIRED CLEARANCES FROM CONDUCTORS 
Table 17 
Required Clearances from Conductors 
Table 17 
Required Clearances From Conductors 	Communication Conductors and Cables, Guys, Messengers, Lightning Protection Wires, Neutral Conductors and Supply Cables 	Supply Line Conductors and Street 
Lighting Conductors 
		Open Supply Conductors 
(Voltages are Phase to Ground) 
		Up to 
750V 	750V to 
8.7 kV 	8.7 kV to 
22 kV 	22 kV to 
50 kV 
Clearance of: 	(Feet) 	(Feet) 	(Feet) 	(Feet) 	(Feet) 
Buildings: 
Horizontal: 	
To walls and projections 	3 	5 	5 	6 	7 
To unguarded windows 	3 	5 	5 	6 	7 
To balconies and areas accessible to pedestrians 1 	3 	5 	5 	6 	7 
Vertical: 	
Above or below roofs or projections not accessible to pedestrians 	3 	10 	10 	10 	11 
Above or below balconies and roofs accessible to pedestrians 1 	8 	15 3 	15 	15 	16 
Above roofs accessible to truck traffic 4 	18 	18 	20 	20 	21 
Above roofs accessible to vehicles, but not subject to truck traffic 	10 	15 3 	20 	20 	21 
Signs, chimneys, radio and television antennas, tanks, and other installations not classified as buildings or bridges 2 : 
Horizontal 	3 	5 	5 	6 	7 
Vertical above or below 	3 	5 	8 	8 	9 
1  A roof, balcony, or area is considered accessible to pedestrians if the means of access is through a doorway, ramp, stairway, or permanently mounted ladder. 
2  The required clearances shall be increased to allow for the movement of motorized signs and other movable attachments. 
3  This clearance may be reduced to 12 feet for supply conductors limited to 300 volts to ground if more than 25 feet measured in any direction from a swimming pool, swimming area, or diving platform. 
4  For the purpose of this rule, trucks are defined as any vehicles exceeding eight feet in height. 
 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-1-13)  
Chapter 10 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Apr. 20, 2020, repealed the former ch. 10. §§ 10-1—10-166, and enacted a new ch. 10 as set out herein. The former ch. 10 was entitled "Parks and Leisure Services,"and derived from: Code 1990; Ord. No. 1517-2-90, adopted Feb. 5, 1990; Ord. No. 1543-5-90, adopted May 21, 1990; Ord. No. 1565-9-90, adopted Sept. 11, 1990; Ord. No. 1628-8-91, adopted Aug. 5, 1991; Ord. No. 1847, adopted Sept. 20, 1993; Ord. No. 1965-9-94, adopted Sept. 12, 1994; Ord. No. 2088-2-96, adopted Feb. 5, 1996; Ord. No. 2638-12-2000, adopted Dec. 18, 2000; Ord. No. 2641-1-2001, adopted Jan. 8, 2001; Ord. No. 2693-6-2001, adopted June 18, 2001; Ord. No. 2723-9-2001, adopted Sept. 17, 2001; Ord. No. 2797-04-2002, adopted April 15, 2002; Ord. No. 3167-02-2005, adopted Feb. 7, 2005; Ord. No. 3425-03-2007, adopted Mar. 19, 07; Ord. No. 3577-06-2008, adopted June 2, 2008; Ord. No. 3756-04-2010 , adopted Apr. 5, 2010; Ord. No. 4126-10-2014 , adopted Oct. 6, 2014; Ord. No. 4135-11-2014 , adopted Nov. 17, 2014; and 0109-19-ORD , adopted Mar. 4, 2019. 
Cross reference— Open-space requirements for parks, etc., in the land development regulations, § 6-444. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City-approved league play or athletic event shall mean an athletic event held that has an executed facility use agreement with the city and which is authorized, organized or scheduled with the assistance of the parks and recreation department. 
Corps shall mean United States Army Corps of Engineers. 
Director shall mean the director of the parks and recreation department or authorized representative or designee. 
Game field shall mean any portion of a park that is either owned or leased by the city that has been designated as an area used for city-sponsored or co-sponsored league play or tournament play. This includes fields for football, soccer, softball, baseball or any other sport activity sponsored or authorized by the city. 
League play shall mean scheduled sports games or matches between a group of teams that regularly play one another. 
LLELA shall mean Lewisville Lake Environmental Learning Area. 
Park shall mean a park, reservation area, playground, recreation center, or any other area in the city, owned or used by the city, which is devoted to active or passive recreation, including all planted expressways, parkways, triangles and traffic circles maintained by the city, except the parkway strips between curb and sidewalks along the streets and highways of the city. 
Personal mobility device shall mean a device motorized or powered by human power to assist a person with a disability as defined by the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 681.001(2). 
Recreation facilities shall mean a public facility for recreation managed by the City of Lewisville Parks and Recreation Department. 
Tournament play shall mean a series of scheduled sports games or matches between a group of teams that play one another in a compressed amount of time. 
Vehicle shall mean a car, truck, golf cart or trailer of any size, kind or description. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Secs. 10-2—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Administration. 
The administration and supervision of the parks and recreation department shall be the responsibility of the director or such other person as may be delegated or assigned such duties by the city manager. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-27. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in any park after he or she has been advised by the director or a park enforcement officer designated by the director that he or she is acting in violation of this chapter or any other provision of law and has been asked to leave. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation partnership, association or other entity recognized in law violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof, be fined a sum not to exceed the maximum allowed by law and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each during or on which violation occurs or continues. 
(c)  The director and park enforcement officers designated by the director shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter through the issuance of citations. Certified peace officers of the city may also enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Secs. 10-28—10-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARK BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Park board, § 11.10. 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-46 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-36. - Composition. 
The park board shall consist of not less than five nor more than nine members. The members shall be citizens and qualified voters of the city. The members shall be appointed by the city council for two-year terms. Members shall be appointed to numbered places on the park board. Even-numbered places are appointed on even-numbered years, and odd-numbered places are appointed on odd-numbered years. Members shall serve without compensation. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-37. - Vacancies. 
(a)  If a replacement member of the park board has not been designated by the end of a member's term, that member shall continue serving until a successor is appointed. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to serve for the unexpired term. The vacancy shall not impact the park board's capacity to establish a quorum. 
(c)  Any member may be removed at will by the city council. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-38. - Officers. 
The park board shall elect annually the following officers: 
(1)  Chairperson. 
(2)  Vice-chairperson. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-39. - Duties of officers. 
(a)  Chairperson. The chairperson of the park board shall preside at all meetings, shall appoint standing committee members, and shall perform such other duties as usually pertain to the office or as may be instructed by the park board. 
(b)  Vice-chairperson. It shall be the duty of the vice-chairperson to perform the duties of the chairperson in the chairperson's absence. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-40. - Powers and duties. 
The city council maintains the right to act independently on all matters pertaining to parks and recreation without park board consideration or recommendation. The park board may, however, act in an advisory capacity to the city council and the parks and recreation department staff. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-41. - Subcommittees. 
(a)  Appointment. The park board, by a majority vote of the quorum present at any regular or special meeting, may appoint such park board members and other individuals, as they see fit, to subcommittees to serve the purposes of the park board. 
(b)  Termination. The subcommittees may be terminated in the same manner as they are appointed. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-42. - Meetings. 
(a)  The park board shall meet on a monthly basis, as needed. 
(b)  The park board shall meet for a special meeting if called by the chairperson or the director. 
(c)  A simple majority of the members of the park board shall constitute a quorum. 
(d)  Any member absent from any meeting shall be identified in the minutes of such meeting. In the absence of a quorum for a meeting, the director will submit, or cause to have submitted, a report to the city council stating all members absent. 
(e)  The director shall attend park board meetings. 
(f)  The director shall participate in meetings to provide staff assistance, reports and recommendations. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Secs. 10-43—10-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways and property, ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 10-66. - Hours of operation—Generally; closed parks. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, parks shall be closed between 11:00 p.m. each day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. The director is authorized to erect such physical barriers as shall be necessary to prevent entry. 
(b)  LLELA shall be closed between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from March through October and 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from November through February. 
(c)  Lake Park day use area shall be closed between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. March through September and 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. from November through February. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the director is authorized to designate hours of operation and uses for all parks and to close any park, including LLELA and the Lake Park day use area, as needed. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-67. - Same—Violations. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to remain, stay or loiter in any closed park, except by special written permission issued by the director. All city personnel shall have the authority to require an individual remaining on park property after closing in violation of this section to leave the property. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-68. - Same—Special permission. 
Special written permission may be granted by the director for organized sports or special events which last past the designated hours of operation for the parks; and in such event, any park containing the permitted activity shall remain open until the activity shall cease, at which time the park shall be closed. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-69. - Prohibited acts. 
Within the limits of any park or recreation facility, it shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts, except as may be otherwise provided: 
(1)  To hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal of any kind; provided that this shall not apply to dogs when led by a leash, not more than six feet long or when in a designated dog park. 
(2)  To ride any horse or other animal upon any trail or street in any park of the city not designated as an equestrian trail. 
(3)  To carry or discharge any firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, or any other fireworks, air guns or slingshots; discharge any firearm; or carry any firearm, except those persons duly authorized and licensed by the state to do otherwise in accordance with state law. 
(4)  To damage, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus or property or to mark or write upon, paint or deface in any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench or other structure without written consent of the director. 
(5)  To pluck, pull up, cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, plant or flower, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer without written consent of the director. 
(6)  To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, animal refuse or other refuse elsewhere than in receptacles provided therefor. 
(7)  To participate in any activity on any park area when such activity will create a danger to the public or may be considered a public nuisance. The city council or director may designate particular locations within park areas for specific activities. 
(8)  Overnight camping is prohibited in any park, with exception of specific areas of any park where signs have been posted allowing overnight camping or with special permit issued by director. 
(9)  To drive any vehicle across the curbs, sidewalks, grass, lawn or anywhere else within such park or trail, other than upon the roads, streets, parking lots, parking areas and camping areas designated for that purpose. 
(10)  To drive any vehicle carelessly, disregarding the rights or safety of others or without due caution and at a speed, or in a manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, any person or property. 
(11)  To park vehicles or trailers upon the grass, lawn or anywhere else within such park, other than in those areas designated for that purpose or with special permit issued by director. 
(12)  To park any vehicle or trailer in any parking lot or parking area so as to obstruct, block or hinder ingress or egress of a park, recreation facility, parking lot or parking area. 
(13)  To use or speak any threatening, abusive, insulting or other language constituting "fighting words" in any of the parks, and no person shall commit, in any such parks, any obscene, lewd or indecent act or create any nuisance. 
(14)  To disturb in any manner any event, activity, picnic, meeting, service, concert, exercise or exhibition. 
(15)  To distribute, post, place or erect any advertising, handbill, circular, bill, notice, paper, sign or other advertising device without written consent of the director. 
(16)  To sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise or services unless such person has a written agreement with the city or a city permit. 
(17)  To practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession or to circulate any petition of whatsoever kind or character without written approval of the director. 
(18)  To light, make or sustain a fire in an enclosed picnic pavilion, fireplace, grill or other receptacle within a park in violation of a fire ban declared by the city or county fire marshal. Fires are permitted only in the grills and fire rings provided by the city or in grills expressly approved by the director. 
(19)  To fail or refuse to remove and properly dispose of solid animal waste of pets or other animals brought into any park by said person. It is a defense to prosecution if the solid animal waste is from a guide or law enforcement dog. 
(20)  To operate any public address system or other amplified sound system in a park without first obtaining a permit from the park director or designee. 
(21)  To play golf or use or play with golf balls within any part of any park not designated as a golf facility. 
(22)  To light, smoke or carry a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind including using electronic nicotine or vapor delivery devices or to use, chew or snuff smokeless tobacco inside parks and recreation facilities. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-70. - Defenses to Prosecution. 
(a)  Subsections (9), (11), and (12) of section 10-69 shall not apply to vehicles operated by the city, county, state or federal agencies, when such vehicles are operated for the purpose of maintenance or improvements to such parks. 
(b)  All police, fire and ambulance units shall be exempt from this article, when such vehicles are being operated under emergency conditions or for city business. 
(c)  Riding a personal mobility device, self-propelled cycle, scooter or skateboard on designated trails, pathways or areas shall be exempt from this article. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-71. - Possession of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he consumes an alcoholic beverage or possesses an open container that contains an alcoholic beverage while in a park or within 15 feet of the following types of park premises: 
(1)  Athletic facilities, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, baseball diamonds, athletic fields and game courts. 
(2)  Swimming pools. 
(3)  Playgrounds furnished with play equipment for children. 
(4)  Vehicle parking areas. 
(5)  Interior roadways. 
(6)  Inside recreational centers and restroom facilities. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the person was on a site for which the consumption of an alcoholic beverage or the possession of an open container that contains an alcoholic beverage was designated by action of the city council to allow such consumption or possession. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "alcoholic beverage" is as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-72. - Possession of glass containers. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), a person commits an offense if he brings, carries, transports or possesses a glass container customarily used to transport liquids while in any park area. 
(b)  For events allowed by city permit at the Wayne Ferguson Plaza, glass containers may be used to the extent allowed by the permit. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-73. - Parking regulations at pay parking areas of Lewisville Lake Park. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he parks a motor vehicle at the paid parking lots at the Lake Park day use area or East Copperas Park, also known as Tower Bay, without paying in advance the posted parking fee. The parking fee shall be determined as set forth in section 2-201 of this Code. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to vehicles operated by city, county, state or federal agencies, when such vehicles are operated for emergency, maintenance or improvements within the park. 
(c)  Upon paying prescribed parking fees, a person shall take the receipt evidencing the same and display the receipt on the dashboard or other prominent place visible to persons from outside the motor vehicle. It shall be presumed that parking fees were not paid if a motor vehicle parked in the area described in subsection (a) does not prominently display the parking receipt. 
(d)  Motor vehicles and trailers parked without paying the parking fee may be towed and removed from the parking area. Towing costs shall be ascribed to the operator of the illegally parked motor vehicle. 
(e)  Motor vehicles and trailers may not be parked in pay parking areas overnight without a special permit. 
(f)  Failure to pay for parking is a strict liability offense and no culpable mental state is required in any prosecution under this section. 
(g)  The registered owner of a motor vehicle is presumed to be the operator of the motor vehicle for the purposes of this section. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-74. - Reserved.  
Sec. 10-75. - United States Army Corps of Engineers parks and preserves. 
The city shall adopt Title 37, Chapter 111, Part 327 Rules and Regulations Governing Public Use of Corps of Engineers Water Resources Development Projects and apply them solely to parks and other recreation areas within the city which are owned, administered and leased from the corps. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Secs. 10-76—10-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIELDS AND RECREATION FACILITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways and property, ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 10-96. - Hours of operation and uses; game fields and recreation facilities. 
The director is authorized to designate hours of operation and uses for game fields and recreation facilities. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-97. - Game fields; designation, admittance. 
(a)  The director is authorized to designate game fields and shall post thereon a sign stating: 
Game Field—Restricted to City-approved League Play or Athletic Events Only—$1.00 to $500.00 Penalty for Violation. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to play upon a field which has been designated a game field and posted except for the purpose of participating in league play or tournament play in a city-approved league play or athletic event or with the prior written consent of the director. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-98. - Closed fields or recreation facilities; designation, admittance. 
(a)  The director is authorized to designate any game field or recreation facility owned or leased by the city as a closed field for maintenance, to protect the area from damage, due to adverse weather conditions or for any other reason deemed necessary by the director. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to play upon as a closed field that has posted thereon a sign stating "Closed—Do Not Trespass Upon This Field—$1.00 to $500.00 Fine". 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Secs. 10-99—10-121. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OVERNIGHT CAMPING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 10-122. - Regulations of conduct. 
(a)  No person shall camp overnight in any park unless such area is designated for overnight camping, such as tent camping areas or recreational vehicle camping areas. 
(b)  No person in any area designated for overnight camping shall: 
(1)  Allow litter, trash or refuse to accumulate in a camping area. Such items shall be placed in receptacles. 
(2)  Create any loud noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  Dispose of human waste or sewage except at places so designated. 
(4)  Leave any item of personal property in a camping space not rented. 
(5)  Sleep outside of a designated camping site. 
(6)  Permit any domestic pet outside of the camper unit unless such pet is on a chain or leash; and unattended pets shall not be left outside of the camper unit. 
(7)  Fail to pick up any pet's feces and dispose of immediately. 
(8)  Bring in outside firewood. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-123. - Space reservation; fees. 
Any person desiring to reserve a camp site in a designated area shall pay a fee which is set out in section 2-201. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-124. - Occupancy restricted. 
Unless written permission is given by the director, campers are limited to one camping vehicle or tent per space or stall at Lake Park, or up to two tents and ten people per camp site at LLELA. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-125. - Utility hookups. 
(a)  Vehicle or camping units having utility hookups shall be in good repair. Hookups shall not be permitted if there is exposed wiring or faulty or dangerous connections for utilities. The director may disconnect the hookup if such hookups are unsafe. 
(b)  Each camper unit may use only one electrical cord. Any person using more than one electrical cord shall pay a fee which is set out in section 2-201 per day for each additional electrical cord used. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-126. - Fees. 
Fees for areas where utilities are furnished are set out in section 2-201. All fees shall be paid in advance. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-127. - Occupancy restricted. 
(a)  No person may rent or remain in a designated camping stall for more than 14 days in any 30-day period. Any person who has rented or remained in a designated camping stall for more than 14 days in a 30-day period may not rent another camping stall site in the city for 14 days following the 14th day of rental or occupancy. 
(b)  No person may camp in a primitive tent camp site for more than five days in any 30-day period. Any person who has camped in a primitive tent camp site for five days in a 30-day period may not rent another primitive tent camp site for 14 days following the fifth day of occupancy. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10-128. - LLELA. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to use a fishing bow or fishing net at LLELA, other than nets specifically designed for landing a hooked fish. 
(b)  Domestic animals are not allowed entry into LLELA unless the animal is an official service animal. 
(c)  LLELA trails are for hikers only. No bicycles, scooters, horses or motorized vehicles are permitted on the trails, except for a personal mobility device which is operated on designated trails, pathways or areas. 
(d)  All visitors must check in at the entry booth before visiting LLELA. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 4-20-20)  
Secs. 10-129—10-150. - Reserved. 

Chapter 10.5. - LIBRARY BOARD[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Public library, § 11.11. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways and property, ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 10.5-1. - Composition. 
The library board shall consist of at least seven but not more than nine members. The members shall be qualified voters of the city or residents of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. The members shall be appointed by the city council for two-year terms. Members shall be appointed to numbered places on the library board. Even-numbered places are appointed on even-numbered years, and odd-numbered places are appointed on odd-numbered years. Members shall serve without compensation. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 2(Exh. B), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10.5-2. - Vacancies. 
(a)  If a replacement member of the library board has not been designated by the end of a member's term, that member shall continue serving until a successor is appointed. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to serve for the unexpired term. 
(c)  Any member may be removed at will by the city council. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 2(Exh. B), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10.5-3. - Officers. 
The library board shall elect annually the following officers: 
(1)  Chairperson. 
(2)  Vice-chairperson. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 2(Exh. B), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10.5-4. - Duties of officers. 
(a)  Chairperson. The chairperson of the library board shall preside at all meetings and shall perform such other duties as usually pertain to the office or as may be instructed by the library board. 
(b)  Vice-chairperson. It shall be the duty of the vice-chairperson to perform the duties of the chairperson in the chairperson's absence. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 2(Exh. B), 4-20-20)  
Sec. 10.5-5. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The city council maintains the right to act independently on all matters pertaining to the library and library services without library board consideration or recommendation. The library board may, however, act in an advisory capacity to the city council in the following duties: 
(1)  To periodically evaluate the library strategic plan and the development of said strategic plan; 
(2)  To recommend the adoption of standards for library facilities and programs; 
(3)  To receive suggestions and recommendations from the city staff, city council and public regarding the development of the library and library service; 
(4)  To hold monthly meetings at regular, stated times, open to the public and in a set place within the city limits. A majority of the library board shall constitute a quorum; 
(5)  To perform such other duties as directed by the city council. 
( 0207-20-ORD , § 2(Exh. B), 4-20-20)  
Chapter 11 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 6, 2006, repealed ch. 11, §§ 11-1—11-5, 11-31, 11-32, 11-46—11-53, 11-66—11-71, 11-91—11-95, 11-106—11-113, 11-136—11-157, 11-161—11-165, 11-176—11-181, 11-201—11-207, 11-226—11-234, in its entirety and replaced it with a new ch. 11, §§ 11-1—11-14. Former ch. 11 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. No. 1560-9-90, § I, adopted Sept. 10, 1990; Ord. No. 1867-1-94, § I, adopted Jan. 3, 1994; Ord. No. 1930-6-94, § I, adopted June 20, 1994; Ord. No. 1948-8-94, § I, adopted Aug. 15, 1994; Ord. No. 2030-7-95, § I, adopted July 17, 1995; Ord. No. 2257-9-97, § I, adopted Sept. 8, 1997; Ord. No. 2318-2-98, §§ I—IV, adopted Feb. 16, 1998; Ord. No. 2699-7-2001, § I, adopted July 16, 2001; Ord. No. 2735-10-2001, § I, adopted Oct. 15, 2001; Ord. No. 2906-02-2003, § I, adopted Feb. 17, 2003; 2926-04-2003, § I, adopted April 7, 2003; Ord. No. 2946-06-2003, § 1, adopted June 16, 2003; Ord. No. 3004-12-2003, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2003; Ord. No. 3047-04-2004, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 19, 2004; Ord. No. 3108-08-2004, § I, adopted Aug. 16, 2004. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; land development regulations, ch. 6; licenses and business regulations, ch. 7. 
 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following definitions ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animation. The rapid display of a sequence of images of 2-D or 3-D artwork or model positions in order to create an illusion of movement. 
Building code. The Building Code adopted in the current Lewisville City Code. 
Building official. The building official or his designee. 
City. The City of Lewisville, Texas. 
City manager. The city manager or his designee. 
Corner lot. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a public street or right-of-way, provided the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than 135 degrees. 
Display surface. The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the message. 
Electric sign. Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including signs illuminated by an exterior light source. 
Flashing. A rapid rhythmic light in which the total duration of the light in each period is clearly shorter than the total duration of the darkness and in which the occurrences of light are all of equal in less than four seconds in duration. 
I-35E. corridor. The land situated within 130 feet from the Interstate 35 East rights-of-way that is adjacent and contiguous to the rights-of-way within the city. 
Lot frontage. The dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street. 
Multi-tenant center. A platted commercial center having four or more tenants. 
Notice. Notice required by this chapter shall be sufficient if it is affected by personal delivery, registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or depositing the notice in the United States mail. 
Off-premises signs. A sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises where the sign is located. 
Old Town Center District. The Old Town Center District is defined as listed in the Old Town Development Ordinance, chapter 9.5 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances, Appendix 1, but generally defined as the area bounded by Church, Charles, Elm, and Kealy Streets. 
Old Town Design District. The Old Town Design District is defined as listed in the Old Town Development Ordinance, chapter 9.5 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances, Appendix 1, but generally defined as the area bounded by College Street, Railroad Street, Purnell Street, South Edna Avenue, West Main Street and Degan Avenue. 
Old Town District. The Old Town District shall include both the Old Town Center District and the Old Town Design District. 
On-premises. The area of real property designated as a lot on a final plat approved by the city and filed with the county clerk's office, or an unplatted tract of land as shown on an abstract. 
On-premises sign. A sign which advertises or directs attention to a business, product, service, or activity which is available on the premises where the sign is located. 
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, organization, or business entity of any kind. 
Prohibited sign. Any sign listed in section 11-12 herein, signs that do not comply with this or other applicable ordinances, and signs that are otherwise prohibited. 
Scrolling. Sliding text, images or video across a monitor or display horizontally or vertically which does not change the layout of the text or pictures, or incrementally moves (pans or tilts) the user's view across what is apparently a larger image that is not wholly seen such as to scroll credits, while leaving the background stationary. 
Sign. Any medium, including its structure and component parts, which is used or intended to be used to attract attention to the subject matter for advertising purposes other than paint on the surface of a building. 
Sign area. The entire area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the message. The sign area as defined shall be used in determining the allowable square footage of signs. 
Sign plan. A plan showing the following information: 
(1)  Building locations, dimensions and elevations; 
(2)  Size, location, and type of both existing and proposed signs; 
(3)  Nearest street intersections and driveway locations; 
(4)  Zoning designation; 
(5)  Name of applicant, sign owner, and sign constructor or erector; 
(6)  Corner "clear vision areas," if applicable; and 
(7)  Engineering data on signs and/or sign structures exceeding 20 feet in height or when required to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
Sign structure. Any structure, which supports or is capable of supporting any sign. A sign structure may be a single pole and may or may not be an integral part of the building. 
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Temporary sign. A sign that does not have a permanent foundation, does not meet the requirements of a permissible sign under this chapter, and is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
Undeveloped property. A property for which a certificate of occupancy has not been issued by the building official on the property, or a residential property for which a certificate of final acceptance has not been issued by the city. 
Unified development. Multiple lots with the same subdivision name or multiple lots, which were depicted on the same final plat. 
Vehicle. Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported. 
Wall exterior. The exterior boundaries of a building that has a slope of 60 degrees or greater with the horizontal plane. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 3421-03-2007, § 1, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 3662-03-2009 , § 1, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 2, 4-1-13; 0032-18-ORD , § 4, 6-4-18)  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 11-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to permit signs that will not, by their size, location, and construction endanger the public health and safety of individuals, or confuse, mislead, or obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety, or decrease the value of surrounding properties. Also, this chapter is intended to create a more aesthetically pleasing community to both visitors and residents by preventing the over-concentration and improper placement of signs and by requiring all signs to be properly maintained. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06)  
Sec. 11-3. - Applicability. 
The terms and conditions of this chapter shall apply to all signs located within the city, with the exception of signs located within the Old Town District and city-owned message/reader board signs. Provisions for signage within the Old Town District are located in chapter 9.5, article XII. City-owned message/reader board signs shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 3, 4-1-13)  
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-4. - Permit required to erect or install a sign. 
(a)  Permit required. No sign, other than those exceptions listed in section 11-11 of this chapter, shall be erected, reerected, constructed, altered, or maintained, except as provided by this chapter and after a permit for the same has been issued by the building inspection division of the community development department. A separate permit shall be required for a sign for each business entity, and a separate permit shall be required for each group of signs on a single sign structure. In addition, electrical permits shall be obtained for interior or exterior lighting. Application for a permit required under this chapter shall be made upon forms furnished by the building inspection division of the community development department. Such application shall contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and address of the sign owner and the sign contractor or erector. The building official may require the filing of plans or other pertinent information where in his opinion such information is necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  To whom issued. No permit for the erection of any sign, with the exception of banner and vertical pole banner signs, shall be issued to any person other than those registered and insured in the city in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)  Not to issue for prohibited locations. No permit shall be issued under this chapter for any sign in a zoning district where signs are prohibited by this chapter. 
(d)  Fees. The fees for sign permits shall be set forth in the City Code, article VIII, section 2-201; provided however, the fee for a sign permit for a sign, which conforms to the requirements of this chapter but was constructed without a permit, shall be twice the cost of the standard permit fee. 
(e)  Appeal from denial. Any applicant for a sign permit whose request is denied by the building inspection division of the community development department, for noncompliance with this chapter, may appeal such decision to the city council by submitting an appeal request to the city secretary within ten calendar days from the date of the denial notification. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(f)  Expiration of permit; renewal. Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall become null and void if the work authorized is not commenced within 60 days from the date of issuance, or if the work is suspended or abandoned for a period of 120 days at any time after the work is commenced. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained and the fees shall be the same as required for the original permit, except that no plan-check fee will be charged provided no changes have been made to the original plans. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter whenever such permit is issued in error or issued on the basis of incorrect information or where the work is done in violation of any ordinance, regulation, or any provision of this chapter. 
(h)  Enforcement authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  Right of entry. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official may enter, at reasonable times, any building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 3421-03-2007, § 1, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 4, 4-1-13)  
ARTICLE IV. - LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-5. - Sign contractor requirements. 
No person shall perform any services involving erecting, constructing, enlarging, altering, repairing, moving, improving, removing, converting, or demolishing any sign until a registration has been approved and issued under chapter 4, article XV, Contractor Registration, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 4456-12-2017 , § 2, 12-18-17)  
ARTICLE V. - INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 11-6. - Inspection requirements. 
(a)  Inspections. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(1)  Footing inspections may be required for all signs having footings. 
(2)  All signs containing electrical wiring shall be subject to the provisions of the governing electrical code, and the electrical components used shall bear the label of an approved testing agency. 
(3)  The building official may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  All signs may be re-inspected at the discretion of the building official. 
(b)  Engineering certification. An engineering certification is required at the time of permit application to verify the location of any sign in the I-35E corridor. Final inspection and approval of any sign will not be accepted without a second engineering certification, dated after the erection of the sign, giving a final verification of the location of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06)  
ARTICLE VI. - SIGN SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN 
 
Sec. 11-7. - Sign specifications and design. 
(a)  Construction of sign supports. The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed, and erected in conformance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Wind resistance. 
(1)  Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in this section. 
(2)  All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. 
(3)  For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. 
(4)  The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds of the dead-load resisting moment. 
(c)  Anchoring. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead-load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
(d)  Wind loads. 
(1)  Signs and sign structures shall be designed to resist wind forces as specified in the current city building code. Copies of all sections referenced herein will be furnished upon request to the building inspection division of the community development department. 
(2)  Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind loads. 
(e)  Allowable stresses. 
(1)  The design of wood, concrete, steel, or aluminum members shall conform to the requirements of the current city building code. 
(2)  Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in the current city building code. 
(3)  The working stresses of wire rope and its fastenings shall not exceed 25 percent of the ultimate strength of the rope or fasteners. 
(4)  Working stresses for wind loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in the current city building code. 
(f)  Generally. 
(1)  Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the current city building code. 
(2)  In all signs and sign structures the materials and details of construction shall, in the absence of specified requirements, conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Structural steel. Structural steel shall be of such quality as to conform to the current city building code. Secondary members in contact with or directly supporting the display surface may be formed of light gauge steel, provided such members are designed in accordance with the specifications of the design of light gauge steel as specified in the current city building code and in addition shall be galvanized. Secondary members, when formed integrally with the display surface, shall be not less than 0.024 inch in thickness. When not formed integrally with the display surface, the minimum thickness of the secondary members shall be 0.10 inch. The minimum thickness of hot-rolled steel members furnishing structural support for signs shall be one-fourth inch, except that, if galvanized, such members shall be not less than one-eighth inch thick. Steel pipes shall be of such quality as to conform to the current city building code. 
(h)  Wood preservation. Anchors and supports when of wood and embedded in the soil shall be pressure treated with an approved preservative. Such members shall be marked or branded by an approved agency. 
(i)  Restrictions on combustible materials. Freestanding signs and low profile/monument signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this chapter. Wall signs, projecting signs, and awning, canopy and/or marquee signs shall be of noncombustible materials, except as provided in subsection 11-7(j). 
(1)  No combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in the construction of electric signs. 
(2)  Roof signs may be constructed of combustible materials on roofs of noncombustible construction. 
(3)  Non-electric wall signs may be constructed of combustible materials on walls allowed to be of unprotected combustible construction. 
(j)  Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim may be composed of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof. 
(k)  Anchorage. 
(1)  Signs attached to masonry, concrete, or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts, or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied. 
(2)  No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case of signs attached to wood framing. 
(l)  Display surfaces. 
(1)  Display surfaces in all types of signs shall be made of metal, masonry, wood, glass or approved plastics. 
(2)  Display surfaces in all types of temporary signs shall be made of wood, molded polyurethane, metal or masonry with painted, vinyl, engraved or mounted letters. 
(m)  Approved plastics. The building official shall require that sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use of any plastic material and if it is determined that the evidence submitted is satisfactory for the use intended, he may approve its use. 
(n)  Clearance of conductors, etc. The following illustrates the requirements of this chapter: 
Clearance of 	Communication Conductors and Cables, Guys, Messengers, Lightning 
Protection Wires, 
Neutral 
Conductors and 
Supply Cables 
(ft) 	Supply Line Conductors and Street 
      Lighting Conductors      
Open Supply Line Conductors (Voltages 
      are Phase to Ground)       
		0 to 750 V 
(feet) 	750V to 8.7 kV 
(feet) 	8.7 to 22 kV 
(feet) 	22 to 50 kV 
(feet) 
Buildings 					
 Horizontal: 					
  To walls and projections 	3 	5 	5 	6 	7 
  To unguarded windows 	3 	5 	5 	6 	7 
  To balconies and areas accessible to pedestrians 1 	3 	5 	5 	6 	7 
 Vertical: 					
  Above or below roofs or projections not accessible to pedestrians 1 	3 	10 	10 	10 	11 
  Above or below balconies and roofs accessible to pedestrians 1 	8 	3 15 	15 	15 	16 
  Above roofs accessible to truck traffic 4 	18 	18 	20 	20 	21 
  Above roofs accessible to vehicles, but not subject to truck traffic 4 	10 	3 15 	20 	20 	21 
Signs, chimneys, radio and television antennas, tanks, and other installations not classified as buildings or bridges 2 					
Horizontal 	3 	5 	5 	6 	7 
Vertical above or below 	3 	5 	8 	8 	9 
 
1 A roof, balcony, or area is considered accessible to pedestrians if the means of access is through a doorway, ramp, stairway, or permanently mounted ladder. 
2 The required clearances shall be increased to allow for the movement of motorized signs and other movable attachments. 
3 This clearance may be reduced to 12 feet for supply conductors limited to 300 volts to ground if more than 25 feet measured in any direction from a swimming pool, swimming area, or diving platform. 
4 For the purpose of this rule, trucks are defined as any vehicles exceeding eight feet in height. 
(o)  Maintenance. All signs and sign structures, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in repair and proper state of preservation. The display surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times. Should the building official find that any such sign or sign structure is not so maintained, is unsafe, or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, a written notice and order shall be given to the permittee or owner thereof. Such notice and order shall contain the following: 
(1)  The street address and description sufficient for identification of the location of such sign. 
(2)  A statement that the building official has found such sign to be in violation of this chapter or other laws, codes, or ordinances governing signs, together with a general description of such conditions found to cause such sign to be in violation of this chapter or other laws, codes, or ordinances governing signs. 
(3)  A statement of action required to be taken as determined by the building official: 
a.  If such action has not begun within ten working days after such notice or completed within 20 working days after commencement, the city may issue citations or the city may maintain, repair, alter, or remove such sign to effect compliance. The cost incurred by the city for such work shall be assessed against the sign owner, the owner of the property upon which such sign is located, or the permittee. 
b.  The building official may cause any sign, which in his opinion, is an immediate danger to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice. 
(p)  Nonconforming signs. Any sign legally in existence at the time of enactment of this chapter is considered legally nonconforming and remains so as long as it is not enlarged or replaced. Any nonconforming sign that is enlarged, expanded, replaced, or modified shall be made to conform to the specific requirements of this chapter. Any nonconforming sign whose sign area is 50 percent damaged or destroyed shall be made to conform to this chapter or shall be removed. Nonconforming signs whose use has been discontinued shall be removed. 
(q)  Visibility at intersections. 
(1)  No sign shall obstruct the view in any direction at the intersection of a street or with an alley or driveway. 
a.  Vision at all intersections where streets intersect at or near right angles shall be clear at elevations between two and one-half feet and nine feet above the street grade, within a triangular area formed by extending the two curb lines from their point of intersection, as illustrated below in figure 1, 45 feet and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle. If there are no curbs existing, the triangular area shall be formed by extending the property lines from their point of intersection 25 feet and connecting these points with an imaginary line, thereby making a triangle. 
b.  The aforementioned restrictions also apply to streets, which do not intersect at right angles, except that the 45 feet and the 25 feet dimensions shall not necessarily be minimum requirements. In such cases, the city traffic engineer or his designee shall have the authority to vary such requirements, as he deems necessary to provide safety for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  Setbacks for all other sign locations are provided for in other sections of this chapter. Setbacks shall be measured from the leading edge of the sign to the property line. 
 

Figure 1 
(r)  Consent required of property owner. A sign shall not be placed on any property without written consent of the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(s)  Identification of manufacturer, installer. Each sign shall be identified by a label, nameplate, or trademark identifying the manufacturer and/or installer of the sign, except those signs that do not require the submittal of a sign plan. 
(t)  New signs restricted. Sign plans shall not be approved for new signs where an illegal sign exists on the premises. 
(u)  Sexually oriented businesses. 
(1)  Any sign advertising a sexually oriented business shall conform to all the requirements of this chapter and shall not advertise, either graphically or verbally, either by explicit or literal expression, connotation or implied reference, any specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area. 
(2)  Because of the objectionable characteristics, and a deleterious effect upon the quality of life in surrounding neighborhoods that a sexually oriented business may produce, the allowable square footage of such signs are limited to 150 square feet total per building. 
(v)  Projection and clearance. 
(1)  Signs shall conform to the clearance and projection requirements of this chapter. 
a.  Clearance from power lines. Signs shall conform to the power line clearance table in subsection 11-7(n) or the latest revision of the current city electrical code. 
b.  Clearance from fire escapes, exits, or standpipes. No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit, standpipe, or fire department connection. 
c.  Obstruction of openings. No sign shall obstruct any opening to such an extent that light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that required by the current city building code. 
(2)  Signs erected within five feet of an exterior wall in which there are openings within the area of the sign shall be constructed of noncombustible material or approved plastics. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 3421-03-2007, § 1, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 5, 6, 4-1-13)  
ARTICLE VII. - ELECTRICAL AND OTHER ILLUMINATED SIGNS 
 
Sec. 11-8. - Electrical and other illuminated signs. 
(a)  Types approved. Four types of sign lighting are approved for use in the city unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Internal lighting, which means a source of illumination entirely within the sign which makes the contents of the sign visible at night by means of light being transmitted through a translucent material but wherein the source of the illumination is not visible. 
(2)  Internal-indirect lighting, which is a source of illumination entirely within the sign (generally a freestanding letter) which makes the sign visible at night by means of lighting the background upon which the freestanding character is mounted. The character itself shall be opaque, and thus will be silhouetted against the background. The source of illumination shall not be visible. 
(3)  Indirect lighting, a source of external illumination located a distance away from the sign, which lights the sign, but which is itself not visible to persons viewing the sign from any normal position of view. 
(4)  Neon light (electrical discharge tubing), a source of external illumination located on a noncombustible surface approved by the current city electrical code. Exposed neon lighting can only be used as lettering, or straight-line perimeter trim. The straight-line perimeter trim is limited to no more than two lights. 
(b)  Shielding of illumination source. The light from any light source intended to illuminate a sign shall be so shaded, shielded, or directed so that the light intensity or brightness shall not adversely affect surrounding or facing premises, nor adversely affect safe vision of pedestrians or operators of vehicles moving on public or private streets, driveways, or parking areas. 
(c)  Permits, inspections required. Permanently wired electrical signs must have permits and be inspected. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 3421-03-2007, § 1, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 7, 8, 4-1-13)  
ARTICLE VIII. - MEASUREMENT OF SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT 
 
Sec. 11-9. - Measurement of sign area and height. 
(a)  The area of a sign shall be measured as follows: 
(1)  For signs in the shape of a square, rectangle, circle, or similar standard geometric shape, the area shall be calculated by using the standard mathematical formula (height multiplied by width, 3.14 multiplied by radius squared, etc.). 
 
Standard Shapes 
(2)  For signs whose shape is irregular, the area shall be measured by enclosing the sign elements with intersecting lines. This method of measurement shall be used for wall signs with individually mounted letters. 
 
Irregular Shapes 
(3)  The area of a spherical, cylindrical or other three-dimensional sign shall be measured by calculating the area of a two-dimensional drawing of the largest elevation of the sign. 
(4)  The height of all signs shall be measured from the top edge of the sign and/or support structure to the average finished grade of the ground below the sign and/or support structure. If a sign is located on a mound, berm, or other raised areas for the sole purpose of increasing the height of the sign, the height of the mound, berm, or other raised area shall be included in the height of the sign. 
(5)  Where a sign has two faces, the area of the largest sign face shall be used to determine the area of the sign provided the two faces are within five degrees of parallel. Where a sign has two or more faces that are greater than five degrees from parallel, the sign area shall either be calculated as the sum of the area of each face, or the sign will constitute two signs. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06)  
ARTICLE IX. - PERMISSIBLE SIGNS THAT REQUIRE A PERMIT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 9 of Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , adopted April 1, 2013, amended the title of art. IX and § 11-10, Permissible signs located outside of the Old Town Design District and the Old Town Center that require a permit, to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 11-10. - Permissible signs that require a permit.* 
(a)  Awning, canopy, and/or marquee signs. 
 
Awning, Canopy, and/or Marquee Sign 
(1)  Definition. Awning, canopy, and/or marquee sign shall mean a sign that is mounted to an awning, canopy, or marquee. 
(2)  Awning, canopy, and/or marquee signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. An awning, canopy, or marquee sign shall not be constructed or erected prior to the issuance of sign permit. 
b.  Place. Awning, canopy, and marquee signs are allowed in all commercial zones and are in addition to any other sign allowed by this chapter. 
c.  Manner. 
i.  Two square feet of signage for each linear foot of awning, canopy, or marquee. Only one surface shall be measured. 
ii.  The sign must be placed on the side of the awning, canopy, or marquee from which it draws its allowable square footage, and may not extend above, below, or beyond the awning, canopy, or marquee. 
(b)  Grand opening signs. 
 

Balloons, Balloon Signs, Inflatable Signs, and Pennants and/or Streamers 
(1)  Definitions: 
a.  Balloon shall mean any object filled with air or similar gases placed to draw attention to a business, product, service, or premise, regardless of whether it contains an advertised message. 
b.  Balloon sign shall mean any object filled with lighter than air gases designed to advertise any product or premise. Balloon signs may contain an advertised message. 
c.  Grand opening shall mean a commemoration that promotes the opening of a new business. 
d.  Inflatable sign shall mean any object, the structure of which holds its shape through the use of a continuous operation fan which supplies ambient air to the structure. Inflatable signs may contain an advertised message. 
e.  Pennants and streamers shall mean any device made of cloth, canvas, plastic, foil, or any flexible material that moves or is designed to move freely in the wind, with or without a frame, or other supporting structure, used for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a business, commodity, service, sale, or product. 
(2)  Grand opening sign permit. A grand opening sign permit will be issued for balloons, balloon signs, inflatable signs, and pennants and streamers. Signage in this group may not be issued a permit separately. This group of signs is permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. Balloons, balloon signs, inflatable signs, and pennants and streamers shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a grand opening sign permit. This sign group is allowed one time per new business location, for a maximum period of 14 consecutive days. 
b.  Place. This sign group is allowed in all commercial zones and is in addition to any other sign allowed by this chapter. Signs in this group may not be located in required parking spaces, driveways, fire lanes, or rights-of-way. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  Balloon: 
(i)  The permittee shall provide the building official with wind loading diagrams and graphs showing stress on rigging and attach points in 25 mile-per-hour and 50 mile-per-hour wind conditions. 
(ii)  Rigging ropes or straps must have adequate certified strength to withstand loads shown on a 50 mile-per-hour wind chart. 
(iii)  No balloon or any similar device may be used or installed that could create a potential safety hazard of any type. 
(iv)  All balloon devices shall conform to flame retardant requirements set forth in the current fire code. 
(v)  No balloon shall exceed 60 feet in height from ground elevation. 
2.  Balloon sign. Balloon signs must be mounted to the building or ground (i.e. the balloon sign itself must be touching the building or ground) and must be fastened by a minimum of two separate tethers. 
(i)  The permittee shall provide the building official with wind loading diagrams and graphs showing stress on rigging and attach points in 25 mile-per-hour and 50 mile-per-hour wind conditions. 
(ii)  An emergency deflation port must be installed and must be operational from ground or roof level. 
(iii)  Rigging ropes or straps must have adequate certified strength to withstand loads shown on a 50 mile-per-hour wind chart. 
(iv)  No balloon sign, or any similar device may be used or installed that could create a potential safety hazard of any type. 
(v)  All balloon signs and devices shall conform to flame retardant requirements set forth in the city fire code. 
(vi)  No balloon sign shall exceed 60 feet in height from ground elevation. 
3.  Inflatable sign. Inflatable signs must be mounted to the building or ground (i.e. the inflatable itself must be touching the building or ground). All lighted inflatable signs shall be subject to electrical inspections and fees and must meet the current city electrical code. 
(i)  The permittee shall provide the building official with wind loading diagrams and graphs showing stress on rigging and attach points in 25 mile-per-hour and 50 mile-per-hour wind conditions. 
(ii)  An emergency deflation port must be installed and must be operational from ground or roof level. 
(iii)  All motors and lighting equipment used must be approved by Underwriter's Laboratories and the current city electrical code. 
(iv)  Rigging ropes or straps must have adequate certified strength to withstand loads shown on a 50 mile-per-hour wind chart. 
(v)  No inflatable sign should provide roof loads in excess of 15 pounds per square foot static. 
(vi)  No inflatable sign, internal and/or external lighting, or any similar device may be used or installed that could create a potential safety hazard of any type. 
(vii)  All inflatable signs or devices shall conform to flame retardant requirements set forth in the current city fire code. 
(viii)  All inflatable signs shall not exceed 60 feet in height from the ground. 
4.  Pennants and streamers. 
(i)  The permittee shall provide the building official with wind loading diagrams and graphs showing stress on rigging and attach points in 25 mile-per-hour and 50 mile-per-hour wind conditions. 
(ii)  Rigging ropes or straps must have adequate certified strength to withstand loads shown on a 50 mile-per-hour wind chart. 
(iii)  No pennants and streamers or any similar device may be used or installed that could create a potential safety hazard of any type. 
(iv)  All pennants and streamers or similar devices shall conform to flame retardant requirements set forth in the current city fire code. 
(v)  No pennants and streamers shall exceed 60 feet in height from ground elevation. 
(c)  Banner sign. 
 

Banner Sign 
(1)  Definitions. Banner sign shall mean a flexible material such as cloth, paper, vinyl, etc. on which a sign is painted or printed. 
(2)  Banner signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A banner sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. Banner signs are allowed for a maximum period of 30 consecutive days with 30 days between each period, two times per 12-month period. 
b.  Place. Banner signs are allowed in all commercial zones and are in addition to any other sign allowed by this chapter. Banner signs must be firmly anchored or secured to the building structure. 
c.  Manner. Banner signs are allowed up to 50 square feet aggregate total. All banner signs shall be kept in good repair. 
(d)  Business park entry sign. 
 

Business Park Entry Sign 
(1)  Definition. A business park entry sign is a low profile/monument or wall sign. 
(2)  A business park entry sign is allowed on the same lot as an individual low profile/monument sign and shall have no effect on the number and size of signs allowed on a property in accordance with this chapter. A business park entry sign is permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A business park entry sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. A business park entry sign permit will not be issued until the final plat is approved and public improvement construction has been completed by the developer and accepted by the city. 
b.  Place. A business park entry sign is permissible on a non-residentially zoned property with unified development. A business park entry sign shall be setback three feet from all property lines. The number of business park entry signs is limited to three street entrances 
c.  Manner. Two signs indicating the main name or logo of the development, as depicted on the final plat, will be allowed. The maximum area of a business park entry sign shall be 50 square feet. A business park entry sign is limited to six feet in height. 
(e)  Construction sign. 
 

Construction Sign 
(1)  Definition. Construction sign shall mean a temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project. 
(2)  Construction signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A construction sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. A construction sign shall not be erected until a building permit has been issued and shall be removed within 14 days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Place. One construction sign shall be allowed per building site. 
c.  Manner. The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall not exceed 20 feet in height measured from grade. 
(f)  Directional sign. 
 

Directional Sign 
(1)  Definition. Directional sign shall mean a sign limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Directional signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A directional sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
b.  Place. Directional signs shall be allowed in all commercial and multifamily zones. On-premise entrance, exit and directional signs are allowed pursuant to an approved sign plan. 
c.  Manner. Such signs shall not exceed four feet in height from finished grade and six square feet in sign area. 
(g)  Freestanding sign. 
 

Freestanding Sign 
(1)  Definition. Freestanding sign shall mean any non-movable sign, which is supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces affixed in or upon the ground. This does not include signs affixed to a building. 
(2)  Freestanding signs are permissible, in addition to wall and/or low profile/monument signs, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A freestanding sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
b.  Place. Freestanding signs shall be allowed in all commercial and multifamily zones. On-premises entrance, exit, and directional signs are allowed pursuant to an approved sign plan. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the OD, MD, MF1, MF2, MF3, PU, and PK districts: 
One freestanding sign is allowed in addition to other signage and shall conform to the following: 
Such sign shall not exceed 100 square feet in area, 25 feet in height and shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line. 
2.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the LC, GB, AO, LI, HI, WH and PUD zoning districts: 
(i)  For platted lots or tracts of land of one acre or less, one freestanding sign not to exceed 150 square feet. 
(ii)  For platted lots or tracts of land greater than one acre but less than five acres, one freestanding sign not to exceed 250 square feet or two signs not to exceed an aggregate total of 300 square feet. 
(iii)  For platted lots or tracts of land greater than five acres, one freestanding sign not to exceed 400 square feet, or three freestanding signs not to exceed an aggregate total of 450 square feet. 
(iv)  Maximum height of freestanding signs of 150 square feet or less shall be 30 feet measured from finished grade. 
(v)  Maximum height of freestanding signs of more than 150 square feet shall be 40 feet measured from finished grade. 
(vi)  Freestanding signs shall be set back from any property line a minimum of ten feet. 
(vii)  All signs in the I-35E corridor shall have a height not to exceed 60 feet. 
3.  Multi-tenant center freestanding signs are in addition to wall and/or low profile/monument signs and shall conform to the following: 
(i)  For platted lots or tracts of land less than one acre, one freestanding sign not to exceed 150 square feet. 
(ii)  For platted lots or tracts of land greater than one acre but less than five acres, two signs not to exceed 150 square feet each, or one sign not to exceed 250 square feet. 
(iii)  For platted lots or tracts of land greater than five acres but less than 15 acres, no more than two signs with an aggregate total not to exceed 600 square feet; no single sign can exceed 300 square feet. 
(iv)  For platted lots or tracts of land greater than 15 acres but less than 25 acres, no more than three signs with an aggregate total not to exceed 1,000 square feet; no single can exceed 350 square feet. 
(v)  For platted lots or tracts of land greater than 25 acres, no more than three signs with an aggregate total not to exceed 1,200 square feet; no single sign can exceed 400 square feet. 
(vi)  Maximum height of freestanding signs of 150 square feet or less shall be 30 feet measured from finished grade. 
(vii)  Maximum height of freestanding signs of more than 150 square feet shall be 40 feet measured from finished grade. 
(viii)  No single tenant may exceed 150 square feet for one sign. 
(ix)  Freestanding signs shall be set back from any property line a minimum of ten feet. 
4.  Existing site with free standing sign(s). A low profile variable message electronic reader board monument sign, using the criteria established under section 11-10(j) low profile/monument sign, provided that an existing free-standing sign be removed from the site. Under this provision, the replacement shall be on a one-for-one basis. 
5.  New site or existing site with no free-standing signs present. A low profile variable message/electronic reader board monument sign is allowed, using the criteria established under section 11-10(j), low profile/monument sign, however, no free-standing signs will be allowed on the site. 
(h)  Hanging sign. 
 

Hanging Sign 
(1)  Definition. Hanging sign shall mean any sign suspended under an awning, canopy, or marquee. 
(2)  Hanging signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A hanging sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
b.  Place. Hanging signs shall be allowed in all commercial zones. Hanging signs are designed for installation under an awning or canopy above the sidewalk. There shall be a minimum clearance of seven feet between the sidewalk surface and the bottom of the sign. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  Hanging signs shall have a maximum height of one foot and be no longer than a maximum of 50 percent of the awning or canopy width. 
2.  Hanging signs shall be aligned perpendicular with the building entrance. 
(i)  Kiosk sign. 
 

Kiosk Sign 
(1)  Definition. A kiosk sign is a free-standing structure located in the city rights-of-way that features the city identification panel at the top of each structure and displays directional information as set forth in the current city kiosk sign program and agreement. All kiosk panels shall be limited to directional only. 
(2)  Kiosk signs are permissible subject to the current city kiosk sign program and agreement and upon the issuance of a sign permit: 
a.  Time. See the current city kiosk sign program and agreement. 
b.  Place. 
(1)  Kiosk signs shall only be located in city rights-of-way. Kiosk sign locations shall be those locations approved by the city council (see current kiosk sign location map). 
(2)  Kiosk signs shall be constructed in accordance with the current city kiosk sign program and agreement. 
c.  Manner. Kiosk signs shall be placed in accordance with the current city kiosk sign program and agreement. 
(j)  Low profile/monument sign. 
 

Low Profile/Monument Sign 
(1)  Definition. Low profile/monument sign shall mean a freestanding sign not exceeding six feet in height measured from the finished grade to the top of the sign. 
(2)  Low profile/monument signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A low profile/monument sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
b.  Place. Low profile/monument signs shall be allowed in all commercial zones (for multifamily zones, MF1, MF2, and MF3, see (p) subdivision identity signs). Low profile/monument signs shall not be closer than three feet to property lines measured from the leading edge of the sign. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  Incorporation of berms with low profile/monument signs is allowed but may not exceed the six feet in height limitations nor obstruct visibility. 
2.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the OD, MD, PU, and PK districts: 
Low profile/monument signage: one square foot of signage for each linear foot of one exterior wall, measured horizontally. 
3.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the LC, GB, AO, LI, HI, WH and PUD zoning districts: 
Low profile/monument signage: One and one-half square feet of signage for each linear foot of one exterior wall, measured horizontal. 
4.  The low profile/monument sign must be placed on the side of the building from which it draws its allowable square footage. Total square footage may be used as wall signs or may be used as roof and low profile/monument signs with a corresponding reduction of wall signage. No wall sign shall project above the highest point of the building, excluding any roof top mechanical structures, chimney, elevator shafts, ventilators, or other such facilities. 
5.  Variable message electronic reader boards (single tenant) are permitted within the allowable sign area of a low profile/monument sign subject to the following: 
(i)  Variable message electronic reader boards shall not be animated, flash, or scroll. 
(ii)  The sign characters of variable message electronic reader boards shall have a minimum height of four inches and a maximum height of ten inches. 
(iii)  Variable message electronic reader boards shall remain static for not less than seven seconds. 
(iv)  Variable message electronic reader boards are permitted to display time, date and temperature remaining static for not less than four seconds. 
(k)  Model complex sign. 
 

Model Complex Sign 
(1)  Definition. Model complex signs shall apply to residential and multifamily projects located on the project site. 
(2)  Model complex signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A model complex sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. Signs shall be removed when the model complex ceases to be used as a model. 
b.  Place. Minimum setback not less than ten feet measured from the leading edge of the sign. 
c.  Manner. One sign per model not to exceed six square feet. Two directional signs not to exceed four square feet each. One sign per complex not to exceed 32 square feet. Maximum height of signs not to exceed 20 feet. Signs may not obstruct visibility. 
(l)  Off-premise real estate sign. 
 

Off-Premise Real Estate Sign 
(1)  Definition. Off-premise real estate signs are intended to be used for the advertising of lots that need traffic to be directed to the lot for sales purposes. 
(2)  Off-premise real estate signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. An off-premise real estate sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. Off-premise real estate signs shall be removed within 14 days after the subdivision has been built out or if construction within the subdivision ceases for a period of three months. 
b.  Place. Off-premise real estate signs shall be set back from all property lines a minimum of ten feet measured from the leading edge of the sign. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  Five off-premise real estate signs not exceeding 20 square feet per sign, shall be allowed per subdivision. Off-premise real estate signs shall not exceed 25 feet in height measured from grade. 
2.  Off-premise real estate signs shall require landowner permission prior to permitting. 
3.  Off-premise real estate signs shall have no effect on the number and size of signs allowed on a property in accordance with this chapter. 
(m)  Projecting sign. 
 

Projecting Sign 
(1)  Definition. Projecting sign shall mean a sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and projects more than 12 inches from such building. 
(2)  Projecting signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A projecting sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
b.  Place. Projecting from an elevation of a building. 
c.  Manner. Projecting signs shall not exceed a maximum area of 15 square feet per sign face. There shall be no more than two sign faces. Maximum projection shall be five feet, maximum thickness shall be two feet, and the lowest point of any sign, which extends over an area intended for vehicular use, shall not be less than 14 feet above the finished grade below it. The lowest point of any sign, which extends over an area intended for pedestrian use, shall not be less than seven feet above the finished grade below it. 
(n)  Real estate sign. 
 

Real Estate Sign 
(1)  Definition. Real estate sign shall mean a sign intended to advertise the financing, development, sale, transfer, lease, exchange, or rental of real property. 
(2)  Real estate signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A real estate sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
b.  Place. Real estate signs are allowed on lots or parcels of land. Setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet from all property lines measured from the leading edge of the sign. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  For lots or parcels of one to five acres, one sign per street frontage, not to exceed 16 square feet per sign may be allowed and shall not exceed 15 feet in height measured from grade. 
2.  For lots or parcels greater than five acres, two signs not to exceed 32 square feet per sign or one sign not to exceed 64 square feet and not to exceed a maximum height of 25 feet measured from grade. 
(o)  Roof sign. 
 

Roof Sign 
(1)  Definition. Roof sign shall mean a sign on or above a roof of a building or structure. 
(2)  Roof signs are in conjunction with wall, low profile/monument, and freestanding signs. Roof signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A roof sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
b.  Place. Roof signs shall be allowed in all commercial districts. Roof signs may be placed on the roof of any building in commercial zones. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the OD, MD, PU, and PK districts: 
One square foot of signage for each linear foot of one exterior wall, measured horizontally. The sign must be placed on the side of the building from which it draws its allowable square footage. Total square footage may be used as wall signs or may be used as roof and low profile/monument signs with a corresponding reduction of wall signage. No sign shall project above the highest point of the building, excluding any roof top mechanical structures, chimney, elevator shafts, ventilators, or other such facilities. 
2.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the LC, GB, AO, LI, HI, WH and PUD zoning districts: 
One and one-half feet of signage for each linear foot of one exterior wall, measured horizontal. The sign must be placed on the side of the building from which it draws its allowable square footage. Total square footage may be used as wall signs or may be used as roof and low profile/monument signs with a corresponding reduction of wall signage. No sign shall project above the highest point of the building, excluding any roof top mechanical structures, chimneys, elevator shafts, ventilators, or other such facilities. 
(p)  Subdivision identity signs. 
 

Subdivision Identity Signs 
(1)  Definition. A subdivision identity sign is a permanent sign, which generally identifies a residential development and refers to the platted name of the subdivision. 
(2)  Subdivision identity signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A subdivision identity sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a subdivision identity sign on a property until a final plat has been approved and accepted by the city for development of the property. 
b.  Place. At each street entrance of the platted subdivision. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  The following sign regulations shall apply in single-family residential districts: 
Two wall or low profile/monument signs indicating the name of the subdivision are allowed at each street entrance of the platted subdivision. 
(i)  Such sign shall not exceed 40 square feet each. This type of sign shall be erected as an integral element of a screening wall or as a low profile/monument sign. 
(ii)  In no case shall such sign be allowed, constructed, or erected in such a manner or location as to obstruct visibility. 
2.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the MF-1, MF-2, MHP, and MHS zoning districts: 
One wall, low profile/monument, or freestanding sign indicating the name of the subdivision is allowed per street entrance of the platted subdivision and shall not exceed 40 square feet in size. 
(i)  Low profile/monument signs shall not be closer than three feet to property lines measured from the leading edge of the sign. Incorporation of berms with low profile/monument signs is allowed but may not exceed the six feet in height limitations nor obstruct visibility. 
(ii)  Freestanding signs shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from all property lines and a maximum height of 18 feet measured from finished grade. 
(q)  Wall sign. 
 
Wall Sign 
(1)  Definition. Wall sign shall mean any sign attached to or painted on a wall, parapet, or facade of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of such wall. 
(2)  Wall signs are permissible, in addition to low profile/monument and freestanding signs, and are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. A wall sign shall not be installed, constructed, or erected prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
b.  Place. The exterior wall elevation of any building in a commercial area. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the OD, MD, PU, and PK districts: 
Wall and/or low profile/monument signage: One square foot of signage for each linear foot of one exterior wall, measured horizontally. The sign must be placed on the side of the building from which it draws its allowable square footage. Total square footage may be used as wall signs or may be used as roof and low profile monument signs with a corresponding reduction of wall signage. No wall sign shall project above the highest point of the building, excluding any roof top mechanical structures, chimney, elevator shafts, ventilators, or other such facilities. 
2.  The following sign regulations shall apply in the LC, GB, AO, LI, HI, WH and PUD zoning districts: 
Wall and/or and low profile/monument signage: One and one-half square feet of signage for each linear foot of one exterior wall, measured horizontal. The sign must be placed on the side of the building from which it draws its allowable square footage. Total square footage may be used as wall signs or may be used as roof and low profile/monument signs with a corresponding reduction of wall signage. No wall sign shall project above the highest point of the building, excluding any roof top mechanical structures, chimneys, elevator shafts, ventilators, or other such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 3421-03-2007, § 1, 3-5-07; Ord. No. 3662-03-2009 , §§ 3, 4, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 3861-05-2011 , §§ 1, 2, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , § 9, 4-1-13) 
Editor's note— See editor's note to art. IX.  
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 10 of Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , adopted April 1, 2013, repealed art. X, Permissible Signs Located in the Old Town Design District that Require a Permit, in its entirety. Former art. X was comprised of § 11-11 and derived from Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, adopted Nov. 6, 2006; Ord. No. 3421-03-2007, adopted March 5, 2007; and Ord. No. 3509-11-2007, adopted Nov. 5, 2007. See ch. 9.5, art. XII for similar provisions. 
 
Sec. 11-11. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Section 11 of Ord. No. 3987-04-2013 , adopted April 1, 2013, repealed art. XI, Permissible Signs Located Within the Old Town Center District that Require a Permit, in its entirety. Former art. XI was comprised of § 11-12 and derived from Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, adopted Nov. 6, 2006; Ord. No. 3421-03-2007, adopted March 5, 2007; and Ord. No. 3509-11-2007, adopted Nov. 5, 2007. See ch. 9.5, art. XII for similar provisions. 
 
Sec. 11-12. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PERMISSIBLE SIGNS THAT DO NOT REQUIRE A PERMIT 
 
Sec. 11-13. - Permissible signs that do not require the issuance of a sign permit. 
(a)  Building or other decorations. Temporary holiday or festival decorations shall not be considered a sign as defined in this chapter. Temporary holiday or festival items can only be used during normal calendar holidays. All electrical decorations require a permit under the electrical code. 
(b)  Exemption. Some signs shall not require a sign permit. These exemptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of the sign from the responsibility of its erection and maintenance, and its compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other law or ordinance regulating the same. All exempt signs or devices shall not be used or installed in any manner that may result in a potential safety hazard of any type. The following signs and devices shall not require a sign permit: 
(1)  Official traffic signs, signals or devices. 
(2)  Zoning change signs. 
(3)  Window signs, except for directly wired electrical signs and those allowed in the Old Town Center district. 
(4)  Customary identification signs, which indicate name, type of business and/or hours of operation attached to or painted on a building or window and not exceeding three square feet in size. 
(5)  Real estate signs of six square feet or less that are located on the premises that are for sale, rent, or lease. 
(6)  Change of copy or message on legally established signs. 
(7)  Garage sale signs; provided however, that only one sign is allowed on the property where the sale is taking place and that sign may not to exceed two square feet. Garage sale signs at any location remote from the sale site are prohibited. Although garage sale signs do not require a sign permit, a permit to conduct the garage sale is required pursuant to section 7-202 of the City Code. 
(8)  Governmental signs. 
(c)  Flags. 
 
Flags 
(1)  Definitions: 
a.  Flag shall mean a piece of fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl, canvas, leather, or other similar material attached to a staff cord on one end generally used as a symbol of a nation, state, city, or other local government entity. Flags of this type shall be classified as non-regulated. 
b.  Flagpole shall mean a staff or pole designed specifically to fly a flag. Cell towers, antennas, monopoles, or similar structures, not primarily designed for use as a flagpole, shall not be allowed for use as a flagpole. 
(2)  Flags on residential properties are not regulated by this chapter. 
(3)  Flags on nonresidential properties are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. No restrictions. 
b.  Place. Flags are allowed in all zoning districts. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  Flagpole height, size of flag, and number of flags are not regulated by this chapter. 
2.  If at least two non-regulated flags (i.e., national, state, municipal or other governmental entity flags) are present, one flag bearing a corporate logo, not to exceed the size of the non-regulated flags, is allowed on the property in multifamily and commercial zones and shall be attached to a flagpole as defined by this chapter. 
(d)  Ideological sign. 
(1)  Definition. Ideological sign shall mean a sign communicating a message or ideas for noncommercial purposes, and which does not constitute any of the following: construction sign, directional sign, billboard, on-premise sign, real estate sign, political sign, model complex sign, garage sale sign, and/or banner sign. 
(2)  Ideological signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. Ideological signs shall be allowed in all commercial and single-family residential zones. 
b.  Place. On-premise. 
c.  Manner. Ideological signs shall not exceed six square feet in sign area. 
(e)  Political signs. 
(1)  Definitions. 
Political sign shall mean a sign that contains primarily a political message. 
Political message shall mean pertaining to any national, state, county or local election. 
(2)  A political sign shall not require a sign permit and is exempt from this chapter except for the following requirements: 
a.  Time. 
1.  Political signs located on private real property must be removed within 30 calendar days after the election is decided. 
2.  Except as otherwise provided herein, political signs located on property other than private real property may be erected no earlier than 60 calendar days before the election and must be removed no later than 30 calendar days after the election. The city may remove any political sign on property other than private real property remaining beyond 30 calendar days after the election, and a $5.00 fee shall be charged for each sign retrieved from the city. 
3.  Political signs permitted to be placed at a polling site pursuant to state law must be removed from the polling site within 24 hours after the close of the polls on election day and within 24 hours after the close of the early voting period. 
b.  Place. 
1.  Political signs may be placed on private real property with the consent of the property owner. 
2.  Political signs may not be placed in roadway medians, but may be placed in the city parkway between the curb and property line provided they do not create a safety hazard of any type. 
3.  Except as otherwise provided herein, political signs may not be placed on city-owned property such as city parks, fire stations, police stations, libraries, city hall, etc. This restriction shall not apply to political signs that are attached to vehicles that are lawfully parked on city-owned property. 
4.  Political signs permitted to be placed at a polling site pursuant to state law may be placed only in designated locations on city-owned property that are approved by the city council and only during the voting period or the early voting period. City staff shall provide a description of the approved locations for permitted electioneering pursuant to this subsection and state law. 
5.  Political signs may not be placed in the state rights-of-way. 
6.  Political signs shall not be installed in any manner that may result in a potential safety hazard of any type. 
7.  These restrictions do not apply to existing billboard signs upon which political advertising may be placed. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  The signs shall not exceed 36 square feet aggregate total for any private lot. 
2.  A sign shall not exceed 36 square feet in city right-of-way. 
3.  Political signs shall be in addition to any other sign allowed in this chapter. 
4.  Political signs shall be kept in repair and proper state of preservation. 
5.  Political signs shall not be more than eight feet high. 
6.  Political signs shall not be illuminated. 
7.  Political signs shall not have any moving parts. 
8.  Political signs permitted to be placed at a polling site pursuant to state law shall not be larger than six square feet (2' x 3') and must be placed in the ground attached to a stake that does not exceed a nine gauge diameter (American Wire Gauge standard (AWG)). Said signs shall be placed into the ground well clear of tree roots, irrigation lines and any other underground vegetation or structures that could be damaged. Said signs shall not be attached, placed or otherwise affixed to any building, tree, shrub, pole or other improvement on public property. 
9.  The city may remove and dispose of any political sign permitted to be placed at a polling site pursuant to state law that is in violation of this chapter. 
(f)  Vehicle signage. 
 
Vehicle Signage 
(1)  Definition. Vehicle sign shall mean a sign that is attached, painted, or placed in or on a motorized vehicle. 
(2)  Vehicle signs are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. No restrictions. 
b.  Place. All vehicles used in actual delivery service or company functions. 
c.  Manner. Vehicles must have a current license tag, inspection sticker, and be operative at all times. The parking of a vehicle, trailer, or device in such a manner as to constitute a sign is prohibited. 
(g)  Vertical pole banner sign. 
 

Vertical Pole Banner Sign 
(1)  Definition. Vertical pole banner sign shall mean a type of sign located on a vertical light pole on a platted lot or public property that is not otherwise allowed as a freestanding sign and shall be limited to cloth, flexible plastic, vinyl, or similar material (i.e. no cardboard, wood, rigid plastics, etc.). 
(2)  Vertical pole banner signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. Vertical pole banner signs do not require a permit. All existing vertical pole banner signs will be required to conform with this section within one year from the effective date of this chapter. 
b.  Place. Vertical pole banner signs shall be mounted on lighted metal poles in commercial zones and on public property. 
c.  Manner. 
1.  Horizontal and/or vertical supports are required and shall be made of metal. 
2.  No vertical pole banner sign may exceed 24 square feet in size. 
3.  Minimum height of the pole shall be 18 feet tall measured from grade to the top of the pole and must be used for lot lighting. 
4.  Minimum height for placement of a vertical pole banner sign shall be at least 12 feet measured from grade to the bottom of the sign. 
5.  Aggregate total square footage for vertical pole banner signs shall be a maximum of 300 square feet per platted lot. 
d.  Exception. Minimum height of the pole and sign shall not apply to city-owned vertical pole banner signs located in rights-of-way and city-owned property. 
(h)  Sandwich board sign. 
(1)  Definition. A sign of A-frame or similar design intended for placement in the pedestrian area in front of the business being advertised. 
(2)  Sandwich board signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. Displayed during business hours only. 
b.  Place. Ten feet from the main entrance outside of the rights-of-way and cannot block or impede accessibility. 
c.  Manner. Cannot exceed two feet in width or a total of six square feet. 
(i)  Ball field fencing signs. 
(1)  Definition. Any temporary or permanent sign placed inside ball field fencing which is intended for related advertising purposes. Advertising on a scoreboard is not considered a sign for the purpose of this chapter, and no permit is required. 
(2)  Ball field signs are permissible subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Time. No restrictions. 
b.  Place. On-premises. Inside ball field fencing. 
c.  Manner: 
1.  All such signs shall be one-sided and only face toward the interior of the field. 
2.  No portion of such signs shall project over the fence in which it is attached. 
3.  No such sign shall exceed the height of eight feet. 
4.  The back side of all such signs shall be protected with an application of paint or other protective coating and must be uniform in color. 
5.  All such signs shall be maintained in good condition, as evidenced by lack of deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 3861-05-2011 , § 3, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 3904-11-2011 , § 1, 11-7-11; Ord. No. 4047-01-2014 , § 1, 1-27-14; Ord. No. 4171-04-2015 , § I, 4-6-15)  
ARTICLE XIII. - PROHIBITED SIGNS 
 
Sec. 11-14. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Signs advertising illegal activities. A sign which advertises activities that are illegal under federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Flashing, etc. signs. 
a.  A flashing, scrolling, or animated sign or sign with intermittent or varying intensity of illumination or color, whether deliberate or as a consequence of a defect in the sign or the illumination source, except for a sign indicating the time, date, and temperature (which shall be considered part of either a free standing, wall, or low profile/monument type of sign). 
b.  A sign, display, or device that changes its message or copy by programmable electronic or mechanical processes, an electronic image on a digital display and a changeable electronic variable message sign are prohibited pursuant to this subsection if said sign, display or device is illuminated by flashing, intermittent or moving lights or contains or displays animated, moving video or scrolling messages. 
c.  Exception. Variable message electronic reader boards signs are allowed when permitted and installed in accordance with this [chapter]. 
(3)  Off-premises signs. A sign which advertises or directs attention to a business, product, service, or activity which is available at a location other than the premises where the sign is located. 
a.  Real estate signs that conform to the requirements of this chapter are allowed. 
b.  Off-premises signs moved, removed, or demolished for any reasons other than natural disaster may not be reconstructed. 
(4)  Portable displays. A display that is temporarily fixed to a standardized advertising structure, which is regularly moved from location to location at periodic intervals, with or without wheels. 
(5)  Signs on public property or utility easements. Any sign, whether temporary or permanent, that is placed on public property or recorded utility easements, including public rights-of-way, without city council approval, shall be removed without notice. 
(6)  Signs on retaining walls, fences, rocks or natural features. A sign erected, placed or painted upon retaining walls, fences, rocks or natural features; except that a ball field fencing sign which meets the requirements of subsection 11-13(i) is not prohibited. 
(7)  Lighted signs in single-family and two-family (duplex) zoning districts. A sign which is illuminated, either externally or internally. 
(8)  Temporary point of sale signs. A sign placed to draw attention to a business or its service that does not have a permanent foundation, does not meet the requirements of a permissible sign under this chapter, and is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
(9)  Signs or banners on a pole. A sign or banner constructed and/or located on a pole that does not meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(10)  Weekend directional signs. A sign that is not installed in a permanent fashion and is used to identify, direct, sell, promote, and otherwise advertise homes and real estate for sale, lease, or rent. Such signs include, but are not limited to, real estate signs installed by use of a stake, tripod, sandwich board, or other temporary means. 
 

Prohibited Signs 
(11)  [Other signs.] Any other signs not referenced herein or governed by this chapter are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 3389-11-2006, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-06; Ord. No. 3563-05-2008, § 1, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 3662-03-2009 , § 2, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 4171-04-2015 , § II, 4-6-15)  
Chapter 12 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, §§ 1—5, repealed chapter 12, sections 12-26—12-29, 12-51—12-53, 12-66—12-69, 12-81—12-84, 12-106, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 12, sections 12-1—12-3, 12-21—12-26, 12-41, 12-42. Former chapter 12 pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1990, §§ 7-6-1—7-6-4, 7-2-1—7-2-5, 7-2-7—7-2-9, 7-2-16, 7-2-17. 
Cross reference— Disposal of dead animals, § 3-15; utilities, ch. 16. 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Purpose. 
The city contracts for solid waste and recycling services to residential customers and solid waste services to nonresidential customers through a franchise ordinance. Such ordinance grants exclusive rights to the franchisee to provide collection, hauling, and disposal of solid waste for residential and nonresidential customers, and collection and hauling for residential recyclable materials. This chapter establishes the responsibilities of residential and nonresidential customers regarding collection, transportation, and disposal of solid waste and recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 3, 4-18-05)  
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
Terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
Acceptable Container shall mean a sealed, leak proof plastic bag of at least 0.85 millimeter in thickness (one-way container), or sealed, covered, trash can not to exceed 39 gallons in capacity for solid waste materials, and a city-owned 64-gallon cart for recyclable materials. 
Bulky waste shall mean indoor/outdoor furniture; construction materials generated by the occupant of a residence in connection with a "do-it-yourself" project (not generated by a commercial contractor); mattresses and box springs; carpet; swing sets; plastic swimming pools; large toys; bicycles; fish aquariums; large household appliances; white goods, and similar items. No white goods shall contain any hazardous materials, including, but not limited to, Freon. 
Commercial container shall mean a truck-loaded or truck-emptied non-disposable container, commonly referred to as a dumpster or roll-off, used for the collection of commercial solid waste. 
Commercial construction and demolition waste shall mean any and all solid waste resulting from any construction, remodel or demolition projects and the clean-up of such projects at a nonresidential site within the city limits; including but not limited to debris, broken concrete and rebar, paper, plastics, cartons, gypsum board, wood, excelsior, rubber, masonry, sheetrock, drywall, roofing materials, and all other materials, including rock and earthen materials and other materials resulting from or incidental to the clean-up of such projects or that are directly or indirectly the byproducts of construction, remodel, or demolition work with respect to existing buildings or other structures under development. 
Commercial solid waste shall mean all types of solid waste generated by store, offices, restaurants, institutions, multi-family dwellings with more than two units, warehouses, and manufacturing activities, excluding residential wastes and grease from commercial restaurants and other food service establishments. 
DFW landfill shall mean the type I municipal solid waste landfill owned and operated by Waste Management of Texas, Inc., and located at 1601 Railroad Avenue, Lewisville, Texas. 
Franchise agreement or franchise ordinance shall mean the legal instrument that defines the exclusive rights and responsibilities of the private waste company that collects, hauls, and disposes of solid waste materials within the city limits and collects, hauls, and delivers residential recyclable materials to the city-designated processing facility. 
Franchisee shall mean the private waste company that collects, hauls, and disposes of solid waste materials within the city limits and collects, hauls, and delivers residential recyclable materials to the city-designated processing facility. 
Garbage shall mean solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
Nonresidential customer shall mean all commercial establishments, institutions, and multi-family dwellings with more than two units using steel or plastic containers, dumpsters, roll-offs, or compactors to store solid waste until scheduled collection service occurs. 
Recyclable materials or recyclables shall mean materials that have been designated by the city to be recovered or diverted from the non-hazardous solid waste stream for purposes of reuse, recycling, or reclamation. 
Refuse shall mean non-putrescible solid waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials. 
Residential construction and demolition waste shall mean construction, demolition, and/or remodeling waste generated as a result of the construction activity at a single family, two-family, condominium, townhome, multi-family, or apartment dwelling located in a city subdivision. 
Residential customer shall mean a resident of a single or two-family dwelling, including condominiums and townhomes that set out their household solid waste in one-way containers or 39-gallon trash cans, and their recycling in city-owned 64-gallon carts. 
Solid waste shall mean garbage; refuse; rubbish; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community and institutional activities. The term does not include: 
(1)  Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject to regulation by permit issued under the water code, chapter 26; 
(2)  Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural or man-made inert solid materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or 
(3)  Unacceptable waste. 
Unacceptable waste shall mean any and all waste, including but not limited to hazardous waste, class I non-hazardous special waste, and untreated medical waste, the acceptance of which would cause the franchisee to violate any permit condition, legal or regulatory requirement, or damage franchisee's equipment or facilities, or present a substantial danger to the health or safety of the public or the franchisee's employees. 
White goods shall mean appliances such as refrigerators, stoves, washers, dryers, and other large enameled appliances, which do not contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) or chlorinated pluorocarbons (CFC) units and have been officially certified to that effect. 
Yard waste shall mean leaves, yard trimmings, yard and garden debris, Christmas trees, and brush, including clean woody vegetative material not greater than four inches in diameter which results from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations. The term does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root balls, and specifically excludes all treated wood. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 3, 4-18-05)  
Sec. 12-3. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Storage or accumulations of solid waste or recyclable materials that is unsightly or a health or safety hazard is prohibited. No owner, lessee, or occupant of any residential or nonresidential unit shall permit the accumulation of any solid waste or recyclable material on residential or nonresidential premises except in acceptable containers as defined herein. Proper storage of such materials between collection days is required to ensure prevention of littering and unsanitary conditions. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or person in control of any premises to allow solid waste or recyclable materials to be piled, placed, or accumulated on any sidewalk, street, or other right of way within the city limits. 
(c)  No person shall dump, throw, or place any solid waste, ashes, grass cuttings, rock, or any other material of any kind in or on any public street, alley, storm sewer, drainage structure, drainage channel, or other public or private property in the city except for the designated collection location on the designated collection day. 
(d)  All hazardous waste, special waste (as defined in state or federal regulations), and medical waste materials must be disposed of in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning material (burning match, charcoal, embers, etc.) into any container used for disposal of solid waste or recyclable materials. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of solid waste, recyclable material, or any other waste material by fire, burial, or similar methods within the city limits. 
(g)  Meddling with solid waste or recycling containers or in any way pilfering, scattering contents, or scavenging materials from such containers is prohibited. 
(h)  No person shall place any solid waste or recyclable materials into any residential or nonresidential waste container without the effective consent of the owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of the premises upon which such container is located. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 3, 4-18-05)  
Secs. 12-4—12-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
Sec. 12-21. - Service. 
Residential customers shall establish service at the same time the customer's water account is established. Residents shall pay a deposit as outlined in section 2-201, fees, for solid waste and recycling collection services prior to the beginning of services. Residential customers are required to make full payment for solid waste and recycling services at the time of payment for water and sewer services. No partial payments for solid waste or recycling services will be allowed. 
If residential water or sewer service is not available or not provided, the residential solid waste customer shall contact the city's customer service division at 151 West Church Street to arrange for solid waste and recycling services and post a deposit as outlined in section 2-201, fees, prior to the beginning of such services. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 4, 4-18-05)  
Sec. 12-22. - Setout requirements and prohibitions. 
(a)  Residents are prohibited from setting out any solid waste that is generated from a nonresidential source to be collected as residential solid waste. 
(b)  No appliances set out for bulky waste collection shall contain any hazardous materials of any kind. Appliances that contain or have contained Freon, PCB, or other liquid or gaseous compounds and which are set out for bulky waste collection must have the Freon, PCB, or other liquid or gaseous compounds removed by a certified technician and be tagged by certified technician as being free of Freon, PCB, or other liquid or gaseous compounds. 
(c)  No hazardous waste, special waste (as defined by state or federal regulations), untreated medical waste, soil, dirt, rock, sand, or concrete shall be set out for residential collection at curbside or alley collection locations. 
(d)  Residents may not set out on any single collection day an amount of waste for regular trash collection or bulky waste collection that exceeds what will fit in the bed of a standard size one ton pickup truck. Individual bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds in weight. Containerized materials must be in acceptable containers as defined herein. 
(e)  Brush or yard waste placed for collection must be cut and bundled, and such bundles shall not exceed four feet in length and 50 pounds in weight. Brush shall not be over four inches in diameter. No stumps, roots, shrubs with intact root balls, or treated wood may be set out for residential collection services. Yard waste generated from a residential service unit by a commercial enterprise or service provider may be placed out for collection at the collection point for that residential service unit provided such waste does not exceed the size limitations identified herein. Yard waste generated offsite may not be set out for residential collection. 
(f)  Animal carcasses shall not be placed in containers or at collection points for residential collection services. Residents shall contact the city's Animal Control Division for proper disposal of animal carcasses. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 4, 4-18-05)  
Sec. 12-23. - Residential collection schedules. 
Collections schedules for residential solid waste and recycling services shall be determined by the city and the franchisee. Residential customers shall contact the franchisee to obtain information regarding service schedules. 
(1)  All solid waste and recyclable materials shall be placed at the designated collection area (curbside or alley as determined appropriate by the city) by 7:00 a.m. on the day of the collection. 
(2)  Collection containers shall not be set out for collection more than 24 hours prior to the collection date and shall be removed from the collection point within 24 hours of collection date. 
(3)  Bulky waste may be set out for collection after arrangements have been made with the franchisee. 
(4)  Complaints regarding missed collections shall be reported directly to the franchisee as soon as the missed collection is discovered. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 4, 4-18-05)  
Sec. 12-24. - Residential containers. 
(a)  All materials shall be placed in acceptable containers as defined herein, and shall be placed in such containers is such a way as to prevent littering or spilling of materials onto public areas or neighboring sites. 
(b)  Placement of the solid waste or recycling container shall be at the edge of the street or alley without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or pedestrian traffic or blocking vehicle or pedestrian line of sight. 
(c)  Residents may not set out containers for solid waste that, when filled with waste, weigh more than 50 pounds. 
(d)  Recycling containers are strictly for the collection of acceptable recyclable materials as determined by the city. All recyclable materials must be placed within the container. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if he damages any solid waste or recycling container owned by the city. 
(f)  Residents shall not remove city-owned containers from the address to which the container is assigned. 
(g)  Residents shall report missing or damaged city-owned carts to the city as soon as resident becomes aware of such loss or damage. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 4, 4-18-05)  
Sec. 12-25. - Residential construction and demolition material. 
(a)  Construction and demolition material that results from construction, remodeling, repairing, or destruction of a residential service unit shall not be subject to the franchise agreement if collected and transported via pickup truck, pickup truck and trailer(s), dump truck(s), dump truck and trailer(s), trailer(s), semi tractor and trailer(s), or any combination of these. Any roll-off, frontload, or other containerized unit used to collect, hold, or transport construction and demolition waste shall be those owned and operated by the franchisee. 
(b)  All residential construction and demolition waste shall be disposed at the DFW landfill located at 1601 Railroad Avenue regardless of the method of transport unless the construction and demolition waste is delivered to a recycling facility. Proof of delivery of these materials to such recycling facility must be made available to the city upon request. Residents may use their two free landfill privileges as defined herein to dispose of residential construction and demolition waste, but the volume of materials shall be limited to the equivalent of one pickup and trailer load per visit. 
(c)  Residential construction and demolition materials are prohibited from being set out for residential collection services, except that miscellaneous small construction related materials and fencing materials from a residential construction and demolition project may be set out as residential solid waste or bulky waste if the setout complies with the size and volume requirements as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 4, 4-18-05)  
Sec. 12-26. - Landfill privileges. 
(a)  Residential customers are provided two free landfill privileges per month at DFW landfill located at 1601 Railroad Avenue. Residents may not use such free landfill privileges to dispose of any solid waste resulting from commercial activity by the resident. 
(b)  Residents must provide a valid driver's license and water bill dated within the preceding 60 days with the same address to use free landfill privileges. Tenants of apartments and townhomes must present a valid driver's license and a current rent receipt or a letter from the property manager dated within the last 60 days identifying the property address and indicating the individual is a resident of the property in order to utilize the free landfill privileges. 
(c)  All loads must be covered to prevent littering of waste enroute to the landfill. Uncovered loads will result in an additional gate fee. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 4, 4-18-05)  
Secs. 12-27—12-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NONRESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
Sec. 12-41. - General. 
(a)  All nonresidential customers shall contract with the franchisee for solid waste collection services. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than franchisee to collect or remove solid waste materials from a commercial container. 
(c)  Collection shall not be provided before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. if the site for collection is within 500 feet of any residential dwelling or residential complex including apartments or townhomes. 
(d)  Nonresidential customers shall remit payments for solid waste services directly to the franchisee. 
(e)  Nonresidential customers are not required to use the services of the franchisee for collection, hauling, and disposal of recyclable materials. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 5, 4-18-05)  
Sec. 12-42. - Collection containers and schedules. 
(a)  Nonresidential customers shall contract for solid waste collection services and acquire an appropriately-sized commercial container at a frequency that prevents the accumulation of waste outside the container and prevents littering or spilling of materials onto public areas or neighboring sites. Collection of nonresidential solid waste shall not be made less than one time per week. 
(b)  Overfilled containers will not be emptied if a safety hazard exists. Customer will be responsible for removing the excess, and collection will be rescheduled when the excess material has been removed. 
(c)  The customer is responsible for providing access to the solid waste container and keeping area around and on top of the container clear of obstructions so that container can be serviced as scheduled. If container is blocked and not cleared, service will not be provided. Customer will be responsible for the cost of extra collections required. 
(d)  The customer will be responsible for odor and insect control around containers. 
(e)  Commercial containers shall not be placed on any sidewalk, street, or other public right of way, and shall be placed solely on private property. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in control of any premises to allow solid waste or recyclable materials to be piled, placed, or accumulated on any sidewalk, street, or other public right of way within the city limits. Commercial containers shall be placed on the site in such a manner that the collection vehicle is able to service the container without obstructing public right of way. 
(f)  All compactor customers that lease compactors must lease such compactors from the franchisee. Commercial customers shall have the right to purchase compactors from third parties, but must utilize the franchisee for compactor disposal services. 
(g)  All solid waste front load and roll-off containers shall display the name and phone number of the franchisee. 
(h)  Commercial containers owned by the franchisee shall not be marked, modified, or damaged by customer in any way. 
(i)  Commercial construction, remodel, and demolition materials as defined herein must be collected in containers owned and operated by the franchisee, including any roll-off, frontload, or other containerized unit. All commercial construction, remodel, and demolition waste shall be disposed of at the DFW landfill unless the construction and demolition waste is delivered to a recycling facility. Proof of delivery of these materials to such recycling facility must be made available to the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 3202-04-2005, § 5, 4-18-05)  
Chapter 13 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND CERTAIN OTHER PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power to acquire property, § 2.01; authority to control, close, etc., streets and public ways, § 3.07(q). 
Cross reference— Restrictions and requirements for fences, § 4-41 et seq.; building numbering system, § 4-361 et seq.; off-street parking and loading requirements, § 6-36 et seq.; permits for public works construction in rights-of-way and easements required, § 6-61 et seq.; requirements for curved ramps for the handicapped, § 6-363; requirements for improvements on land served by substandard public improvements, § 6-436 et seq.; specific standard for public improvements, § 6-461 et seq.; railroad crossing requirements in the land development regulations, § 6-484; requirements for streets in the land development regulations, § 6-506 et seq.; requirements regarding alleys in the land development regulations, § 6-541 et seq.; house moving licensing and regulations, § 7-76 et seq.; water flowing upon streets prohibited, § 9-4; littering in public places prohibited, § 9-81; parks, § 10-66 et seq.; recreation areas, § 10-96 et seq.; public library, ch. 10.5 et seq.; specific street traffic regulations, § 15-61 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 13-1—13-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), adopted Aug. 12, 2017, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 13-26—13-41 was entitled "Excavations" and derived from Code 1990, §§ 8-1-1—8-1-3 and 8-7-1—8-7-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 13-26. - Purpose. 
The standards and procedures provided in this article are adopted to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the public by minimizing and reducing impacts to public safety within the city's public right-of-way and to minimize and reduce impacts to the city, its residents, and visitors, and for the general health and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-27. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article apply to any installations in, on, over, or under the public rights-of-way, whether they are installed pursuant to state law, or pursuant to an agreement with the city. 
(b)  The contractors shall comply with all generally applicable ordinances of the city and adhere to the requirements found in this article for the placement of their facilities within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-28. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction means any work performed above the surface, on the surface, or beneath the surface of a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, installing, servicing, repairing, upgrading, or modifying any facility(s) in, above or under the surface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface and subsurface of the public right-of-way. The word "construction" does not include the installation of facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property, or the repair or maintenance of existing facilities unless such installation, repair, or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement, excavation or boring. 
Contractor shall mean any person or group of persons using the public right-of-way to locate a facility. This term includes network providers, as defined in article IV of this chapter, and in the event this article conflicts with article IV of this chapter, the provisions in article IV of this chapter shall apply. This term does not include the city. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specified. 
Detour shall mean an alternate route in which vehicular traffic is directed around a street which is closed. 
Director means the department director designated by the city manager or designee to administer this chapter. 
Emergency shall mean an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. 
Facility or facilities shall include, but not be limited to, any and all cables, pipelines, splice boxes, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults, manholes, conduits, control boxes, fiber optic cables, power sources, and other appurtenances, equipment, structures, plant or tangible things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by an owner, that are located or are proposed to be located in the public right-of-way. 
Manual shall mean the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Municipal authorization means the individual grant to use the public rights-of-way issued by the city and accepted by the individual owner in accordance with the ordinances of the city, a franchise agreement, any other type of agreement, or a license, or under operation of state law that provides a specific grant of authority to use the public rights-of-way. 
Owner means any person who owns any facility or facilities that are, or are proposed to be, installed or maintained in the public right-of-way. Included within this definition is the owner's contractor, subcontractor, agent, or authorized representative. 
Permit means the permit, pursuant to this article, that must be obtained before an owner may construct facilities in a public right-of-way. A permit allows the holder to construct facilities in that part of the public right-of-way described in such permit. 
Person means any natural or corporate person, business association, or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole proprietorship, a political subdivision (excluding the city), a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
Public right-of-way or right-of-way shall mean the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Responsible person shall mean the city manager or his or her designated representative. 
Streets and alleys shall mean a traveled way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, alley, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated. 
Major thoroughfares or arterial streets shall mean principal traffic arteries more or less continuous across the city which are intended to connect remote parts of the city and which are used primarily for fast or heavy volume traffic and shall include, but not be limited to each street designated as a major street on the thoroughfare plan. 
Collector streets shall mean those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
Minor streets shall mean those which are used primarily for access to abutting residential properties which are intended to serve traffic within a limited residential district. 
Alleys shall mean minor traveled ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATIONS AND PERMITTING 
 
Sec. 13-29. - Public right-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  Prior to the city issuing a permit for installing facilities in, on, or over the public rights-of-way, all persons must first obtain a separate municipal authorization. 
(b)  This article does not constitute or create authority to place, reconstruct, or alter facilities in, on, under, or over the public rights-of-way, nor to engage in construction, excavation, encroachments, or work activity within or upon any public right-of-way, and said authority must be obtained in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(c)  Any person with a current, unexpired franchise, municipal authorization, license or other authorization from the city or State of Texas to use the public right-of-way (herein referred to as a "existing authorization") that is in effect at the time this article takes effect, shall continue to operate under and comply with that existing authorization, and in the event this article conflicts with existing authorization, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(d)  Permittee accepts at its own risk that city may make use of the public rights-of-way in a manner that is inconsistent with permittee's placement and use of its facilities located in the public rights-of-way, and in that event permittee shall not be entitled to compensation from city. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-30. - Registration. 
(a)  In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all owners of facilities in the public right-of-way will register with the city. Registration will be issued in the name of the person who owns the facilities. Registration must be renewed on or before January 31 of each year. The city shall provide written notification of this renewal requirement. If a registration is not renewed, and subject to 60 days notification to the owner, the facilities of the owner will be deemed to have been abandoned. When any information provided for the registration changes, the owner will inform the city of the change no more than 30 days after the date the change is made. 
(b)  Registration shall include: 
(1)  The name, address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner; 
(2)  The names, address(es) and telephone number(s) of the contact person(s) for the owner; 
(3)  The name(s) and telephone number(s) of an emergency contact who shall be available 24 hours a day; 
(4)  The source of the owner's municipal authorization (e.g., franchise, state law, etc.). If the owner is a certificated telecommunications provider, or holds a state-issued certificate of franchise authority, the owner must provide the certificate number of same issued by the Texas Public Utility Commission; and 
(5)  Owner shall include with information presented at time of registration detailed drawings reflecting owner's installations on private property so that city may verify compliance with city ordinances related to zoning, development, building regulations, and setbacks, and for easement verification. 
(c)  The owner shall submit two-year projections of its plans for the construction of facilities in the city at the time of registration renewal; and 
(d)  Registration shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a permit. Each owner shall update and keep current its registration with the city at all times. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-31. - Permit required. 
Contractor shall not install any facility in any portion of the public right-of-way without first applying for and obtaining a permit in compliance with the city's permit application process. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-32. - Permit not required. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a permit is not required for routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the above, the contractor shall give the city 30 days' advance notice of the work described above. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-33. - Permits—General. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this article, the city will issue permits to contractors authorizing contractors to install and maintain facilities in or on public right-of-way. The locations at which contractors' facilities may be permitted, and the size and appearance of such facilities, shall be determined in accordance with this article. Provisions concerning construction and activities in the public right-of-way in chapter 6 shall also be applicable to contractors' activities in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  The city will issue a permit(s) to contractor only when the city reasonably determines, in its sole judgment, that: (i) contractor meets all requirements set forth in this article, and (ii) such permit(s) comply with all applicable codes. 
(c)  No use, however lengthy, of any of public right-of-way, and no payment of any fees or charges required under this article, shall create or vest in contractor any easement or other ownership or property right of any nature in any portion of the public right-of-way. After issuance of any permit, contractor shall be and remain a mere licensee. Neither this article, nor any permit granted under this article, shall constitute an assignment of any of the city's rights to the public right-of-way. 
(d)  No part of contractors' facilities or other equipment constructed, modified, or erected, or placed on public right-of-way will become, or be considered by the city as being affixed to or a part of, the public right-of-way. All portions of contractors' facilities and other equipment constructed, modified, erected, or placed by contractor on public right-of-way will be and remain the property of contractor and may be removed by contractor at any time. 
(e)  Nothing in this article or in a permit granted hereunder shall be construed as granting contractor any right to locate contractors' facilities at any specific location or to compel the city to grant contractor the right to locate at any specific location. 
(f)  This article does not in any way limit the city's right to locate, operate, maintain or remove city-owned poles or other city equipment or property in the manner that the city deems appropriate. 
(g)  Contractor is obligated to obtain all necessary certification, permitting, and franchising from federal, state and local authorities prior to making any installations of facilities. 
(h)  Nothing in this article or in any permit granted hereunder shall be construed to grant contractor the authority to lease, grant, or otherwise assign any rights under its permit to any other party without the written consent of the city. 
(i)  In the event the city determines to deny the use by contractor of any particular location in the public right-of-way, such denial by the city shall be undertaken in its capacity as proprietor of the public right-of-way, and not in its regulatory capacity. 
(j)  Any permit granted under this article is limited to the uses specifically authorized in the permit and any other use shall be considered a material breach of this article. Nothing in this article or in any permit granted hereunder shall be construed to require the city to allow contractor to use the public right-of-way after the termination of the applicable permit. 
(k)  Emergency responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the department shall be notified in writing within two business days of any construction related to an emergency response, including a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the public right-of-way. An updated map of any facilities that were relocated, if applicable, shall be provided within 90 days. 
(l)  A permit is not required under subsection (a) if the activity in the public right-of-way consists exclusively of a residential service connection on the same side of the public right-of-way, if the connection does not require a pavement cut. 
(m)  A copy of the permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the responsible person at all times when construction work is occurring. 
(n)  All construction work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time period, the owner may request an extension of the time period from the responsible person. The responsible person will use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. If the request for the extension is made prior to the expiration of the permit, work may continue while the request is pending. 
(o)  No owner or contractor shall perform construction, excavation, or work in an area larger or at a location different than that specified in the permit or permit application. If, after construction, excavation, or work is commenced under an approved permit, it becomes necessary to perform construction, excavation, or work in a larger or different area than originally requested under the application, the owner or contractor shall notify the responsible person immediately and, within 24 hours, shall file a supplementary application for the additional construction, excavation, or work. If the responsible person approves the additional construction, excavation, or work, such approval will be noted in the permit file and will constitute an amendment to the permit. 
(p)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state rights-of-way located in the city shall be provided, if requested by the department. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-34. - Permit application. 
(a)  The permit will be in the name of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. The permit application must be completed and signed by a representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
(b)  Any person requesting a permit will provide the responsible person with documentation in the format specified by the department, at the time of permit application submittal, describing: 
(1)  The name, telephone number, local address and principal place of business of the owner. 
(2)  The name and day and night telephone numbers of the engineer, foreman, or other person who will be in charge of the construction or repairs for which the permit is requested. 
(3)  The times of the day and total number of days the owner seeks to block the roadway. 
(4)  The proposed location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the owner's plan for public right-of-way construction. For lines longer than 100 feet, the line must be stationed. 
(5)  Three sets of engineering plans, including plan and profile, which will be on a standard engineering scale, acceptable to the department, unless waived by the responsible person. When required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as amended, the plans must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas. 
(6)  A map or site plan drawn to scale on 11-inch × 17-inch or 22-inch × 34-inch paper showing: 
a.  The location of the proposed installation, including GIS or street address information; 
b.  The proximity of the proposed installation to special districts of the city; 
c.  The proximity to schools and municipal parks; and 
d.  The proximity to poles, if any, and depicting the sidewalks, and ramps onto sidewalks required by all applicable regulations, the Texas Accessibility Standards, or other law, including the Americans with Disabilities Act, paved street surface and all existing underground and overhead utilities in the right-of-way and utility easements. 
(7)  Detail of the location of all public right-of-way and utility easements that owner plans to use. 
(8)  Detail of existing utilities located in the public right-of-way, including the city's utilities, in relationship to owner's proposed route. 
(9)  Detail of what owner proposes to construct including size of facilities, materials used, such as pipe size, number of ducts, valves, etc. 
(10)  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in public rights-of-way. 
(11)  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc., including depth located in public right-of-way. 
(12)  Typical details of manholes and/or handholes owner plans to use or access. 
(13)  Complete legend of drawings submitted by owner, which may be provided by reference to previously submitted documents acceptable to the city. 
(14)  The construction methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the public right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the responsible person. 
(15)  A description of standard barricading showing placement of barricades, cones and informational signs used on the project. In most cases, layouts will be similar to those shown in the latter part of the manual. Deviation from the manual will be allowed only with approval of the responsible person. The description will include a listing of all persons directly responsible for the safety on each project to include an address or a telephone listing at which such person can be reached at any hour of the day if a hazardous condition develops. This description shall be provided to the city a minimum of five business days prior to the start of construction. 
(16)  Proof of insurance and bonds as required by the city. 
(17)  Disclosure if the proposed facility is: 
a.  In a residential area; or 
b.  In an underground utility district or other area with undergrounding requirements. 
(18)  A pre-permit survey completed, signed and sealed by a qualified and experienced professional engineer in accordance with the city's requirements, certifying that contractor's facilities can be installed on the identified structure in compliance with all applicable codes, regulations and laws. The professional engineer's qualifications must include experience performing work for similar attachments on similar facilities. 
(19)  Detailed plans for each facility including representative drawings or pictures of the intended equipment and proposed dimensions of same. 
(20)  Certification that the proposed facility complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and that the proposed facility shall not cause any interference with the city's public safety radio system, traffic light system, or other city safety communications components. 
(21)  Certification that the proposed facility will be placed into active commercial service by or for the contractor not later than the 60 th day after the date the construction and final testing of the facility is completed. 
(22)  If applicable, contractor shall have in place an executed license agreement with the city. 
a.  The permit application will be denied if this license agreement is not in place at the time the application is submitted. 
b.  Engineering and construction plans and drawings related to the facility, including where the proposed facility will be connected, shall also be provided. 
c.  If the applicant is not the same as the licensee identified in the license agreement, the licensee shall sign the permit application or provide a letter of agency satisfactory to the city. The licensee in such license agreement shall be presumed to be the owner of the facility and related equipment, and shall be fully responsible for them and the fees payable to the city thereunder. 
(23)  If the proposed location lies within a highway right-of-way, the contractor must provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal government. 
(24)  Any other information deemed reasonably necessary by the responsible person. 
(c)  The city's acceptance of the submitted design documents does not relieve the contractor and its engineer of full responsibility and liability for any errors and/or omissions in the engineering analysis. 
(d)  The city shall review the permit application for completeness and notify the contractor in writing if the contractor needs to submit additional or missing information. Such written notice will be provided within 30 days after receipt of a permit application for a facility. The notice shall specifically identify the missing information. If the contractor does not submit the missing or additional information within 180 days of the notice, the contractor's permit application shall be deemed withdrawn. 
(e)  The city shall review the permit application to determine if the requested location and proposed installation complies with all applicable codes. 
(1)  If the city denies the permit application, it will notify the contractor by electronic mail on the date the city denies the application, stating the basis for the denial. 
(2)  The contractor may cure the deficiencies identified by the city within 30 days by resubmitting the application, along with payment to the city for the city's actual costs incurred in reviewing the resubmitted application. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-35. - Pre-construction meeting. 
The contractor shall notify the city at least seven business days before the commencement of work, as the city may require a pre-construction conference. No work shall commence until the date provided to the city or as specifically authorized at the pre-construction meeting, if any. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-36. - Record drawings. 
Upon passing final city inspection, the contractor shall furnish to the city the original drawings, revised to depict as-built conditions. The plans shall be marked "Record Drawings" on each sheet and shall be signed and dated by the contractor's design engineer. The contractor's design engineer shall certify that the plans accurately show the work as actually constructed. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-37. - Termination of permits. 
(a)  Unless the city grants an extension of time upon the contractor's request, a permit shall expire six months after approval by the city if installation pursuant to the permit has not begun by that date. 
(b)  Any permit shall automatically terminate when the contractor ceases to have authority to construct and operate its facilities on public right-of-way at the location covered by the permit. The contractor shall, at its sole expense, remove the facility from the public right-of-way within 30 days. If the contractor fails to remove the facility within 30 days, the city shall have the right to remove the facilities at the contractor's expense. 
(c)  Any permit shall automatically terminate for a facility that becomes nonfunctional and no longer fit for service. The contractor shall, at its sole expense, remove any such facility, or part of such facility, within 30 days of the facility becoming nonfunctional. If the contractor fails to remove the nonfunctional facility within 30 days, the city shall have the right to remove same at the contractor's expense. 
(d)  The contractor may at any time surrender any permit. The contractor shall, at its sole expense, remove the facility from the public right-of-way within 30 days of the contractor's notice of surrender of a permit. If the contractor fails to remove the facility or any part thereof from the public right-of-way within 30 days, the city shall have the right to remove same at the contractor's expense. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-38. - Permit Application—Special requirements. 
(a)  At the time of permit approval or at any time after a permit is issued under this article, the responsible person may require any or all of the following: 
(1)  The use or specific location of additional barricades, signals, signs or other traffic control or safety devices, or the use of special traffic control or safety procedures. 
(2)  That the work be performed only at certain hours during the day or night, or during specified days of the week. 
(3)  That only a specified area, or not more than a specified number of lanes, shall be blocked at the same time or at specified times of the day. 
(4)  That materials and equipment used in the work site and dirt removed from any excavation be located other than in the vehicle lanes of such roadway. 
(5)  That all equipment be moved from the traffic lanes and any excavation in the traffic lanes be covered or filled with materials of sufficient strength and construction to permit vehicular traffic to pass over such excavation during all or part of the peak traffic periods or at night. 
(b)  When such requirements are deemed necessary by the responsible person in the interest of public safety and to avoid traffic congestion, any such special requirements shall be endorsed on the permit and shall be a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-39. - Appeal to city council. 
If an application is disapproved, or if an applicant believes he has been unfairly treated by the responsible person, the applicant may in writing appeal such decision to the city council, which shall hear such appeal at the first regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the written appeal. If the written appeal is received less than 72 hours prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, such hearing shall be held at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting. The city council may grant or deny the permit or impose such restrictions or special requirements as it deems necessary, and the decision of the city council shall be final. Any permit not granted or any activity not permitted by the responsible person shall not be granted or permitted until the appeal is heard by the city council, and if the responsible person issues an order to cease some activity, such activity shall cease until such time as the appeal procedure is completed. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
DIVISION 3. - INSTALLATION IN RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 13-40. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state and federal laws. Facilities shall be installed, operated and maintained in such a manner so as not to unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian use of public rights-of-way, or with any existing publicly-owned or publicly-franchised water and wastewater lines, gas lines, electric lines, storm sewer lines, open drainage areas, cable, fiber optic cable, roadways, sidewalks, alleys, traffic control devices, public signs, or any other facilities permitted in the rights-of-way by the city. 
(b)  Public notification of work to be performed. 
(1)  For any closure of a traffic lane or blocking of a sidewalk or alley lasting six days or less, the permittee shall conspicuously mark its vehicles with the permittee's name and telephone number. 
(2)  For projects scheduled to last seven days or more, a three feet by three feet informational sign stating the identity of the person doing the work, a local telephone number, and owner's identity shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur at least 48 hours prior to the beginning of work in the public right-of-way, and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. The informational sign will be posted on public right-of-way at a location that is 100 feet before the construction location commences, unless other posting arrangements are approved or required by the responsible person. 
(3)  When projects last seven days or more, the permittee shall also provide written notification to all adjacent property occupants at least 48 hours prior to the beginning of construction. Informational fliers shall include the person doing the work, a local telephone number, owner's identity, and the proposed construction schedule. 
(c)  Erosion control measures (e.g., silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades must be in place before work begins. Owner shall be responsible for stormwater management, erosion control, and excavation safety measures that comply with city, state, and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, construction fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, and barricade fencing around open holes. High erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing. Upon request owner may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from federal or state government. 
(d)  Permittee shall erect, place and maintain all warning signs, traffic control devices and barricades required by the manual or the responsible person. All such signs, devices and barricades should be in good condition, clean and legible and shall be of the type required by the manual; provided, that the responsible person may authorize the use of different or special devices and equipment if, in his opinion, such equipment will be at least as effective for its intended purpose as that set forth for such purpose in the manual. When additional regulatory signs are deemed necessary by the responsible person such signage will be installed as directed along with such regulator signs as are required to be provided by the city pursuant to the manual. 
(e)  Without affecting the legal relationship between the owner and its contractor, owner is responsible for the workmanship of, and any damages by, its contractors or subcontractors. A responsible representative of the owner will be available to the director at all times during construction. 
(f)  Owner or contractor or subcontractor will notify the director immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city- or privately-owned. 
(g)  Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity-dependent facilities. Facilities shall not be located over, or within two feet, horizontally or vertically, of any water or sanitary sewer mains, unless approved by the responsible person. 
(h)  New facilities must be installed to a minimum depth required by state and federal codes and standards, but not less than 36 inches below grade. 
(i)  All directional boring shall have a locator place bore marks and depths while the bore is in progress. Locator shall place a mark at each stem with a paint dot and depth at least every other stem. 
(j)  Owner will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities. When required by the responsible person, owner shall verify locations by pot holing, hand digging, or other method approved by the responsible person prior to any excavation or boring. 
(k)  Placement of all manholes and/or handholes must be approved in advance by the responsible person. Handholes or manholes will not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the responsible person. 
(l)  Locate flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed. 
(m)  When construction requires pumping of water or mud, the water or mud shall be contained in accordance with federal and state law and the directives of the director. 
(n)  A person shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical, and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the public right-of-way. The city shall waive the requirements of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver, based upon information provided to the city by the person. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference. 
(o)  On construction projects in which excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, the permittee must have detailed plans and specifications for excavation safety systems. The term "excavation" includes trenches, structural or any construction that has earthen excavation subject to collapse. The excavation safety plan shall be designed in conformance with state law and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards and regulations. 
(p)  Prior to any boring, permittee shall identify and verify the elevation of all existing utilities and adjust the bore to avoid contact by a minimum of 12 inches below existing utilities, and a minimum of two feet below city utilities, as per subsection (g) of this section. 
(q)  The depth of conduit, measured from the top of the conduit to the surface of the ground, shall be a minimum of 36 inches. 
(r)  Within the street right-of-way, with the exception of road crossings, city utility crossings and driveways, a four-inch capacity conduit should be used. 
(s)  Trenching shall be promptly backfilled with earth and tamped with a mechanical tamper at six-inch lifts, so that the earth is restored to original grade to assure no hazard to vehicular, animal or pedestrian traffic. A density test may be required to ensure compaction at 95 percent standard proctor, with such test results to be furnished directly from the laboratory to the city engineer. All open trenches will be properly guarded or barricaded to prevent damage or injury. 
(t)  All cable, where practical, shall be located to cross the roadbed at approximately right angles thereto. No cable shall be placed at any culvert or within five feet of the closed point of same. 
(w)  In areas of potential erosion, the area shall comply with city stormwater pollution prevention ordinance. 
(u)  Operations along roadways, walkways and sidewalks shall be kept clear of excavated material or other obstructions at all times. Barricades, warning signs and lights, and flagmen, when necessary, shall be provided by the contractor or the grantee. Operations involving traffic control shall be in accordance with the manual and an approved traffic control plan, which shall be submitted to city engineer's office. 
(v)  Damage to banks, any public utilities, ditches, roads, fences, lawns, shrubbery, drives and any other property, public or private, caused from the equipment and installation of the facilities shall be immediately reported. Except for damage to city-owned public utilities, such damage shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the public authorities having jurisdiction over the public right-of-way involved, at the cost of the owner. Damage to any city-owned public utilities shall be repaired by the city at permittee's expense. 
(w)  All bores shall be accomplished by the dry-bore method or horizontal directional drilling. 
(x)  No appurtenances shall be located in existing or planned sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-41. - Standards adopted. 
The Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices is hereby adopted by and shall be controlling within the city. A copy of such standards shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-42. - As-built plans. 
Owner shall provide the responsible person with "as-built plans" within 90 days of completion of facilities in the public right-of-way. The plans shall be provided to the city with as much detail and accuracy as required by the responsible person. All the requirements specified for the plans submitted for the initial permit, as set forth herein shall be submitted and updated in the "as-built plans." Owners with facilities in the public right-of-way existing as of the date of this article who have not provided "as-built plans" shall provide one-quarter of the information concerning facilities in city public right-of-way within one year after the enactment of this article, and one-quarter each six months thereafter. The detail and accuracy will address location, size of facilities, materials used, and any other health, safety and welfare concerns. Submittal of "as-built plans" shall be in digital format, and each sheet must be a separate file using TIFF formatting. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-43. - Inspection of facilities. 
(a)  The contractor must give seven business days' notice to the city prior to the start of work. The city reserves the right to inspect new and existing facilities at any time. 
(b)  The city's inspections, or the failure to do so, shall not operate to impose upon the city any liability of any kind whatsoever or relieve the contractor of any responsibility, obligations or liability for contractor's facilities, whether assumed under the contractor's permit or otherwise existing. 
(c)  The city shall provide written notice to the contractor if an inspection reveals that all, or any part, of the contractor's facilities are installed, used, or maintained in violation of this article or contractor's permit. The contractor agrees to bring its facilities into full compliance with this article and its permit within 30 days of receipt of notice from the city. If the contractor does not correct the violation(s) within 30 days as required, the city may correct the conditions at the contractor's expense. When the city reasonably believes that the violation(s) poses an immediate threat to the safety of any person, interferes with the performance of the city's obligations, or poses an immediate threat to the physical integrity of poles or city facilities or the public right-of-way, the city may perform work and/or take action as reasonably necessary to eliminate such immediate threat without first giving written notice to the contractor. The city will advise the contractor in writing of the work performed or the action taken, including photographic evidence substantiating the violation and its cause. The contractor shall pay the city for all costs the city incurs in performing the work or taking the action. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-44. - Conformance with public improvements. 
(a)  An owner may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the National Arborist Association and the International Society of Arboriculture. Should the owner, its contractor or agent, fail to remove trimmings within 24 hours, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the owner shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within 30 days. 
(b)  An owner shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The owner shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities within 15 business days of receiving a copy of a permit issued by the city. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. The owner may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-45. - Location of poles and utility structures. 
(a)  Utility structures not exceeding 20 cubic feet are allowed in the public right-of-way or utility easements, subject to available room and located as approved by the responsible person. The placement of utility structures larger than 20 cubic feet, but not exceeding 30 cubic feet, will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by the responsible person. Such structures shall not encroach within a sidewalk area, including a vertical clearance of eight feet above the sidewalk or within the sight visibility area. 
(b)  Utility structures larger than 30 cubic feet shall be located as close as practical to the back of a public or private utility easement and subject to available room and located as approved by the responsible person. 
(c)  Above ground facilities such as pedestals, switching boxes, marker posts, and similar facilities shall be located no less than three feet from the edge of an alley or the back of street curbs and shall not create a physical or visual barrier to vehicles leaving or entering roads, driveways or alleys. Such facilities shall also not be located in front of residential lots in a manner that creates an unreasonable visual or aesthetic impairment for the property owner. 
(d)  The owner's identity and telephone number shall be placed on all utility structures placed in the public rights-of-way. 
(e)  The following provisions are applicable to the identification of existing underground facilities. Contractors and owners performing line locates shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No line locate may be longer than 500 linear feet. If the project requires a line locate longer than 500 linear feet, a separate line locate request must be called in for each 500-foot section. 
(2)  Area locates must be made with white ultraviolet degradable paint. 
(3)  All locates must be made with ultraviolet degradable paint. 
(4)  Painting of decorative surfaces and features should be avoided whenever possible. 
(5)  If the responsible person determines that the locate marks are excessive, the person making the locate marks may be required to remove marks using a method acceptable to the responsible person. 
(6)  All locate flags related to the ticket called in by the contractor shall be removed prior to final acceptance. 
(7)  All locate requests must be placed in accordance with federal, state, and local laws, with the most stringent law prevailing. 
(f)  The city shall not grant permits for facilities that, in the city's sole determination, will adversely impact pedestrian movement or will be in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(g)  A minimum five-foot clear path of travel will be provided at all times. 
(h)  Separation. 
(1)  In order to minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding area, the hazard of poles, adjacent to roadways, and the effect on property values, the city may deny a permit for a new pole, if the requested location is within 45 linear feet of a street intersection or 300 linear feet per block face of existing pole. 
(2)  In residential zoning districts, poles shall be located where the shared property line between two residential parcels intersects the public right-of-way. 
(3)  In non-residential zoning districts, facilities shall be located between tenant spaces, storefront bays, or adjoining properties where their shared property lines intersect the public right-of-way. 
(i)  Poles shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from a traffic signal pole, and set back a minimum of 15 feet from any pedestrian ramp. The city may require a greater setback from these and other fixtures in the public right-of-way to ensure proper sight lines for public safety purposes. 
(j)  Poles and accessory equipment shall be located at least ten feet from a driveway and at least 12 feet from the center of existing trees. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
DIVISION 4. - REMOVAL AND ABANDONMENT OF FACILITIES; REPAIR AND RESTORATION 
 
Sec. 13-46. - Removal upon notice from the city for city project. 
(a)  The city may determine that it is necessary for the contractor to remove or relocate its facilities or any portion thereof from the public right-of-way for city projects. Whenever the city reasonably determines that relocation or removal is needed for the construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connection with, any city construction or maintenance project of a street or public right-of-way, or other public purpose, the contractor shall remove or relocate its facilities at its sole cost and expense, except as otherwise provided in existing state or federal law. 
(b)  The contractor shall complete the removal or relocation within 30 days after receiving written notice from the city, provided the city or a third party has not prevented the contractor from completing such work. The contractor shall notify the city in writing within ten days after the removal or relocation has been completed. 
(c)  If the contractor fails to remove or relocate the facility or portion thereof as requested by the city within 30 days after receiving written notice from the city, the city shall have the right to remove, or to have removed, the facility at the contractor's expense. 
(d)  The city shall not be responsible or liable for damage to the contractor's facilities except to the extent provided in this article. 
(e)  The contractor shall reimburse the city for the city's actual cost of removal of the facilities within 30 days of receiving the invoice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-47. - Removal required by the city for safety and imminent danger reasons. 
(a)  The contractor shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable facility within the time frame and in the manner required by the city if the city reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any part of a facility: 
(1)  Is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare, or public property; 
(2)  If such facility, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of city facilities or equipment; or 
(3)  If the contractor fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by law for its facilities or for the use of any location under applicable codes, regulations and law. 
(b)  If the city reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the city may immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable facilities at the contractor's sole cost and expense in strict accordance with the city's ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-48. - Repair by contractor. 
The contractor shall repair any damage to any public right-of-way, city facility or equipment, and the property of any third party resulting from the contractor's removal or relocation activities (or any other of the contractor's activities hereunder) within ten days following the date of such removal or relocation, at the contractor's sole cost and expense, including restoration to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date the contractor was granted a permit, including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs, or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-49. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  The surface of any public right-of-way disturbed by owner in the construction or maintenance of its facilities shall be restored to as good a condition as before the commencement of the work promptly but not more than 30 days after the completion of the work in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances. The city shall have 90 days from the date of such restoration to determine whether the restored surface requires additional work to place it in as good a condition as before the commencement of the work. If the city determines that additional restoration work is necessary, owner shall perform all additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city. No public right-of-way shall be encumbered for a period longer than necessary to complete all work. 
(b)  If restoration is not satisfactory or performed in a timely manner, after written notice, then all work in progress, except that related to the problem, including all work previously permitted but not complete may be halted and a hold may be placed on any future permits until all restoration is complete. 
(c)  Upon failure of owner to perform such restoration, and five days after written notice has been given to the owner by the city, and in the event restoration has not been initiated during such five-day period, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the owner, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the owner will reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within 30 days from the date of the city invoice. 
(d)  If the city determines that the failure of owner to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts, after emergency notice has been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the owner shall promptly reimburse the city for the costs incurred by the city within 30 days from the date of the city invoice. If payment is not received within the 30 days, the city shall initiate a claim for compensation with the appropriate bonding company. 
(e)  Owner shall warrant any restoration work performed in the rights-of-way for two years from the date of final completion and acceptance of the work by the city or, if additional restoration work is required, from the date of acceptance of the additional restoration work by the responsible person as meeting city's standards, whichever date is later. This warranty shall include all repairs and actions needed as a result of: 
(1)  Defects in workmanship; 
(2)  Settling of fills or excavations; 
(3)  Any unauthorized deviations from the approved plans and specifications; 
(4)  Failure to barricade; 
(5)  Failure to clean up during and after performance of the work; 
(6)  Restoration of improvements including, but not limited to, landscaping and irrigation; or 
(7)  Any other violation of the ordinances of the city. 
(f)  If repairs are required during the two-year warranty period, those repairs need only be warranted until the end of the initial two-year period starting with the date of acceptance. It is not necessary that a new two-year warranty be provided for subsequent repairs after acceptance. 
(g)  At any time prior to completion of the two-year warranty period, the city may notify the owner of any needed repairs. Such repairs shall be completed within 24 hours if the city determines the defects are an imminent danger to the public health, safety, or welfare. Non-emergency repairs shall be completed within 15 calendar days after notice is sent by the city. Within two years from the date of the completion of the repair work, should the city reasonably determine that the surface, base, irrigation system, or landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet the standards of subsection (a) of this section, owner shall perform such additional restoration work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein. 
(h)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the responsible person. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work to a condition equal to or better either by sodding or seeding, or as directed by the responsible person. Replacement of sod is to be of like kind, smoothed, shaped, rolled, and compacted for proper landscape maintenance; 
(2)  Adjusting of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
(3)  Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be completed daily, unless other safety requirements are approved by the responsible person. Holes with only vertical walls shall be covered and secured to prevent entry. If bore pits, trenches or other holes are left open for the continuation of work, they shall be fenced and barricaded to secure the work site as approved by the responsible person; 
(4)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; 
(5)  Restoration of excavation site to city specifications; 
(6)  Restoration of all paving, sidewalks, landscaping, ground cover, trees, shrubs and irrigation systems; 
(7)  Openings in pavement or sidewalks shall be filled by tamping the dirt in such a manner as to leave the street, alley or sidewalk at that point free from depressions or holes; the opening shall be refilled and maintained by permittee until the dirt is thoroughly settled and packed, the gravel, if any, replaced and packed; the surplus of dirt and/or gravel removed and the surface of the street, alley or sidewalk is in as good condition as it was prior to the making of any opening or excavation therein. 
a.  Permittee shall report the completion of the refill to the responsible person, whose duty it shall be to inspect and pass upon the completeness and acceptability of the workmanship of the refill. 
b.  Should the refill not meet with the approval of the responsible person, the permittee will be given two days' notice, either in writing or otherwise, to complete the job to the satisfaction and approval of the responsible person. 
(i)  Owner or contractor shall remove all locate flags during the clean-up process at the completion of the work. 
(j)  In the event a permit issued under this chapter is revoked, the permit holder shall immediately commence operations to restore the work area within the roadway to its proper condition, such work to be completed within 24 hours. In addition, except as required to restore the work area to its proper condition, the permit holder shall remove all equipment, men, materials and debris from the roadway. In the event such restoration is not done, the city may, at its election, take charge of the work and restore the premises to its proper condition and shall be entitled to recover from the permit holder by civil action the actual expenses incurred by the city in restoring the premises, including, but not limited to, cost of labor, materials, overhead, rental of any equipment used by the city in restoring the site and attorney's fees, and for such purposes, the city shall have a right of action against any bonds in effect running from the holder of the permit to the city, conditioned upon compliance with the ordinances of the city in the performance of such work. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-50. - Abandonment of facilities. 
Whenever an owner intends to abandon any of its facilities within a public right-of-way, it shall submit to the city an application describing the facilities to be abandoned and the date of the proposed abandonment. The city may require owner, at owner's expense: (a) to remove the facilities from the public right-of-way; or (b) to modify the facilities in order to protect the public health and safety or otherwise serve the public interest. If the owner fails to respond to the city's request within 60 days, the abandoned facilities shall be considered the property of the city. Alternatively, the owner may choose to remove the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
DIVISION 5. - LIABILITY, INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE 
 
Sec. 13-51. - Liability and indemnification. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to maintain and operate public rights-of-way in the manner it deems best. The contractor agrees to use public rights-of-way at the contractor's sole risk. The city shall exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging the contractor's facilities and the city shall report to the contractor the occurrence of any such damage caused by the city's employees, agents or contractors. 
(b)  The contractor shall indemnify the city as provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 283.057(a), (b). 
(c)  No provision of this article is intended, or shall be construed, to be a waiver for any purpose by the city of governmental immunity or other provisions of Texas law limiting municipal liability. No indemnification provision contained in this article under which the contractor indemnifies the city shall be construed in any way to limit any other indemnification provision contained in this article or Texas law. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-52. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Owner shall, at its sole cost and expense, obtain, maintain, or cause to be maintained, and provide, throughout the term of the permit granted herein, insurance in the amounts, types and coverages as required by the city. Such insurance may be in the form of self-insurance to the extent not precluded by applicable law or by obtaining insurance. 
(b)  Owner must name the city, which includes all authorities, commissions, divisions, and departments, as well as elected and appointed officials, agents, and volunteers, as additional insureds under the required coverage, except workers' compensation coverage. The certificate of insurance must state that the city is an additional insured and provide for an endorsement that the "other insurance" clause shall not apply to the city where the city is an additional insured shown on the policy. 
(c)  Owner will require its contractors and subcontractors performing work within the public rights-of-way to maintain, at their sole cost and expense, insurance in the form and with the minimum limits required by the city. Such insurance shall be required under the same conditions as specified herein for owner. Owner will maintain at all times, and will provide to city upon request, proof of its contractors' and subcontractors' compliance with this requirement. 
(c)  Owner will provide proof of insurance prior to issuance of the permit. The certificate of insurance shall state the policy number, name of the insurance company, name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company, name, address, and telephone number of insured, policy expiration date, and specific coverage amounts. 
(d)  All polices shall be endorsed to read: "THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NON-RENEWED WITHOUT THIRTY (30) DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE TEN (10) DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED." 
(e)  Within ten calendar days of a suspension, cancellation, or non-renewal of coverage, the owner shall provide a replacement certificate of insurance and applicable endorsements to the city. The city shall have the option to suspend the owner's performance and the permit should there be a lapse in coverage at any time during the construction period. 
(f)  In addition to any other remedies the city may have upon the owner's failure to provide and maintain any insurance or policy endorsements to the extent and within the time herein required, the city shall have the right to order the owner to stop work under its permit. 
(g)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the owner may be held responsible for payments of damages to persons or property resulting from the owner's or its subcontractors' performance of the work. 
(h)  Owner's insurance shall be deemed primary and non-contributory with respect to any insurance or self-insurance carried by the city. The insurance required is in addition to and separate from any other obligation of owner hereunder. 
(i)  Owner and its subcontractors are responsible for all damage to their own equipment and/or property. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
DIVISION 6. - EMERGENCIES 
 
Sec. 13-53. - Emergency situations. 
The requirements of this article are to be used for all planned construction projects. In the event of an emergency-type situation, notification of work to be done may be made by telephone directly to the responsible person or his appointed representative, thereby bypassing the requirements of this article. Under these conditions the owner will still be required to follow the basic barricading standards as outlined in the manual. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Sec. 13-54. - Emergency contact. 
The contractor shall maintain a staffed 24-hour emergency telephone number, not available to the general public, where the city can contact the contractor to report damage to the contractor's facilities or other situations requiring immediate communications between the parties. Such contact person shall be qualified and able to respond to the city's concerns and requests. 
(Ord. No. 4406-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-12-17)  
Secs. 13-55—13-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TREES AND SHRUBBERY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Landscaping of dedicated rights-of-way, § 6-307. 
 
Sec. 13-61. - Trees to be trimmed. 
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees on property owned or occupied by him, overhanging any public thoroughfare, so that the branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrians or public travel. 
(Code 1990, § 8-9-1)  
Sec. 13-62. - Hedges and shrubbery. 
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public sidewalks so that no part of the hedges and/or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1990, § 8-4-2)  
Sec. 13-63. - Injury to trees and/or shrubbery. 
It is unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or without lawful authority so to do, to wilfully injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any flower or plant, located either on private ground or on any public place or thoroughfare. 
(Code 1990, § 8-4-3)  
Sec. 13-64. - Trees outside of property line. 
The city council is hereby provided full and complete control over all trees which are outside the property lines of privately owned real property. 
(Code 1990, § 8-4-4)  
ARTICLE IV. - NETWORK PROVIDERS' ACCESS TO PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 13-65. - Purpose. 
The standards and procedures provided in this article are adopted to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the public by minimizing and reducing impacts to public safety within the city's public right-of-way and to minimize and reduce impacts to the city, its residents, and visitors, and for the general health and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-66. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article apply to any sitings, installations, and collocations in, on, over, or under the public rights-of-way of network nodes, node support poles, Micro-network nodes, distributed antenna systems, transport facilities, microwave communications, or other wireless facilities, by whatever nomenclature, whether they are installed pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284, or pursuant to an agreement with the city, or installed as may otherwise be allowed by law. 
(b)  Providers shall comply with all generally applicable ordinances of the city pertaining to the occupancy and use of public right-of-way, unless such provisions conflict with this chapter, in which case this chapter prevails. 
(c)  Providers shall adhere to the requirements found in this article for the placement of their facilities within the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Any and all facilities selected for the installation of provider's wireless facilities shall not be considered "personal wireless service facilities" as that term is defined at 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)(ii), or a "base station" as that term is defined at 47 CFR § 24.5. The limitations applicable to local governments with regard to the placement, construction, and modification of "personal wireless service facilities" under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B) shall not apply to the city with regard to locations selected for wireless facilities in the public right-of-way. Nor shall any federal regulations limiting the authority of local governments with regard to the placement, construction, and modification of "base stations" apply to the city with regard to wireless facilities located in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-67. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon and its derivatives shall mean, with regard to wireless facilities and transport facilities, and all supporting equipment installed in the public right-of-way (including by way of example but not limited to: poles, wires, conduits, manholes, handholes, cuts, network nodes, node support poles, ground equipment, or any portion thereof) that have been left by a provider in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than 120 consecutive days unless, after notice to provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that the applicable facility, or portion thereof, is still in active use. 
Affiliate shall mean each person or entity that falls into one or more of the following categories: (a) a person or entity having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in a provider; (b) a person or entity in which provider has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; or (c) a person or entity that directly or indirectly is controlled by a third party that also directly or indirectly controls a provider. 
Antenna shall mean communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes shall mean: (i) all applicable Lewisville Code of Ordinances provisions, policies and guidelines; (ii) all applicable engineering and safety standards governing the installation, maintenance and operation of facilities and the performance of all work in or around public right-of-way and includes the most current versions of the National Electric Safety Code ("NESC"), the National Electrical Code ("NEC"), the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code Ch. 752, the rules and regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Act ("OSHA"); and (iii) any applicable lawful rules, requirements or orders now in effect or hereafter issued by the city or other authority having jurisdiction. 
Chapter 284 shall mean Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284), and as amended. 
Collocate and collocation shall mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Concealment or camouflage shall mean any wireless facility or pole that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged, or otherwise concealed such that it blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility or pole includes any wireless facility or pole approved by the city as conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is located and may include, but is not limited to, a wireless facility or pole that is hidden beneath a façade, blended with surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree branches. 
Days shall mean calendar days unless otherwise specified. 
Decorative pole shall mean any streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to city ordinances. 
Design district shall mean an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city, and for which the city maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards. Examples of design districts within the city include, but are not limited to, the Old Town Design District and the I-35E Redevelopment Corridor. Additional areas may be designated as design districts by the city at any time. 
Disaster emergency, or disaster, or emergency shall mean an imminent, impending, or actual natural or human-induced situation wherein the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the city is threatened, and includes, but is not limited to, any declaration of emergency by city, state or federal governmental authorities. 
Distributed antenna system or DAS shall mean a type of network node. 
Easement shall mean and shall include, any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes, or any other purpose whatsoever. Easement shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
Ground equipment shall mean any part of a wireless facility or associated equipment that is located on the surface of the ground and, if included in an approved permit application or otherwise approved by the city in writing, an incidental structure to support the wireless facility. 
Highway right-of-way shall mean right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
Location shall mean the city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node or node support pole. 
Macro-tower shall mean a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by Chapter 284 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
Micro-network node shall mean a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
Modification or modify shall mean any work in the public right-of-way, or alteration of a wireless facility that is not substantially similar in size or is a change in the wireless facility's location in the public right-of-way or its physical position on the pole, except those alterations or changes that are excepted from requiring a permit under Chapter 284, which do not constitute modifications hereunder. 
Municipal park shall mean an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by city ordinance or has been dedicated to the city for use as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
Municipally-owned utility pole shall mean a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally-owned electric utility, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utility Code § 11.003, and located in a public right-of-way. 
Network node shall mean equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term: 
(1)  Includes: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and 
(2)  Does not include: 
a.  An electric generator; 
b.  A pole; or 
c.  A macro-tower. 
Network provider shall mean: 
(1)  A wireless service provider; or 
(2)  A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: 
a.  Network nodes; or 
b.  Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
Node support pole shall mean a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Permit shall mean the city's written authorization for the use of public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole for a network provider to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project pursuant to the requirements of this article. A permit shall include an excavation permit. 
Pole shall mean a service pole, municipally-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
Pre-permit survey shall mean all work or operations required by applicable codes or the city to determine whether the proposed location of a network node has the structural and spatial ability to accommodate network nodes and related equipment. Such work includes, but is not limited to, field inspection, loading calculations, and administrative processing. The pre-permit survey shall be coordinated with the city and include the provider's professional engineer. 
Private easement shall mean an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
Public right-of-way or right-of-way shall mean the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
School shall mean an educational institution that offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12. 
Service pole shall mean a pole, other than a municipally-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public right-of-way, including: 
(1)  A pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  A structure for signage; 
(3)  A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the city and supporting only network nodes. 
Small cell is included as a type of network node. 
Street shall mean only the paved portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the back of the street curb to the back of the opposite street curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A street is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of, the entire right-of-way. A right-of-way may include sidewalks and public utilities, but a street does not. A street does not include the sidewalk, if present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
Streetlight pole shall mean any standard-design concrete, fiberglass, metal, or wooden pole used for street lighting purposes, owned or operated by the city, that is capable of supporting network nodes. 
TAS shall mean Texas Accessibility Standards. 
Traffic control device shall mean all signs, signals, markings, or devices placed or erected by the city or a public body having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. 
Traffic signal shall means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Transport facility shall mean each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
Underground utility district shall mean an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried, or have been approved for burial underground pursuant to city ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing above ground structures in a public right-of-way. 
Utility pole shall mean a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002. 
Wireless facilities shall mean micro-network nodes, network nodes, and node support poles, as defined herein and in Chapter 284. 
Wireless service shall mean any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider shall mean a person or entity that provides wireless service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATIONS AND PERMITTING 
 
Sec. 13-68. - Access to public right-of-way. 
(a)  Subject to the provisions of this article, the city will issue permits to providers authorizing providers to install and maintain wireless facilities and transport facilities in or on public right-of-way in accordance with Chapter 284. The locations at which provider's wireless facilities and transport facilities may be permitted, and the size and appearance of such wireless facilities, shall be determined in accordance with this article. Provisions concerning construction and activities in the public right-of-way in chapter 6 shall also be applicable to providers' activities in the public right-of-way. If the requested location is to collocate a network node on a service pole, provider must also, prior to making application for such location, enter into a license agreement with the city for such collocation. 
(b)  The city will issue a permit(s) to provider only when the city reasonably determines, in its sole judgment, that: (i) provider meets all requirements set forth in this article, and (ii) such permit(s) comply with all applicable codes. 
(c)  No use, however lengthy, of any of public right-of-way, and no payment of any fees or charges required under this article, shall create or vest in provider any easement or other ownership or property right of any nature in any portion of the public right-of-way. After issuance of any permit, provider shall be and remain a mere licensee. Neither this article, nor any permit granted under this article, shall constitute an assignment of any of the city's rights to the public right-of-way. 
(d)  No part of provider's wireless facilities or transport facilities or other equipment constructed, modified, or erected, or placed on public right-of-way will become, or be considered by the city as being affixed to or a part of, the public right-of-way. All portions of provider's wireless facilities and transport facilities and other equipment constructed, modified, erected, or placed by provider on public right-of-way will be and remain the property of provider and may be removed by provider at any time. 
(e)  Nothing in this article or in a permit granted hereunder shall be construed as granting provider any right to attach provider's wireless facilities or transport facilities at any specific location or facility or to compel the city to grant provider the right to attach at any specific location or facility. 
(f)  This article does not in any way limit the city's right to locate, operate, maintain or remove service poles or other city equipment or property in the manner that the city deems appropriate. 
(g)  Provider is obligated to obtain all necessary certification, permitting, and franchising from federal, state and local authorities prior to making any installations of wireless facilities or transport facilities. 
(h)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the city to install, retain, extend, or maintain any service poles or other city equipment or property for use by the provider when such service poles or other city equipment or property are not needed for the city's own requirements. 
(i)  Nothing in this article shall limit, restrict, or prohibit the city from fulfilling any agreement or arrangement regarding a service pole or other city equipment or property into which the city has previously entered, or may enter in the future, with other entities, including, but not limited to, agreements or arrangements for the removal of wireless facilities. 
(j)  Nothing in this article or in any permit granted hereunder shall be construed to grant provider the authority to lease, grant, or otherwise assign any rights under its permit to any other party without the written consent of the city. 
(k)  In the event the city determines to deny the use by provider of any particular service poles or other city equipment or property or any particular location in the public right-of-way, such denial shall not be construed to be a prohibition on, or to have the effect of prohibiting, the provision of wireless services. Any such denial by the city shall be undertaken in its capacity as proprietor of the public right-of-way, and not in its regulatory capacity. 
(l)  Any permit granted under this article is limited to the uses specifically authorized in the permit and any other use shall be considered a material breach of this article. Nothing in this article or in any permit granted hereunder shall be construed to require the city to allow provider to use the public right-of-way after the termination of the applicable permit. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-69. - Fees and charges. 
(a)  Provider shall pay the city the following permit application fees: 
(1)  Network nodes. An application fee in an amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201) for up to five network nodes in each application, and an additional amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201) for each additional network node in the application (a maximum of 30 network nodes may be included in each application). 
(2)  Node support poles. An application fee in an amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201) for each pole. 
(3)  Transport facility. An application fee in an amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201) for up to five network nodes in each application, and an additional amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201) for each additional network node in the application (a maximum of 30 network nodes may be included in each application). 
(b)  Provider shall pay the city the following recurring fees: 
(1)  Network nodes. An annual network node site rental fee in an amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201) per network node site, with an annual adjustment as provided herein. 
(2)  Transport facility. A monthly transport facility rental fee in an amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201) for each network node site, not to exceed the provider's monthly aggregate per-node compensation to the city. The network provider bears the burden to establish that the entity paying the city the transport facility rental is the same as, or an affiliate of, the entity paying the network node site rental rate. 
(3)  Collocation of network nodes on service poles. An annual fee in an amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201) per service pole. 
(4)  All recurring fees are payable in advance and are due upon approval of the permit(s) by the city; no permit shall become effective until the fee has been paid. Initial amounts shall be pro-rated, based upon an annual due date of January 1 of each year. 
a.  For example, a network node permit approved by the city in August shall be effective upon payment in advance by the provider of five-twelfths of the annual rental rate. Thereafter, all payments of annually-recurring fees are due to the city by January 1 for the following calendar year. 
b.  For example, a transport facility permit approved by the city in August shall be effective upon payment by the provider of five months of the monthly rental amount. Thereafter, payments for 12 months at a time are due to the city by January 1 for the following 12 months. 
(5)  Provider shall maintain and submit annually to the city with each payment to the city, an inventory of provider's network nodes, node support poles, node support poles connected by transport facilities, and collocated network nodes. This information shall include complete and accurate GIS location information, maps, plans, equipment inventories, and other records related to provider's facilities. An inventory shall be effective from January 1 of each year. The city reserves the right to compare the information contained on the inventory to any actual field inspection or survey conducted mutually. In the event that provider fails to submit an inventory, provider shall pay the city, in addition to the monthly- or annually-recurring fees, all actual costs associated with the city's performance of an inventory of provider's facilities. 
a.  If either provider or the city subsequently discovers that provider has failed to pay the entire or correct amount of compensation due, the correct amount shall be paid by provider within 30 days of such determination. Any overpayment to the city through error or otherwise will, at the sole option of the city, either be refunded to provider by the city within 30 days of such determination or offset against the next payment due from provider. Acceptance by either provider or the city of any payment due under this section shall not be deemed to be a waiver by either of any claim of violation of this article, nor shall the acceptance by either of any such payments preclude either from later establishing that a larger amount was actually due or from collecting any balance due. Nothing in this section shall be deemed a waiver by either provider or the city of its rights under law or equity. 
b.  Interest on late payments shall be calculated in accordance with the interest rate for customer deposits established by the Public Utility Commission of Texas in accordance with the V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 183.003, as amended for the time period involved. 
c.  The compensation payable to the city hereunder shall not be offset by any payment by provider to the city relating to ad valorem taxes. 
(6)  The network node site rental fee set forth herein shall be adjusted on an annual basis, by an amount equal to one-half of the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index. For purposes of this section, Consumer Price Index shall mean the annual revised Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics. The adjusted fee will be effective 60 days after the city provides notice to providers of the new rate. 
(7)  The recurring fees set forth herein shall be exclusive of, and in addition to, all ad valorem taxes, special assessment for municipal improvements, and other lawful obligations of the provider to the city. 
(8)  When the city at its own expense has removed or remediated provider's wireless facilities or transport facilities or provider is otherwise required to reimburse the city hereunder, the provider shall remit payment to the city within 30 days of the date of the invoice. 
(9)  Upon provider's termination of the use of any service pole or public right-of-way in accordance with the terms of a permit and this article, and provider peaceably surrendering the service pole or public right-of-way to the city in the same condition it was in on the date the permit(s) was granted, excepting ordinary wear and tear, there will be no compensation due to the city by provider for such location. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 3. - INSTALLATION IN RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 13-70. - General requirements. 
(a)  Wireless facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or are visually minimized to the extent possible. 
(b)  Wireless facilities must conform to the city's aesthetic or design standards for the proposed location, if any, unless otherwise approved by the city. 
(c)  Separation. 
(1)  In order to minimize negative visual impact to the surrounding area, the hazard of poles adjacent to roadways, and the effect on property values, the city may deny a permit for a new node support pole if the requested location is within 45 linear feet of a street intersection or 300 linear feet per block face of existing utility pole or node support pole. 
(2)  In residential zoning districts, network nodes and node support poles shall be located where the shared property line between two residential parcels intersects the public right-of-way. 
(3)  In non-residential zoning districts, wireless facilities shall be located between tenant spaces, storefront bays, or adjoining properties where their shared property lines intersect the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Provider shall comply with and observe all applicable city, state, and federal historic preservation laws and requirements. 
(e)  When a permit is issued provider shall install and maintain its wireless facilities and transport facilities, and all ground equipment, in accordance with the city's requirements and specifications. All of provider's wireless facilities, transport facilities, and ground equipment must comply with all applicable codes. 
(f)  Provider shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of its wireless facilities, transport facilities, and related ground equipment. Provider shall install such facilities in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the city, as such may be amended from time to time. Provider's work shall be subject to the regulation, control, and direction of the city. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of the wireless facilities, transport facilities, and related ground equipment shall be in compliance with all applicable city, state, and federal laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations. 
(g)  Primary use. The city shall not grant permits to locate wireless facilities on service poles or other city facilities or equipment that, in the city's sole determination, will adversely impact the primary use of the service pole or other city facility or equipment. 
(h)  Visual clutter. The city may not grant permits to wireless facilities that, in the city's sole determination, will contribute to visual clutter, taking into account the proximity of existing wireless facilities and the surrounding land use. There shall not be more than one network node on any one pole, unless otherwise approved, in writing, by the city. 
(i)  Wireless facilities and ground equipment shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic or render the public right-of-way non-compliant with applicable codes, including the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(j)  Height. A node support pole, modified utility pole, or service pole shall not exceed the height limitations of Chapter 284 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.103). 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-71. - Placement preference. 
(a)  General guidelines on placement. In accordance with Chapter 284, a network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and node support poles in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the city's ordinances regulating the use and occupancy of public rights-of-way or this article; or 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.). 
(b)  Order for installation. The order for installation of network node attachments to existing facilities and new node support poles is as follows: 
(1)  Existing telephone or electric lines between existing utility poles. Micro-network nodes shall only be lashed on existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or telephone poles), with notice to the pole owner as required by the Federal Pole Attachment Act, and not placed on utility poles, node support poles, or service poles. 
(2)  Existing utility poles (electric poles or telephone poles) shall be the preferred support facility for network nodes and related ground equipment. 
(3)  Service poles: 
a.  Non-decorative poles with a height of more than 20 feet, outside of historic district, scenic area, or scenic corridor. 
b.  Wireless facilities shall not be placed on service poles supporting traffic control devices, traffic signals, or any structure supporting a traffic control device or traffic signal, unless the city determines that such installation will not interfere with the integrity of the facility or the safety of the public. Any such installation allowed by the city will be in accordance with a separate agreement with the city. 
c.  Attachment to service poles used for street signage is discouraged. 
(4)  New node support poles shall be the least preferred type of allowed facility for attachment of network nodes. 
(5)  Ground equipment shall be minimal and the least intrusive design and placement as possible. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-72. - Design district. 
(a)  Areas within the city that have been, or shall be in the future, designated by zoning or otherwise as design districts, in which unique design and aesthetic standards are maintained and enforced by the city. Providers shall comply with and observe all applicable city, state and federal historic preservation laws and requirements. 
(b)  Wireless facilities proposed within a design district shall be subject to review by the city engineer or designee in order to satisfy that the installations are compatible with the regulations applicable to design district. 
(1)  As a condition for approval of permits for network nodes or node support poles in design districts, the city shall require reasonable design or concealment measures for such facilities. Therefore, with any request for installations in these areas, provider shall include proposed concealment measures in the permit application. Thereafter, provider shall implement the city-approved design concepts, and the use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order to achieve compliance with design district review, including following the design guidelines for the city's design districts and other applicable regulations. 
(2)  Prior to submitting an application for a permit for a wireless facility in a design district, provider shall meet with the city engineer or designee to discuss any potential design modifications appropriate for the installation. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-73. - School zone lights. 
Wireless facilities will not be allowed at locations that interfere with school zone flashing lights. The interference to be avoided is structural, radio frequency and visual. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-74. - Pedestrian impacts. 
(a)  The city shall not grant permits for wireless facilities that, in the city's sole determination, will adversely impact pedestrian movement or will be in violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(b)  A minimum five-foot clear path of travel will be provided at all times. 
(c)  Network nodes on new or existing poles must be installed at least eight feet above the ground. 
(d)  If the network node attachment is projecting toward the street, it must be installed no less than 16 feet above the ground for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic. 
(e)  No protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole shall be more than two feet. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-75. - New node support poles. 
(a)  Node support poles shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from a traffic signal pole, and set back a minimum of 15 feet from any pedestrian ramp. The city may require a greater setback from these and other fixtures in the public right-of-way to ensure proper sight lines for public safety purposes. 
(b)  Node support poles and accessory equipment shall be located at least ten feet from a driveway and at least 12 feet from the center of existing trees. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-76. - Decorative poles. 
(a)  Wireless facilities proposed for decorative poles must be camouflaged so as to not adversely affect the appearance of such poles. 
(b)  Prior to submitting an application for a wireless facility on a decorative pole, provider shall meet with the city engineer or designee to discuss any potential design modifications appropriate for the installation. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-77. - Residential areas and municipal parks. 
(a)  Providers shall not be allowed, without the written consent of the city, to install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way located in a municipal park or adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
(1)  Not more than 50 feet wide; and 
(2)  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multi-family residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
(b)  As a general rule, new node support poles will not be permitted in a public right-of-way that is in a municipal park or that is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is described in subsection (a), above. 
(c)  The city may, but is not required to, issue a permit for the installation of a network node or node support pole in areas described in this section on terms that are discretionary and nondiscriminatory, and that have the effect of minimizing interference with the aesthetic qualities of such areas, and that are in keeping with this article. 
(d)  If the city approves a permit for the installation of network nodes or node support poles in the areas described in this section, provider remains under an obligation to determine whether any private deed restrictions or other private restrictions are in place in the area, and to comply with same. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-78. - Undergrounding requirements. 
(a)  Areas within the city may be designated from time to time by the city as underground utility districts in accordance with filed plats, and/or in connection with the conversion of overhead to underground areas, as may be allowed by law. 
(b)  Provider will comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing above ground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. 
(c)  In underground utility districts as established by the city, provider shall neither allow, nor install transport facilities or any other overhead facilities serving to connect provider's network nodes. In all areas where overhead telecommunications or utility lines are, or are planned to be, buried below ground as part of a city project, all transport facilities or any other wireless facilities serving to connect provider's network nodes, including ground equipment, shall also be buried below ground. 
(d)  If a permitted location subsequently becomes part of an underground utility district, provider's permit will be automatically revoked within 90 days after such designation, with removal of provider's micro-network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment at such location within 90 days of such designation, or as otherwise reasonably allowed by the city for the transition of overhead facilities. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-79. - Electrical supply. 
Provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the wireless facility. The city shall not be liable to the provider for stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the wireless facility, including, without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the utility serving the wireless facility or the act or omission of any other tenant or licensee of a city facility, or for any other cause beyond the control of the city. Provider shall not be entitled to any abatement of the rental fee for any such stoppage or shortage of electrical power. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-80. - Traffic signals and street signage. 
(a)  If allowed by the city, installations on traffic signals or street signage must not interfere with the integrity of same or the safety of the public. 
(b)  Any installation allowed by the city will be in accordance with a separate agreement with the city. 
(c)  Network nodes installed on any traffic signal or street signage structures shall be encased in a conduit separate from the traffic light or street signage elements, have an electric power connection separate from the traffic signal or street signage structure, and have an access point separate from the traffic signal or street signage structure. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-81. - Generators. 
Generators or back-up generators shall not be installed in the public right-of-way. Permits granted to provider for network nodes or transport facilities do not include authorization for the installation of generators or back-up generators in the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-82. - Equipment dimensions. 
With each application and with each request for a permit, and for each requested location, provider shall provide detailed drawings with calculations to show strict conformity to the size limitations as set forth herein and in Chapter 284 for micro-network nodes, network nodes, ground equipment, and maximum pole height. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-83. - Non-interference. 
(a)  To the extent not inconsistent with Chapter 284, provider's network nodes shall not cause harmful interference to the city's public service radio frequency, wireless network, or communications operations ("city operations"), or to third-parties' network nodes or similar third-party equipment in the public right-of-way or adjacent city property ("protected equipment"). If provider's network node interferes with city operations, then provider shall immediately cease operation of the network node causing said interference upon receiving notice from the city and refrain from operating until provider has eliminated the interference. If after notice provider continues to operate a network node that causes interference with city operations, such network node may be deemed unauthorized and subject to the remediation and termination provisions of this article. If provider's network node interferes with protected equipment, then provider shall take the steps necessary to correct and eliminate such interference within 24 hours of receipt of notice from the city. If provider is unable to resolve the interference issue within this timeframe, it will voluntarily power down the network node causing the interference, except for intermittent testing until such time as the interference is remedied. 
(b)  Following installation or modification of a network node, the city may require provider to test the network node's radio frequency and other functions to confirm that it does not interfere with city operations or protected equipment. If, after notice, provider continues to operate a wireless facility that causes interference with city operations, such wireless facility may be deemed unauthorized and subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-84. - Tree maintenance. 
Provider and its contractors and agents shall obtain written permission from the city before trimming trees hanging over its wireless facilities and transport facilities to prevent branches of such trees from contacting same. When directed by the city, provider shall trim under the supervision and direction of the city engineer or designee. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from the provider's actions under this section. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-85. - Signage. 
Provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the wireless facility or ground equipment that is visible to the public. Corporate logos are prohibited as signage. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four inches by six inches, unless otherwise required by law (e.g., RF ground notification signs), or the city. Except as required by law, provider shall not post any other signage or advertising on the pole, the wireless facility, or any ground equipment cabinet or back-up battery. Signage must be updated by the provider within 90 days of a company name change of the provider. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-86. - Repair. 
Whenever the installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation of the wireless facility or transport facility, or any portion thereof is required or permitted under this article, and such installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation causes any service pole, and city facility or equipment, or any portion of the public right-of-way, to be damaged or to have been altered in such a manner as to make it unusable, unsafe, or in violation of any laws, provider, at its sole cost and expense, shall promptly repair and return such service pole, city facility or equipment, or public right-of-way to its original condition. If provider does not perform such work as described in this paragraph, then the city shall have the option, upon 15 days' prior written notice to provider or immediately if there is an imminent danger to the public, to perform or cause to be performed such reasonable and necessary work on behalf of provider and to charge provider for the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the city. Provider shall reimburse the city for the costs in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-87. - Damage to service pole. 
Whenever a service pole or other city facility or equipment supporting a network node is damaged or knocked down, the city shall endeavor to provide prompt notice to provider of the need to remove or repair provider's network node. Upon receipt of notification from city of such damage, provider shall promptly respond and shall within one hour of such notification take such measures as are necessary to make the area safe, such as disconnection of the power source to the network node and removing damaged equipment from the public right-of-way, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-88. - Access by provider. 
Provider's access to public right-of-way shall be coordinated with the city to schedule such access at times that are least disruptive to the traveling public. The time of day and duration of provider's access shall be as determined by the city. For all activities that impact traffic, provider's access shall be conditioned upon city approval of provider's traffic control plan. Provider shall maintain written logs of each instance when provider has accessed the public right-of-way; such log shall be made available to the city upon reasonable request by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-89. - Graffiti abatement. 
As soon as practical, but not later than 14 days from the date provider receives notice thereof, provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its wireless facilities, or ground equipment. The foregoing shall not relieve provider from complying with any visual blight ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE AND REGULATORY COMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 13-90. - Necessary approvals. 
Provider shall be responsible for obtaining from the appropriate public and/or private authority or other appropriate persons any required authorization to construct, operate and/or maintain its wireless facilities or transport facilities on public property before it occupies any portion of the public right-of-way. The city retains the right to require evidence that appropriate authorization has been obtained before any permit is issued to provider. Provider's obligations under this article include, but are not limited to, the obligation to obtain all necessary approvals to occupy public/private rights-of-way and to pay all associated costs. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 5. - PERMIT APPLICATION PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 13-91. - Permit required. 
Provider shall not install any wireless facility or transport facility in any portion of the public right-of-way, or materially modify the wireless facility or transport facility, without first applying for and obtaining a permit in compliance with the city's permit application process. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-92. - License agreement required. 
As a precondition to receiving a permit to collocate a network node on a service pole, provider shall enter into a license agreement with the city. The city engineer or designee shall have the authority to execute said agreement. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-93. - Permit not required. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a permit is not required for: 
(1)  Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro-network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles, in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  A network node or pole is considered to be "substantially similar" if: 
a.  The new or upgraded network node, including the antenna or other equipment element, will not be more than ten percent larger than the original permitted network node, provided that the increase may not result in the network node exceeding the size limitations provided by Chapter 284; and 
b.  The new or upgraded pole will not be more than ten percent higher than the original permitted pole, provided that the increase may not result in the pole exceeding the applicable height limitations prescribed by this article and Chapter 284; 
(2)  The replacement or upgrade does not include replacement of an existing node support pole; and 
(3)  The replacement or upgrade does not defeat existing concealment elements of a node support pole. 
(c)  The determination under this section of whether a replacement or upgrade is substantially similar is made by measuring from the dimensions of the network node or node support pole as approved by the city. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, for activities that do not require a permit: 
(1)  The provider shall give the city 30 days' advance notice of the work described above; 
(2)  A network provider may replace or upgrade a pole only with the approval of the pole's owner; and 
(3)  The size limitations may not in any event exceed the parameters prescribed by Chapter 284 without the city's approval. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-94. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  Provider shall complete and submit to the city an application to locate a wireless facility or transport facility, using the application form provided by the city. The following items shall accompany the completed application form: 
(1)  A one-time, nonrefundable application fee for review of the application in the amount provided for in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201). 
(2)  Documents necessary for the review or as requested by the city that are designed and sealed by a professional engineer, including but not limited to: 
a.  A map or site plan drawn to scale on 11-inch × 17-inch or 22-inch × 34-inch paper showing: 
1.  The location of the proposed installation, including GIS or street address information; 
2.  The proximity of the proposed installation to special districts of the city; 
3.  The proximity to schools and municipal parks; and 
4.  The proximity to utility poles, node support poles, and other network nodes on a service pole, if any, and depicting the sidewalks, and ramps onto sidewalks required by applicable codes, TAS, or other law, including the Americans with Disabilities Act, paved street surface and all existing underground and overhead utilities in the right-of-way and utility easements. 
b.  Disclosure if the proposed installation is: 
1.  In a residential area as described in section 13-77; and 
2.  In an underground utility district or other area with undergrounding requirements. 
c.  A pre-permit survey completed, signed and sealed by a qualified and experienced professional engineer in accordance with the city's requirements, certifying that provider's wireless facilities or transport facilities can be installed on the identified structure in compliance with the applicable codes. The professional engineer's qualifications must include experience performing work for similar attachments on similar facilities. 
d.  Detailed plans for each wireless facility, transport facility, and ground equipment, including representative drawings or pictures of the intended network node and other equipment, and proposed dimensions of same. Such plans shall show strict compliance with this article, with the size limitations set forth in Chapter 284, with maximum pole height limitations set forth herein and in Chapter 284, and with all applicable codes. 
e.  Certification that the proposed wireless facility complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and that the proposed wireless facility shall not cause any interference with the city's public safety radio system, traffic light system, or other city safety communications components. 
f.  Certification that the proposed network node will be placed into active commercial service by or for a provider not later than the 60 th day after the date the construction and final testing of the network node is completed. 
g.  If the proposed location is on a service pole, provider shall have in place an executed license agreement with the city for the use of the service pole. 
1.  The permit application will be denied if this license agreement is not in place at the time the application is submitted. 
2.  Representative drawings or pictures of the intended network node as intended to be collocated on the service pole shall be provided. 
3.  Engineering and construction plans and drawings related to the collocation of the network node on the service pole, including where the proposed transport facilities will be connected to the network node as electrical power connections, shall also be provided. 
4.  If the applicant is not the same as the licensee identified in the license agreement, the licensee shall sign the permit application or provide a letter of agency satisfactory to the city. The licensee in such license agreement shall be presumed to be the owner of the network node and ground equipment, and shall be fully responsible for them and the rental fees payable to the city thereunder. 
5.  If the requested location has already been approved for collocation by other entities, the application for the service pole shall be denied. 
h.  If the proposed location lies within a highway right-of-way, the provider must provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal government. 
(3)  The city's acceptance of the submitted design documents does not relieve provider and its engineer of full responsibility and liability for any errors and/or omissions in the engineering analysis. 
(b)  The city shall review the permit application for completeness and notify the provider in writing if provider needs to submit additional or missing information. Such written notice will be provided within 30 days after receipt of a permit application for a network node or node support pole, or within ten days for a permit for a transport facility. The notice shall specifically identify the missing information. If provider does not submit the missing or additional information within 180 days of the notice, the provider's permit application for the requested location shall be deemed withdrawn. 
(c)  The city shall review the permit application to determine if the requested location and proposed installation complies with all applicable codes. 
(1)  If the city denies the permit application, it will notify provider by electronic mail on the date the city denies the application, stating the basis for the denial. 
(2)  Provider may cure the deficiencies identified by the city within 30 days by resubmitting the application, along with payment to the city for the city's actual costs incurred in reviewing the resubmitted application. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-95. - Pre-construction meeting. 
Provider or provider's contractor shall notify the city at least seven business days before the commencement of work, as the city may require a pre-construction conference. No work shall commence until the date provided to the city or as specifically authorized at the pre-construction meeting, if any. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-96. - Record drawings. 
Upon passing final city inspection, provider shall furnish to the city the original drawings, revised to depict as-built conditions. The plans shall be marked "Record Drawings" on each sheet and shall be signed and dated by the provider's design engineer. The provider's design engineer shall certify that the plans accurately show the work as actually constructed. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-97. - Termination of permits. 
(a)  Unless the city grants an extension of time upon provider's request, a permit shall expire six months after approval by the city if installation pursuant to the permit has not begun by that date. 
(b)  Any permit shall automatically terminate when provider ceases to have authority to construct and operate its wireless facilities or transport facilities on public right-of-way at the location covered by the permit. Provider shall, at its sole expense, remove the wireless facility or transport facility from the public right-of-way within 30 days. If provider fails to remove the wireless facility or transport facility within 30 days, the city shall have the right to remove the facilities at provider's expense. 
(c)  Any permit shall automatically terminate for a wireless facility or transport facility that becomes nonfunctional and no longer fit for service ("nonfunctional attachment"). Provider shall, at its sole expense, remove any nonfunctional attachment, or part of a nonfunctional attachment, within 30 days of the wireless facility or transport facility becoming nonfunctional. If provider fails to remove a nonfunctional attachment within 30 days, the city shall have the right to remove the nonfunctional attachment at provider's expense. 
(d)  Provider may at any time surrender any permit. Provider shall, at its sole expense, remove the wireless facility, transport facility, and related ground equipment from the public right-of-way within 30 days of provider's notice of surrender of a permit. If provider fails to remove the wireless facility, transport facility, or related ground equipment, or any part thereof from the public right-of-way within 30 days, the city shall have the right to remove same at provider's expense. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 6. - REMOVAL OF WIRELESS FACILITIES AND GROUND EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 13-98 - Removal upon notice from the city for city project. 
(a)  The city may determine that it is necessary for provider to remove or relocate its micro-network node, network node, node support pole, transport facilities, and related ground equipment, or any portion thereof, from the public right-of-way or a service pole for city projects. Whenever the city reasonably determines that relocation or removal is needed for the construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connection with, any city construction or maintenance project of a street or public right-of-way, or service pole, provider shall remove or relocate its facilities at its sole cost and expense, except as otherwise provided in existing state or federal law. 
(b)  Provider shall complete the removal or relocation within 30 days after receiving written notice from the city, provided the city or a third party has not prevented provider from completing such work. Provider shall notify the city in writing within ten days after the removal or relocation has been completed. 
(c)  If provider fails to remove or relocate the micro-network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof as requested by the city within 30 days after receiving written notice from the city, the city shall have the right to remove, or to have removed, the micro-network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment, or portion thereof, at provider's expense. 
(d)  The city shall not be responsible or liable for damage to provider's wireless facilities, transport facilities, or related ground equipment except to the extent provided in this article. 
(e)  Network provider shall reimburse the city for the city's actual cost of removal of wireless facilities, transport facilities, and related ground equipment within 30 days of receiving the invoice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-99. - Removal required by the city for safety and imminent danger reasons. 
(a)  Network provider shall, at its sole cost and expense, promptly disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable wireless facility, transport facility, and related ground equipment within the timeframe and in the manner required by the city if the city reasonably determines that the disconnection, removal, or relocation of any part of a wireless facility, transport facility, or related ground equipment: 
(1)  Is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare or public property; 
(2)  If such wireless facility, transport facility, or related ground equipment, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of service poles or other city facilities or equipment; or 
(3)  If provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, permits and certifications required by law for its wireless facilities, transport facilities, and related ground equipment, or for the use of any location under applicable codes, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(b)  If the city reasonably determines that there is imminent danger to the public, then the city may immediately disconnect, remove, or relocate the applicable wireless facilities, transport facilities, or related ground equipment at the provider's sole cost and expense in strict accordance with the city's ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-100. - Repair by provider. 
Provider shall repair any damage to any service pole, public right-of-way, city facility or equipment, and the property of any third party resulting from provider's removal or relocation activities (or any other of provider's activities hereunder) within ten days following the date of such removal or relocation, at provider's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the service pole or other city facility or equipment and any portion of the public right-of-way to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date provider was granted a permit, including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs, or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 7. - ABANDONMENT OR REMOVAL 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Abandonment by the city. 
(a)  If the city desires at any time to abandon or remove any service pole or other city facility or equipment to which provider's wireless facilities or transport facilities are attached, the city shall give provider notice in writing at least 60 days prior to the date on which the city intends to abandon or remove such service pole or other city facility or equipment. If, following the expiration of the 60-day period, provider has not removed all of provider's wireless facilities or transport facilities, shall have the right to remove same at provider's expense. 
(b)  If any service pole or other city facility or equipment must be removed by reason of any federal, state, county, municipal or other governmental requirement, including, but not limited, to underground conversion, or the requirement of a property owner, provider shall remove its wireless facilities or transport facilities from the affected location, at provider's expense, within 60 days of receipt of written notice from the city. If provider does not remove its wireless facilities or transport facilities within the 60-day period, the city shall have the right to remove same at provider's expense. 
(c)  Provider shall not abandon in place any wireless facilities, transport facilities, or related ground equipment, underground conduit, or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-102. - Removal by provider. 
If provider removes or relocates a wireless facility, transport facility, or ground equipment at its own discretion, it shall notify the city engineer in writing not less than ten business days prior to removal or relocation. Provider shall obtain all permits required for relocation or removal of its wireless facilities, transport facilities, or ground equipment prior to relocation or removal. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 8. - INSPECTION OF FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 13-103. - [Notice to city prior to beginning work.] 
Provider must give seven business days' notice to the city prior to the start of work. The city reserves the right to inspect new and existing wireless facilities, transport facilities, and related ground equipment at any time. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-104. - [Inspections.] 
The city's inspections, or the failure to do so, shall not operate to impose upon the city any liability of any kind whatsoever or relieve provider of any responsibility, obligations or liability for provider's wireless facilities, transport facilities, or related ground equipment, whether assumed under provider's permit or otherwise existing. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-105. - [Inspection findings—Notice.] 
The city shall provide written notice to provider if an inspection reveals that all, or any part, of provider's wireless facilities, transport facilities, or related ground equipment are installed, used, or maintained in violation of this article or provider's permit. Provider agrees to bring its wireless facilities, transport facilities, and related ground equipment into full compliance with this article and its permit within 30 days of receipt of notice from the city. If provider does not correct the violation(s) within 30 days as required, the city may correct the conditions at provider's expense. When the city reasonably believes that the violation(s) poses an immediate threat to the safety of any person, interferes with the performance of the city's obligations, or poses an immediate threat to the physical integrity of service poles or other city facilities or the public right-of-way, the city may perform work and/or take action as reasonably necessary to eliminate such immediate threat without first giving written notice to provider. The city will advise provider in writing of the work performed or the action taken, including photographic evidence substantiating the violation and its cause. Provider shall pay the city for all costs the city incurs in performing the work or taking the action. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 9. - LIABILITY AND INDEMNIFICATION 
 
Sec. 13-106. - [City reserves the right to maintain and operate public rights-of-way.] 
The city reserves the right to maintain and operate public rights-of-way in the manner it deems best. Provider agrees to use public rights-of-way at provider's sole risk. The city shall exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging provider's wireless facilities and the city shall report to provider the occurrence of any such damage caused by the city's employees, agents or contractors. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-107. - Indemnification. 
Provider shall indemnify the city as provided in Chapter 283, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 283.057(a) and (b). 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-108. - [Liability.] 
No provision of this article is intended, or shall be construed, to be a waiver for any purpose by the city of governmental immunity or other provisions of Texas law limiting municipal liability. No indemnification provision contained in this article under which provider indemnifies the city shall be construed in any way to limit any other indemnification provision contained in this article or Texas law. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 10. - DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
Sec. 13-109. - [Provider assumes all risks.] 
The city does not warrant the condition or safety of public rights-of-way or service poles. Any provider issued a permit to occupy public rights-of-way or service poles has an obligation to inspect public rights-of-way or service poles, prior to commencing any work. By accepting a permit from the city for occupancy of public right-of-way, provider assumes all risks of any damage, injury, or loss of any nature whatsoever caused by or in connection with the use of public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-110. - [Permit acquaintance.] 
By accepting a permit, provider warrants that it has acquainted, or will fully acquaint, itself and its employees and/or contractors and agents with the conditions relating to the work that provider will undertake under the permit and that it fully understands or will acquaint itself with the facilities, difficulties, and restrictions attending the execution of such work. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-111. - [City makes no express or implied warranties.] 
The city makes no express or implied warranties with regard to public rights-of-way, service poles, or other city facilities or equipment, all of which warranties are hereby disclaimed. The city expressly disclaims all other warranties, express or implied including, but not limited to, implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-112. - [Interruption of service by damaging equipment.] 
In the event that provider shall cause an interruption of service by damaging or interfering with any equipment of the city, provider at its expense shall immediately do all things reasonable to avoid injury or damages, direct and incidental, resulting from the interruption and shall notify the city immediately. To the extent permitted by Texas law, provider shall be liable for all direct costs resulting from such damage and any necessary repairs. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Sec. 13-113. - [Severability.] 
If V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 284, or any part thereof is at any time, in full or in part, revoked, found to be unconstitutional, struck down, preempted or otherwise becomes void or invalid, then permits granted under this article shall automatically terminate, unless an extension is granted by the city. This section shall constitute notice that in such case, all network nodes are to be removed within 90 days from the event that affects Chapter 284. The parties agree they will negotiate in good faith to assure an ease of transitions as to those parts of Chapter 284 that have been adjudicated as unenforceable, as well as continued compliance with those parts that may remain enforceable, if any. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
DIVISION 11. - EMERGENCY CONTACT 
 
Sec. 13-114. - [Emergency contact.] 
Provider shall maintain a staffed 24-hour emergency telephone number, not available to the general public, where the city can contact provider to report damage to provider's wireless facilities, transport facilities, or ground equipment or other situations requiring immediate communications between the parties. Such contact person shall be qualified and able to respond to the city's concerns and requests. 
(Ord. No. 4400-08-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 8-7-17)  
Secs. 13-115—13-140. - Reserved.  
Chapter 14 - TAXATION AND FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Finance, § 9.01 et seq.; department of taxation, § 9.17; budget, § 9.02; city assessor-collector, § 9.17; city depository, § 11.25. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Fees, charges, rates. 
All fees, charges and rates which may be imposed under this chapter are set out in section 2-201.  
Secs. 14-2—14-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAX  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-26. - Additional penalty for delinquent taxes. 
(a)  Taxes owed to the city that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall and they do hereby incur an additional penalty of 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due, pursuant to the authority granted in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.07. 
(b)  There shall be delivered to the property owner a notice of delinquency and of the penalty set forth in this section at least 30 and not more than 60 days before July 1 each year. 
(Code 1990, § 1-24-15) 
State Law reference— Collection, penalties, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.011.  
Secs. 14-27—14-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - EXEMPTIONS 
 
Sec. 14-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ordinance No. 2062-10-95, adopted October 30, 1995, repealed Ordinance No. 1506-12-89, adopted December 4, 1989; subsequently, § 14-36, which derived from § 1 of such ordinance and pertained to taxation of freeport goods, was also repealed.  
Sec. 14-37. - Exemption for senior citizens. 
(a)  Pursuant to article VIII, section 1-b, of the Texas Constitution, $60,000 dollars of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons 65 years of age or older, shall be exempt from city ad valorem taxes for the year 1999, and all subsequent levies, upon the owners' compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The owner of the resident homestead, or one of the spouses if the resident homestead is owned by a married couple, shall be 65 years of age or older as of January 1, of each tax year, beginning with 1974. 
(2)  The owner of a resident homestead shall submit to the tax assessor-collector for the city, before April 15 of each year, an affidavit that the owner or one of the spouses if the resident homestead is owned by a married couple, is 65 years of age or older. The initial exemption claim shall be accompanied by adequate proof of such age. 
(3)  The title to the property must be in the name of the person requesting the exemption on January 1 of the year the exemption is requested. 
(4)  The property must be improved and occupied by the person requesting the exemption. 
(5)  At such time any of the above stipulations cease to exist, the property loses its exempt status. 
(6)  All prior years' taxes must be paid and all special assessments paid current before the exemption can be granted. If in subsequent years the taxes become delinquent, the applicant loses the exemption. 
(b)  Any person who makes a false affidavit in claiming the resident homestead exemption, shall be subject to all penalties which exist for lack of payment of taxes, and all other appropriate criminal penalties. 
(Code 1990, § 1-24-2; Ord. No. 2420-2-1999, § 1, 2-15-99)  
Sec. 14-38. - Exemption for disabled persons. 
Pursuant to section 11.13 of the Texas Tax Code, $20,000.00 of the assessed value of a person's residence homestead shall be exempt from city ad valorem taxes if one of the owners is disabled, as defined by the Texas Tax Code. An eligible disabled person who is 65 or older may not receive both a disabled and an elderly residence homestead exemption but may choose either. 
(Ord. No. 2514-11-1999, § 1, 11-1-99)  
Sec. 14-39. - Exemption for certain travel trailers. 
(a)  "Travel trailer" shall have the same definition as currently stated in Property Tax Code § 11.142 as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(b)  Travel trailers, whether real or personal property, shall be exempt from taxation if on January 1 of the applicable tax year, the travel trailer is registered in this state in compliance with chapter 502, Transportation Code and the travel trailer is not held or used for the production of income. 
(Ord. No. 2794-04-2002, § 1, 4-1-02)  
Sec. 14-40. - Ad valorem tax limitation. 
(a)  The city council does hereby establish an ad valorem tax limitation on residence homesteads of the disabled and of those age 65 or over and their spouses, in accordance with article VIII, section 1-b, of the Texas Constitution and section 11.261 of the Texas Tax Code. 
(b)  The ad valorem tax limitation provided in subsection (a) above is generally explained as follows: 
(1)  Effective with tax year 2004, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead of a person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or 65 years of age or older. 
(2)  If the person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older dies in a year in which the person received a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is 55 years of age or older at the time of the person's death, subject to any exceptions provided by general law. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (2), taxes on the residence homestead may be increased to the extent the value of the homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other than improvements made to comply with governmental requirements. 
(4)  "Disability" means under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under federal old-age, survivors, and disability insurance. 
(5)  In the event of a conflict between article VIII, section 1-b of the Texas Constitution and section 11.261 of the Texas Tax Code with the general explanation of the tax limitation explained herein, the provisions of the Texas Constitution and the Texas Tax Code shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 3082-06-2004, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3082-06-2004, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 21, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence, its inclusion herein as section 14-40 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 14-41—14-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 7. 
State Law reference— Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration shall mean the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space, but shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for the occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
Hotel shall mean any building, trailer, railroad pullman car not being utilized for the transportation of travelers, or other facility in which the public may, for consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, railroad pullman cars parked on a siding or otherwise used for sleeping accommodations not involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by "permanent residents" as that term is hereinafter defined, and all other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or space are furnished for a consideration. As defined herein, "hotel" shall not include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to the use or possession extends for a period of less than 30 days. 
Occupant shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any rooms, sleeping spaces or facility in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
Quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Permanent resident shall mean any occupant of any room, sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
(Code 1990, § 1-28-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-62. - Tax levied. 
(a)  As authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq., there is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of use or possession of any room that is in a hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day and is ordinarily used for sleeping, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the price of a room in a hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident as defined under V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.101. 
(c)  The revenue derived from this tax may only be used for the purposes set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.101 as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Code 1990, § 1-28.2; Ord. No. 1676-2-92, § I, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 1835-9-93, § 1, 9-13-93) 
Cross reference— Licenses and business regulations, ch. 7.  
Sec. 14-63. - Violations. 
(a)  The city attorney, or other attorney acting for the municipality, may bring suit against any person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this article and pay the collections over to the municipality and which person has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due, or has filed a false report; and such attorney may sue to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the municipality until the tax is paid or the report is filed or corrected. In addition to the amount of any tax owed, the person is liable to the city for reasonable attorney's fees and a penalty equal to 15 percent of the total amount of the tax owed. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such offense is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
(c)  The remedies provided herein are in addition to all other available remedies at law. 
(Code 1990, § 1-28-6; Ord. No. 2026-6-95, § I, 6-19-95)  
Sec. 14-64. - Owners to collect tax. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by this article for the city. 
(Code 1990, § 1-28-3)  
Sec. 14-65. - Report. 
On the 20th day of the month following each calendar month, every person required in section 14-64 to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the city finance director showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the finance director may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall also be furnished to the finance director, at the time of payment of such tax, a copy of the most current quarterly report filed with the state comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax. 
(Code 1990, § 1-28-4)  
Sec. 14-66. - Authority of city manager. 
The city manager shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby, and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1990, § 1-28-5)  
Chapter 15 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic control device requirements in land development regulations, § 6-482; wrecker service rotation list and requirements, § 7-341 et seq.; placing advertising material on vehicles prohibited, § 9-85. 
State Law reference— Uniform traffic control law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley shall mean a minor traveled way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
Authorized emergency vehicle shall mean vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments, or public service corporations, as are designated by the mayor and city council. 
Bicycle shall mean every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two front or two rear wheels. 
Crosswalk shall mean as follows: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Driver shall mean every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Intersection shall mean as follows: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)  Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by any intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
Loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles doing the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Motor vehicle shall mean every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
Motorcycle shall mean every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
Official time standard shall mean, whenever certain hours are named herein, standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
Park shall mean, when prohibited, the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
Passenger loading zone shall mean a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles doing the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian shall mean any person afoot. 
Police officer shall mean every officer of the municipal department or any other officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. The marshal shall also be known as chief of police, and his department shall be known as the city police department. His deputies shall be known as police officers. 
Private road or driveway shall mean every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Railroad shall mean a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than street cars, operated upon stationary rails. 
Railroad train shall mean a steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except street cars. 
Right-of-way shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
Roadway shall mean that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Safety zone shall mean the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Stop shall mean, when required, the complete cessation of movement. 
Stop, stopping or standing shall mean, when prohibited, any stopping or standing of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Through street or highway shall mean any street or highway running from city limit to city limit or for a distance of ten blocks or more. 
Traffic shall mean pedestrian, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purpose of travel. 
Traffic control sign or device shall mean any sign, signal, marking, and device erected or installed in accordance with this chapter and used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic. A traffic control sign or device may also be referred to in this chapter as an "official traffic-control device". 
Traffic-control signal shall mean a traffic control device that is operated manually, electrically, or mechanically and by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1990, § 10-1-1; Ord. No. 2036-8-95, § I, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 4143-12-2014 , §§ 1—3, 12-15-14) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 15-2. - Authority to erect a traffic control sign or device. 
The city engineer, or his designee, shall conduct all necessary surveys, studies and investigations of public streets and highways within the city and shall determine those places where a particular danger or hazard exists and shall install and maintain traffic control signs or devices in accordance with those determinations and as required under this chapter and other traffic-control laws, regulations, and guidelines. For purposes of prosecuting any type of violation related to a person's failure to follow or comply with a traffic control sign or device, said sign or device's authorized installation shall be presumed. 
(Ord. No. 4143-12-2014 , § 4, 12-15-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4143-12-2014 , § 4, adopted December 15, 2014, amended section 15-2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 15-2 pertained to authority to erect stop signs, and derived from the Code of 1990, § 10-10-1.  
Sec. 15-3. - Traffic restrictions—Lewisville Dam. 
(a)  Only foot traffic shall be permitted to go upon and enter on the slopes of Lewisville Dam. 
(b)  No vehicles, sleds, skis or devices shall be permitted to go upon, use or enter on the Lewisville Dam. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the Mill Street right-of-way crossing of Lewisville Dam. 
(Code 1990, § 10-11-19(A))  
Sec. 15-4. - Same—Pedestrian walkway at Fox Avenue. 
No motor vehicle shall be operated on or upon the pedestrian walkway on Fox Avenue where Fox Avenue crosses and overpasses Interstate Highway Number 35E. 
(Code 1990, § 10-11-19(B))  
Sec. 15-5. - Same—Dedicated utility easements. 
(a)  No motor vehicles shall be operated on or upon the dedicated utility easements located at the rear of the following properties: 
Berry Heights Addition, Blocks A, B, C, D; 
Harbor Heights Addition, Blocks A, B, C, D; 
Lake Park Addition, Block A; 
Lakeland Terrace, Blocks C, D; 
Lakeland Terrace No. 2, Blocks F, G, H, J, K, L, M, N, P, R, S, T; 
Lakeland Terrace No. 3, Blocks 1, 2; 
Lakewood North No. 1, Blocks 1, 2; 
Lakewood North No. 2, Blocks A, B, C; 
Lakewood North No. 3, Block A; 
Lakewood North No. 4, 2nd Section Blocks A, E, F, G, H, J; 
Lakewood North No. 4, Blocks A, B, C, D, E, F, G, K, J; 
Oakridge Park Estates, Section "B" Block A; 
Oakridge Park Estates, Section "D" Blocks A, B, D, E; 
Oakridge Park Estates, Section "E" Blocks B, D; 
Oakridge Park Estates, Section "F" Blocks A, B; 
Oakridge Park Estates, Section "G" Blocks A, B; 
Oakridge Park Estates, 2nd Section Block A; 
Oakridge Park Estates, 3rd Section Block A; 
Oakridge Park Estates, 4th Installment Blocks A, B; 
Rolling Ridge Addition, Blocks A, B, C, D; 
Serendipity Village No. 1, Blocks A, B, C, D, E; 
Tanglewood Park, Blocks A, B, C; 
Westwood Estates No. 1, Blocks A, B, C, D; 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to vehicles operated by the fire department of the city responding to calls, nor to police vehicles, or ambulances responding to emergency calls, or to utility repair vehicles. 
(Code 1990, § 10-11-19)  
Sec. 15-6. - Police to direct traffic. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the provisions of this chapter. Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signals in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, providing, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or fire department may direct traffic, as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1990, § 10-2-1)  
Sec. 15-7. - Valet parking prohibited. 
(a)  Valet parking is prohibited within the city limits unless otherwise provided in the city Code. 
(b)  This section does not apply to occasional valet parking services provided: (1) at a private residence; (2) in connection with a social or non-profit fundraising activity; (3) pursuant to a special event permit; or (4) in connection with a city or city-sponsored event. This section also does not apply to a valet parking service that operates (including maneuvering or queuing of vehicles) exclusively on private property. 
( 0011-18-ORD , § I, 2-5-18)  
Secs. 15-8—15-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPEED LIMITS 
 
Sec. 15-31. - Application of state speed laws. 
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets declared and determined upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas. 
(Code 1990, § 10-3-1)  
Sec. 15-32. - Violating posted limits. 
It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of any speed limit provided in this article when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1990, § 10-3-1(A))  
Sec. 15-33. - General limit. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the incorporated city limits at a greater speed than 25 miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1990, § 10-3-1(A)1; Ord. No. 2305-1-98, § 1, 1-5-98)  
Sec. 15-34. - Effect of adverse, hazardous conditions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(b)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, drive at an appropriate, reduced speed when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or street or highway conditions. 
(Code 1990, § 10-3-1(A)2, 3)  
Sec. 15-35. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
The following streets or portions thereof shall be designated as special speed zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle thereon at a speed greater than indicated: 
Street/Road/Highway 	Extent 	Speed 
(mph) 
ACE Lane 	From State Highway 121 to F.M. 3040 	35 
Bellaire Boulevard 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to 800 feet west of Old Orchard Lane 	40 
Bellaire Boulevard 	From 800 feet west of Old Orchard Lane to Interstate Highway 35E 	35 
Bellaire Boulevard 	From Valley Parkway to State Highway 121 	40 
Bennett Lane 	From Interstate Highway 35E to Railroad Street 	40 
Brazos Boulevard 	From west city limits to Garden Ridge Boulevard 	35 
Charles Street 	From College Street to Main Street 	25 
Charles Street 	From Main Street to Interstate Highway I-35E 	35 
Church Street 	From Herod Street to Mill Street 	25 
Church Street 	From Kealy Avenue to Herod Street 	30 
Church Street 	From Railroad Street to Kealy Avenue 	35 
Civic Circle Drive 	From F.M. 1171 (Main Street) to Summit Avenue 	30 
Club Ridge Drive 	From Highland Drive to Vista Ridge 	40 
Club Ridge Drive 	From Vista Ridge Mall Drive south to Highland Drive 	30 
Club Ridge Drive 	From Vista Ridge Mall Drive to Highland Drive 	25 
College Parkway 	From Kirkpatrick Lane to Valley Parkway 	35 
College Parkway 	From Valley Parkway to Summit Drive 	40 
College Parkway 	From Summit Avenue to Interstate Highway 35E 	40 
College Street 	From the intersection of Interstate Highway 35E East Frontage Road to the intersection of North Mill Street 	35 
College Street 	From the northbound frontage road of Interstate Highway 35E to Mill Street 	30 
College Street 	Mill Street to Railroad Street 	30 
College Street 	From Railroad Street to Valley Ridge Boulevard 	35 
Continental Drive 	2,000 feet west of SH 121 to SH 121 	35 
Corporate Drive 	From west city limits to Railroad Street 	35 
Cowan Avenue 	From the intersection of Purnell Street, north to the intersection of North Mill Street 	35 
Cowan Avenue 	Mill Street to Jones Street 	35 
Denton Tap Road 	South city limit to SH 121 	45 
Duncan Lane 	From Round Grove Road (F.M. 3040) to 1,400 feet south of Round Grove Road, northbound lanes only 	40 
East Hill Park Road 	From State Highway 121 to Kinepac Road 	35 
East Main Street 	SH 121 to east end of Main Street 	30 
East Uecker Lane 	Uecker Lane To Rockbrook Drive 	25 
Edmonds Lane 	From Bellaire Boulevard to F.M. 1171 	35 
Edmonds Lane 	From Corporate Drive to Bellaire Boulevard 	35 
Edmonds Lane 	From Corporate Drive to Valley View 	35 
Edmonds Lane 	From SH 121 north to Corporate Drive 	40 
F.M. 407 	Beginning at a point (Station 369+75) being west city limits, there continuing along F.M. 407 in an easterly direction for a distance of 1.473 miles, approximately, such point (Station 447+50) being at Interstate Highway 35E 	40 
F.M. 407 	From a point (Mile Post 13.144) being the west city limit, thence continuing along F.M. 407 in an easterly direction for a distance of 1.207 miles to Summit Avenue (Mile Post 14.351) 	45 
F.M. 407 	Thence continuing along F.M. 407 in an easterly direction to a point approximately 0.353 miles east of Summit Avenue (Mile Post 14.704) 	35 
F.M. 544 	From a point, being the intersection of the south curbline of State Highway 121 Business and F.M. 544 (MP 00.000), thence continuing in a southeasterly direction along F.M. 544 to a said point (MP 000.632) being the intersection of the east curbline of F.M. 2281 and F.M. 544, for a distance of 0.632 miles 	45 
FM 544 	From a point, being the intersection of the east curbline of F.M. 2281 and F.M. 544 (MP 000.632), thence continuing easterly along F.M. 544 to the east city limits (MP 002.160), for a distance of 1.528 miles 	50 
F.M. 1171 (also known as Main Street) 	From a point, being the west city limits of Lewisville (Station 148+60), thence continuing along F.M. 1171 in an easterly direction a distance of 1.622 miles to a point being the Interstate Highway 35E Southbound Frontage Road (Station 234+26); 	40 
	Thence continuing along F.M. 1171 in an easterly direction a distance of 0.502 miles to a point approximately 230 feet east of Cowan Street; 	35 
	Thence continuing along F.M. 1171 in an easterly direction for a distance of 0.530 mile, approximately, to a point approximately 75 feet east of Harris Street 	30 
	Thence continuing along F.M. 1171 in an easterly direction for a distance of 0.208 mile, approximately, to a point of approximately 400 feet east of Leonard Street 	35 
	Thence continuing along F.M. 1171 in an easterly direction for a distance of 0.493 mile, approximately, said point (Station 0+00) being at the intersection with State Highway 121 	40 
F.M. 1171 (Main Street) 	From the west city limits (Garden Ridge Boulevard), being the Town of Flower Mound east town limits, and being TxDOT Mile Post 4.407 easterly along F.M. 1171 to Edmonds Lane, being TxDOT Mile Post 2.778 	40 
	Thence continuing easterly along F.M. 1171 to SH 121, being TxDOT Mile post 0.000 	35 
F.M. 2281 (Old Denton Road) 	From the south city limits, being the City of Carrollton north city limits, and being TxDOT Mile Post 1.1679 northerly along F.M. 2281 to SH 121 Business, being TxDOT Mile Post 0.000 	55 
FM 3040 (Round Grove Road) 	From Old Orchard Lane to Interstate Highway 35E 	50 
Forestbrook Drive 	From State Highway 121 to Oakbend Drive 	35 
Fox Avenue 	From Azalea Drive to Interstate Highway 35E 	35 
Fox Avenue 	From the intersection of Garden Ridge Boulevard, east to the intersection of Purnell Street 	35 
Fox Avenue 	From High School Drive to Purnell Street 	25 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From F.M. 407 to Interstate Highway 35E 	35 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From F.M. 1171 to Valley Boulevard Parkway 	40 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From Bellaire Blvd. to Farm/Market 1171 	35 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From Bellaire Boulevard to Corporate Drive 	40 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From Farm/Market 407 to Wren Lane 	40 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From Interstate Highway 35 East to Wren Lane 	40 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From Main Street (F.M. 1171) to Bellaire Boulevard 	40 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From Valley Ridge to Farm/Market 407 	40 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From Valley Parkway to Valley Ridge Boulevard 	40 
Grandy's Lane 	McGee Lane to Interstate Highway 35E 	30 
Hebron Parkway 	From Interstate Highway 35 East to east city limits 	45 
Highland Drive 	Between Denton Tap Road and MacArthur Boulevard 	40 
Highpoint Oaks Drive 	Vista Ridge Mall Drive to SH 121 	35 
High School Drive 	Fox Avenue to Mill Street 	25 
Hillside Drive 	Cowan Avenue to Mill Street 	30 
Holford's Prairie Road 	From State Highway 121 to Bunker Hill Lane 	30 
Holford's Prairie Road 	From State Highway 121 to Midway Road 	30 
Huffines Boulevard 	From south of State Highway 121 	30 
Interstate Highway 35E Main Lanes (northbound and southbound) 	From the south city limits (MP 1.644) to the north city limits (MP 10.664) 	70 
Interstate Highway 35E Managed Lanes (northbound and southbound) 	From the south city limits (MP 1.644) to the north city limits (10.664) 	75 
Interstate Highway 35E Frontage Road (northbound) 	50 mph beginning at said point (MP 1.644) being the south city limits and continuing along the IH-35E East Frontage Road in a northerly direction for a distance of 6.927 miles to a said point (MP 8.571) being the intersection of the centerline of FM 407 and the IH-35E East Frontage Road 	50 
	Thence 55 mph beginning at said point (MP 8.571) being the intersection of the centerline of FM 407 and the IH-35E East Frontage Road and continuing along the IH-35E East Frontage Road in a northerly direction for a distance of 2.093 miles to a said point (MP 10.664) being the north city limits 	55 
Interstate Highway 35E Frontage Road (southbound) 	55 mph beginning at said point (MP 10.664) being the north city limits and continuing along the IH-35E West Frontage Road in a southerly direction for a distance of 2.093 miles to a said point (MP 8.571) being the intersection of the centerline of FM 407 and the IH-35E West Frontage Road 	55 
	Thence 50 mph beginning at said point (MP 8.571) being the intersection of the centerline of FM 407 and the IH-35E West Frontage Road and continuing along the IH-35E West Frontage Road to said point (MP 1.644) being the south city limits 	50 
Jones Street 	From the intersection of Kealy Avenue, west to the intersection of East Frontage Road of Interstate Highway 35 	35 
Jones Street 	From Mill Street to Kealy Avenue 	40 
Josey Lane 	From SH 121 to approximately 1,900 feet south of SH 121 	50 
Kealy Avenue 	From the intersection of East Main Street, north to the intersection of Jones Street 	35 
Kealy Avenue 	Mill Street to F.M. 1171 (Main Street) 	30 
Kinepac Road 	From East Hill Park Road to East City Limits 	30 
Lake Park Road 	From Interstate Highway 35E to Mill Street 	35 
Lake Ridge 	From East Hill Park Drive to Standridge Drive 	35 
Lake Vista Drive 	From MacArthur Boulevard to Vista Ridge Boulevard 	45 
Lake Vista Drive 	Between Vista Ridge Mall Drive and SH 121 	40 
Lakepointe Drive 	From Hebron Parkway to Interstate Highway 35 East 	40 
Lakeside Circle 	From Hebron Parkway to Hebron Parkway 	40 
Lakeway Drive 	From Corporate Drive to Bennett Lane 	40 
Leora Drive 	From Lake Ridge to S.H. 121 	35 
MacArthur Boulevard 	Beginning at the south city limits and continuing in a northerly direction for a distance of 1.00 mile approximately, to F.M. 3040 	45 
McDonnell Street 	Texas Street to Yates Street 	30 
McGee Lane 	From Farm/Market 407 to Bogard Lane 	35 
McGee Lane 	Grandy's Lane to F.M. 407 	35 
McGee Lane 	From Valley Ridge Boulevard to Bogard Lane 	40 
McGee Lane 	Valley Ridge Blvd. to Grandy's Lane 	35 
Main Street 	From Charles Street to Mill Street 	25 
Main Street 	From Cowan Avenue to Herod Street 	35 
Main Street 	From Herod Street to Charles Street 	30 
Main Street 	From IH-35E to Cowan Avenue 	40 
Main Street 	From Kealy Avenue to Railroad Street 	35 
Main Street 	From Mill Street to Kealy Avenue 	30 
Main Street 	From Railroad Street to S.H. 121 Business 	40 
Marina Vista Drive 	From Lake Ridge to S.H. 121 	35 
Metropark Boulevard 	From south of State Highway 121 	30 
Midway Road 	From Huffines Blvd. to East City Limits 	35 
Mill Street (F.M. 3504) 	From the intersection of East Main Street, south to the intersection of State Highway 121 	35 
Mill Street 	From Lake Park Road to F.M. 1171 (Main Street) 	40 
Mill Street 	From Oakridge Boulevard to Lake Park Road 	35 
Northfork Circle 		30 
Oakbend Drive 	From Farm/Market 3040 to Uecker Drive 	35 
Oakbend Drive 	From F.M. 3040 to Vista Ridge Mall Drive 	35 
Oakbend Drive 	From Uecker Lane to Interstate Highway 35E 	35 
Oakwood Lane 	From State Highway 121 to Bellaire Blvd. 	35 
Office Park Circle 		30 
Old Orchard Lane 	From Corporate Drive to Valley Parkway 	35 
Old Orchard Lane 	From Farm/Market 3040 to Corporate Drive 	35 
Old Orchard Lane 	From Valley Parkway to Valley Ridge Boulevard 	40 
Purnell Street 	From Interstate Highway 35 East to Mill Street 	30 
Purnell Street 	From Mill Street to Railroad Street 	35 
Railroad Street 	From College Street to State Highway 121 Business 	30 
Railroad Street 	From State Highway 121 Business to Hebron Parkway 	40 
Ridgemont Drive 	From Spur 553 to Highland Drive 	40 
Roberts Drive 	From Interstate Highway 35 East to Hebron Parkway 	30 
Rockbrook Drive 	Between FM 3040 and SH 121 	40 
Rockbrook Drive 	From Spur 553 to F.M. 3040 	45 
Rockbrook Drive 	From Uecker Lane to F.M. 3040 	35 
Southfork Drive 	West of Cowan Avenue 	30 
Southwest Parkway 	From Bellaire Boulevard to State Highway 121 Business 	35 
Southwest Parkway 	From State Highway 121 to Corporate Drive 	35 
Spinks Road 	From Duncan Lane to Edmonds Lane 	40 
Spur 553 	Beginning at Denton Tap Road and continuing in an easterly direction for a distance of 2.14 miles approximately to Interstate Highway 35E 	50 
S.H. 121 Business (northbound and southbound) 	55 mph beginning at said point (MP 13.681) being Lewisville south city limits and continuing along S.H. 121 Business in a northerly direction for a distance of 1.410 miles to a point approximately 900 feet south of Corporate Drive 	55 
	Thence 45 mph from a point approximately 900 feet south of Corporate Drive continuing in a northerly direction for a distance of 1.396 miles to the midpoint of the bridge under IH-35E (MP 10.875) 	45 
	Thence 50 mph from the midpoint of the bridge under IH-35E continuing in a northerly direction for a distance of 1.348 miles to a point approximately 370 feet south of Valley Ridge Blvd. (MP 9.527) 	50 
	Thence 60 mph from a point approximately 370 feet south of Valley Ridge Blvd. continuing in a northerly direction for a distance of 4.664 miles to a point being the north city limit (MP 4.863) 	60 
State Highway 121 Frontage Roads (northbound and southbound) 	Beginning at a said point (MP 69.476) being the Lewisville boundary line with Coppell at Denton Tap Road and continuing along State Highway 121 Frontage Roads to a said point (MP 66.855) being approximately 0.27 miles east of Interstate Highway 35E Northbound Frontage Road 	50 
State Highway 121 Frontage Roads (northbound and southbound) 	Beginning at a said point (MP 63.847) being the Lewisville boundary line with Carrollton north of Carrollton Parkway, then continuing along State Highway 121 Frontage Roads to a said point (MP 61.658) being the Lewisville boundary line with The Colony at Standridge Drive 	50 
State Highway 121 Main Lanes (northbound and southbound) 	From a point, being the south city limits of Lewisville (MP 20.154), thence continuing northerly along State Highway 121 Main Lanes for a distance of 0.154 miles (813 feet) to a said point (MP 20.000) being the Sam Rayburn Tollway/SH 121 Business split 	70 
Summit Avenue 	From F.M. 407 to Len Mar Drive 	40 
Summit Avenue 	From Valley Ridge Boulevard to Moccassin Trail 	40 
Summit Drive 	From College Parkway to Valley Ridge Boulevard 	40 
Summit Drive 	From Farm/Market 1171 to College Parkway 	40 
Uecker Drive 	From Oakbend Drive to Corporate 	35 
Uecker Lane 	From Rockbrook Drive to Oakbend Drive 	35 
Uecker Lane 	F.M. 3040 to East Uecker Lane 	25 
Valley Parkway 	From Round Grove Road (FM 3040) to State Highway 121 (Business) 	40 
Valley Parkway 	From Timber Creek to Kirkpatrick Lane 	35 
Valley Parkway 	Beginning at F.M. 3040 and continuing along Valley Parkway in a northerly direction 1.14 mile, approximately, to Timber Creek 	40 
Valley Ridge Boulevard 	From west city limit to 3,860 feet south of State Highway 121 Business 	40 
Valley Ridge Circle 	From Interstate Highway 35E to Valley Ridge Boulevard 	30 
Valley View Drive 	Beginning at Edmonds Lane and continuing along Valley View Lane in an easterly direction for a distance of 0.66 mile, approximately, to State Highway 121 	35 
Valley View Drive 	Edmonds Lane to Hillshire Drive 	25 
Vista Ridge Mall Drive 	From Club Ridge Drive to Interstate Highway 35E 	45 
Vista Ridge Mall Drive 	Denton Tap Road to Club Ridge Drive 	45 
Vista Ridge Mall Drive 	SH 121 to Denton Tap Road 	40 
Vista Ridge Mall Drive 	From SH 121 Business to Denton Tap Road 	40 
Vista Ridge Mall Drive 	Between Denton Tap Road and IH-35E 	40 
Water's Ridge Drive 	From Corporate Drive to Bennett Lane 	40 
Water's Ridge Drive 	From Interstate Highway 35 East to Lakepointe Drive 	40 
Waters' Ridge Drive 	Lakepointe Drive to Corporate Drive 	40 
Windhaven Parkway 	From Josey Lane to Trinity Drive 	40 
Yates Street 	Bennett Lane to McDonnell Street 	30 
 
(Ord. No. 1468-7-89, § 1, 7-10-89; Ord. No. 1473-8-89, § 1, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 1474-8-89, § 1, 8-7-89; Code 1990, § 10-3-1(B); Ord. No. 1509-1-90, § 1, 1-8-90; Ord. No. 1556-8-90, § 1, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 1576-10-90, § 1, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 1612-4-91, § 1, 4-15-91; Ord. No. 1620-6-91, § 1, 6-17-91; Ord. No. 1655-11-91, § I, 11-4-91; Ord. No. 1660-12-91, § I, 12-2-91; Ord. No. 1798-4-93, §§ I—III, V, VIII, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 1866, § I, 12-20-93; Ord. No. 1906-3-94, § 1, 3-21-94; Ord. No. 1932-6-94, § I, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 1976-10-94, § 1, 10-3-94; Ord. No. 2023-5-95, § 1, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 2094-3-96, § I, 3-4-96; Ord. No. 2136-8-96, § 1, 8-19-96; Ord. No. 2252-8-97, § 1, 8-18-97; Ord. No. 2322-3-98, § 1, 3-2-98; Ord. No. 2402-12-98, § 1, 12-7-98; Ord. No. 2511-11-1999, § 1, 11-1-99; Ord. No. 2512-11-1999, § 1, 11-1-99; Ord. No. 2533-1-2000, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 2554, § 1, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 2746-11-2001, § 1, 11-19-01; Ord. No. 2779-02-2002, § 1, 2-18-02; Ord. No. 3031-03-2004, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. 3033-03-2004, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 3034-03-2004, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. 3069-05-2004, § 1, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 3070-05-2004, § 1, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 3150-12-2004, § 1, 12-6-04; Ord. No. 3151-12-2004, § 1, 12-6-04; Ord. No. 3239-08-2005, § 1, 8-15-05; Ord. No. 3326-03-2006, § 1, 3-20-06; Ord. No. 3347-06-2006, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 3348-06-2006, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 3394-11-2006, § 1, 11-20-06; Ord. No. 3395-11-2006, § 1, 11-20-06; Ord. No. 3540-02-2008, § 1, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 3542-02-2008, § 1, 2-18-08; Ord. No. 3571-05-2008, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 3626-11-2008 , § 1, 11-17-08; Ord. No. 3659-02-2009 , § 1, 2-16-09; Ord. No. 3722-12-2009 , § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 3772-05-2010 , § 1, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 3818-11-2010 , § 1, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 3885-09-2011 , § 1, 9-19-11; Ord. No. 3921-02-2012 , § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 3944-06-2012 , § 1, 6-4-12; Ord. No. 4006-07-2013 , § 1, 7-1-13; Ord. No. 4097-08-2014 , § 1, 8-4-14; Ord. No. 4262-04-2016 , § 1, 4-18-16; Ord. No. 4455-12-2017 , § 1, 12-18-17; 0055-18-ORD , § 1, 8-20-18; 0191-20-ORD , § 1, 1-27-20; 0224-20-ORD , § 1, 6-15-20; 0236-20-ORD , § 1, 8-3-20)  
Sec. 15-35.1. - Reconciliation of street names. 
All engineering and traffic investigation studies performed on the roadway designated as F.M. 1171 shall be recognized as having been performed on the roadway known as Main Street (commonly known as East Main and West Main), said roadways being one and the same. 
All engineering and traffic investigation studies performed on the roadway designated as Mill Street from State Highway 121 to F.M. 1171 shall be recognized as having been performed on the roadway known as F.M. 3504, said roadways being one and the same. 
(Ord. No. 1798-4-93, § IX, 3-15-93)  
Sec. 15-35.2. - Lewisville Lake Park. 
In recognition of the Corps of Engineers jurisdiction over Lewisville Lake Park, and their ability to set speed limits for all roads contained in the Park, the City adopts the Corps of Engineers' 20 miles per hour speed limit for all roads within Lewisville Lake Park, except for King Fisher Road which shall be ten miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 1798-4-93, § X, 3-15-93)  
Sec. 15-35.3. - Lewisville Railroad Park. 
The maximum speed limit within Lewisville Railroad Park shall be 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 3739-01-2010 , § 1, 1-25-10)  
Sec. 15-36. - Maximum speed limits near schools. 
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the city council has determined that, on days when school is in session, the prima facie reasonable and prudent maximum speed of the school zones designated below shall be a speed of 20 miles per hour, except that the prima facie reasonable and prudent maximum speed for the school zones located on Farm to Market Road 544 and Round Grove Road shall be 35 miles per hour. 
No person shall drive a vehicle on any portion of a public street or highway designated as a school zone at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing. Any speed in excess of the maximum speeds listed in the paragraph above shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable and prudent, and therefore, unlawful: (1) when school is in session; and (2) provided that an appropriate sign giving notice thereof is erected. The posted signs shall state the prima facie maximum speed and the times during which the school zone is in effect or operation, or shall state the prima facie maximum speed when flashing and shall be accompanied by a flashing beacon or light during the times the school zone is in effect. The areas or portions of streets designated as school zones are as follows: 
Street/Highway 	Designated School Zone 
Abilene Drive 	From Tiburon Bend to 100 feet north of College Parkway 
Bellaire Boulevard 	From 250 feet east of Garden Ridge Boulevard to Garden Ridge Boulevard 
Bellaire Boulevard 	From 100 feet east of Old Orchard Lane to 100 feet east of Catalina Lane 
Brazos Boulevard 	From the Lewisville north city limit to a point 200 feet southeast of the north city limit 
Cascade Range 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to 1,000 feet west of Garden Ridge Boulevard 
Centennial Drive 	From 100 feet north of Fox Avenue to Fox Avenue 
Charles Street 	From 250 feet north of Purnell Street to 250 feet south of High School Drive 
Clarendon Drive 	From 150 feet west of Tiburon Bend to 150 feet east of Tiburon Bend 
Clydesdale Drive 	From 150 feet west of Windmere Drive to 150 feet east of Tiburon Bend 
College Parkway 	From 250 feet west of Abilene Drive to 150 feet east of Garden Ridge Boulevard 
College Street 	From 250 feet west of Cowan Avenue to 150 feet east of Herod Street 
Corporate Drive 	From 500 feet west of Edmonds Lane to 1,750 feet east of Edmonds Lane 
Country Ridge Road 	From Southwest Parkway to McCartt Drive 
Cowan Avenue 	From 100 feet south of Richland Street to 350 feet north of College Street 
Crestview Point Drive 	From 100 feet west of Rockbrook Drive to Rockbrook Drive 
Duncan Lane 	From Round Grove Road (F.M. 3040) to 1,400 feet south of Round Grove Road 
Edmonds Lane 	From 150 south of Raldon Drive to 400 feet north of Fox Avenue 
Edmonds Lane 	From 500 feet south of Corporate Drive to 1,291 feet north of Valley View Drive 
Farm to Market Road 544 	From 400 feet east of Windhaven Parkway to 2,414 feet east of Windhaven Parkway 
Fox Avenue 	From 400 feet west of Edmonds Lane to Purnell Street 
Fox Avenue Ramps at Interstate Highway 35E 	From Fox Avenue to 200 feet southwest of Interstate Highway 35E West Frontage Road 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From 200 feet south of College Parkway to 200 feet north of College Parkway 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From 200 feet south of Valley Ridge Boulevard to 200 feet north of Highpoint Drive 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From 250 feet north of Bellaire Boulevard to Bellaire Boulevard 
Hatcher Avenue 	From 200 feet south of Walters Street to College Street 
High School Drive 	From 200 feet west of Fox Avenue to Mill Street 
Kealy Avenue 	From 150 feet east of Mill Street to Mill Street 
Lake Haven Drive 	From Fox Avenue to 100 feet west of Charles Street 
Lake Park Road 	From 485 feet east of Oakridge Boulevard to 985 feet east of Oakridge Boulevard 
Len Mar Drive 	From 100 feet west of Summit Avenue to Summit Avenue 
McCartt Drive 	From Country Ridge Road to 250 feet south of Country Ridge Road 
Mill Street 	From 200 feet north of Purnell Street to 200 feet south of High School Drive 
Mill Street 	From the intersection of Walters Street, north to the intersection of Stewart Street 
Milton Street 	From 250 feet north of Purnell Street to High School Drive 
Pickett Street 	From Purnell Street to High School Drive 
Poydras Street 	From High School Drive to 100 feet south of High School Drive 
Purnell Street 	From 200 feet west of Fox Avenue to 100 feet east of Mill Street 
Ridge Meade Drive 	From 100 feet west of Rockbrook Drive to Rockbrook Drive 
Rockbrook Drive 	From 100 feet north of Vista Ridge Mall Drive to 100 feet north of Highland Drive 
Round Grove Road 	From 300 feet east of Old Orchard Lane to 300 feet west of Valley Parkway 
Savage Street 	From 150 feet west of Oakridge Boulevard to 200 feet south of Sandra Drive 
Southwest Parkway 	From 250 feet north of Country Ridge Road to 250 feet south of Country Ridge Road 
Stover Drive 	From Valley View Drive to the north end of Stover Drive 
Summit Drive 	From 600 feet north of Len Mar Drive to 550 feet south of Len Mar Drive 
Tiburon Bend 	From 150 feet west of Abilene Drive to Clydesdale Drive 
Valley Parkway 	From 200 feet east of Garden Ridge Boulevard to 1,800 feet east of Garden Ridge Boulevard 
Valley Parkway 	From 100 feet south of Main Street to 1,100 feet south of Main Street 
Valley Parkway 	From 400 feet south of Cassion Drive to 500 feet north of Monarch Drive 
Valley Ridge Boulevard 	From 240 feet west of Garden Ridge Boulevard to 240 feet east of Garden Ridge Boulevard 
Valley View Drive 	From Stover Drive to 500 feet east of Edmonds Lane 
Village Drive 	From 100 feet south of Fox Avenue to Fox Avenue 
Vista Drive 	From Valley View Drive to north end of Vista Drive 
Vista Noche Drive 	From 100 feet west of Rockbrook Drive to Rockbrook Drive 
Vista Ridge Mall Drive 	100 feet west of Rockbrook Drive to 100 feet east of Rockbrook Drive 
Vista Trail Drive 	From 100 feet west of Rockbrook Drive to Rockbrook Drive 
Walters Street 	From Cowan Avenue to 150 feet west of Herod Street 
Wildvalley Drive 	From Bellaire Boulevard to 350 feet north of Bellaire Boulevard 
Windhaven Parkway 	From 570 feet north of Cookie Lane to 500 feet south of Cookie Lane 
Windmere Drive 	From 150 feet south of Clydesdale Drive to Clydesdale Drive 
 
(Code 1990, § 10-3-1(C); Ord. No. 1798-4-93, §§ IV—VI, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 1967-9-4, § I, 9-12-94; Ord. No. 2028-7-95, §§ 1—3, 7-3-95; Ord. No. 2136-8-96, § 2, 8-19-96; Ord. No. 2154-10-96, §§ 1—3, 10-7-96; Ord. No. 2354-7-98, § 1, 7-20-98; Ord. No. 2467-7-1999, §§ 1—3, 7-19-99; Ord. No. 2930-05-2003, § 1, 5-5-03; Ord. No. 3071-05-2004, § 1, 5-17-04; Ord. No. 3572-05-2008, § 1, 5-19-08; Ord. No. 3688-06-2009 , § 1, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 3703-08-2009 , § 1, 8-17-09; Ord. No. 3786-06-2010 , § 1, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 3817-11-2010 , § 1, 11-15-10; Ord. No. 4030-10-2013 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-21-13; Ord. No. 4121-10-2014 , § 1(Exh. A), 10-6-14; Ord. No. 4318-10-2016 , §§ 1, 2, 10-3-16; Ord. No. 4357-02-2017 , §§ 1, 2, 2-6-17; Ord. No. 4411-08-2017 , § 1, 8-21-17; 0053-18-ORD , § 1, 8-20-18; 0159-19-ORD , §§ 1, 2, 9-16-19)  
Secs. 15-36.1—15-36.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4030-10-2013 , § 2, adopted Oct. 21, 2013, repealed the former §§ 15-36.1—15-36.3 in their entirety, which pertained to maximum speed limits for special school zone areas, and derived from Ord. No. 1798-4-93, § VII, adopted Mar. 15, 1993; Ord. No. 2154-10-96, § 5, adopted Oct. 7, 1996; Ord. No. 2354-7-98, §§ 2, 3, adopted July 20, 1998; Ord. No. 2467-7-1999, § 4, adopted July 19, 1999; Ord. No. 2929-05-2003, § 1, adopted May 5, 2003; Ord. No. 3149-12-2004, § 1, adopted Dec. 6, 2004; Ord. No. 3541-02-2008, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2008; Ord. No. 3689-06-2009 , § 1, adopted June 15, 2009; Ord. No. 3773-05-2010 , § 1, adopted May 17, 2010; Ord. No. 3786-06-2010 , § 1, adopted June 21, 2010; Ord. No. 3816-11-2010 , § 1, adopted Nov. 15, 2010; Ord. No. 3817-11-2010 , § 1, adopted Nov. 15, 2010; and Ord. No. 3886-09-2011 , § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 2011.  
Sec. 15-37. - Speed limit signs. 
Whenever the speed limit of 30 miles per hour, as prescribed by this article, is, by the provisions of this article or other provisions of this chapter, increased or decreased at any intersection or other place or upon any part of a street, the department of public services shall erect appropriate signs giving notice of such speed limit, and no such limit shall be effective unless such signs are erected at such intersection or other place or part of such street. 
(Code 1990, § 10-3-1(E))  
Sec. 15-38. - Speed limit in alleys. 
The maximum speed limit in any alley within the limits of the city shall be ten miles per hour. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle or any other vehicle in any alley in the city at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(Code 1990, § 10-3-1(H)(2))  
Secs. 15-39—15-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and certain other public ways and property, ch. 13. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15-61. - Fish Hatchery Road closed 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
No person shall travel, either by motor vehicle, foot, or in any other manner upon Fish Hatchery Road between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., each day. 
(Ord. No. 1458-5-89, § 1, 5-22-89)  
Sec. 15-62. - Pedestrian crossing restricted. 
Upon those streets and intersections and portions of streets described and enumerated in this section, pedestrian crossing shall be prohibited when a sign indicating pedestrian crossing is prohibited is placed within or adjacent to such streets or intersections: 
Street or Intersection 	Extent 
Round Grove Road (FM 3040) 	50 feet east of Old Orchard Lane to 50 feet west of Valley Parkway 
Valley Parkway 	50 feet south of Main Street to 50 feet north of Kathy Lane except at the designated pedestrian crossing 
 
(Ord. No. 4141-12-2014 , § 1, 12-15-14; 0135-19-ORD , § 1, 8-5-19)  
Secs. 15-63—15-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS 
 
Sec. 15-71. - General provisions. 
(a)  The city council may designate any highway or any separate roadway under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic the driver of a vehicle shall drive only in the direction designated. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall drive only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1990, § 10-4-8)  
Sec. 15-72. - Designation of specific streets. 
Upon those streets and portions of streets described and enumerated in this section, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated when signs and traffic signals indicating the direction of traffic are erected and established at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited: 
Street 	Extent 	 Direction 
Hatcher Street 	West College Street to West Walters Street 	South 
Lake Park Road 	From the intersection of Lake Park Road and Oak Ridge Boulevard to Mill Street 	East 
Mill Street 	From the intersection of Lake Park Road and Mill Street to Cowan Road 	South 
Most westerly driveway at Main Valley Shopping Center on south side of the 1100 block of West Main Street 	West Main Street adjacent to Civic Circle intersection 	South (entrance only permitted) 
Service (frontage) Road on east side of Interstate Highway 35E 	From the southernmost city limits to one mile south of State Highway 121 (being centerline Station 1080+25 of Interstate Highway 35E) 	North 
Service (frontage) Road on west side of Interstate Highway 35E 	From the southernmost city limits to one mile south of State Highway 121 (being centerline Station 1080+25 of Interstate Highway 35E) 	South 
Service (frontage) Road on east side of Interstate Highway 35E 	One mile south of State Highway 121 (being centerline Station 1080+25 of Interstate Highway 35E) to one-fourth mile north of Farm Road 407 (being centerline Station 1311+44.56 of Interstate 35E) 	North 
Service (frontage) Road on west side of Interstate Highway 35E 	Centerline of Farm Road 407 to one mile south of State Highway 121 (being centerline Station 1080+25 of Interstate Highway 35E) 	South 
South Poydras Street 	West Main Street to Elm Street 	South 
 
(Code 1990, § 10-11-20)  
Secs. 15-73—15-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TURNING 
 
Sec. 15-86. - Altering turns, traffic movement. 
When the city council directs, the department of public services shall put up markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to the intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this chapter be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Code 1990, § 10-5-1(E))  
Sec. 15-87. - Limitations on turning around. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other traffic. A complete turn shall not be made at the intersection of any street or highway with any other street. 
(b)  A U-turn shall not be made at any intersection of any two streets or upon any street or alley where the city council determines that it is unsafe to make a U-turn and shall have caused to be posted at such place in the street or alley a sign showing that a U-turn is prohibited. 
(c)  Upon those streets and intersections and portions of streets and intersections described and enumerated in this subsection, motor vehicle U-turns in the direction indicated shall be prohibited when a sign showing that a U-turn is prohibited is placed within or adjacent to such streets or intersections: 
Street or Intersection 	Extent 	Type of Turn Prohibited 
Bellaire Boulevard at Gilani Lane and the Founders Academy and Lillie J. Jackson Early Childhood Center driveway during the hours of 7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. on school days only 	Intersection only 	Northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound U-turns 
Bellaire Boulevard at the Hedrick School east driveway 	Intersection only 	Eastbound and westbound U-turns 
Bellaire Boulevard at the Hedrick School west driveway 	Intersection only 	Eastbound and westbound U-turns 
Bellaire Boulevard at Old Orchard Lane 	Intersection only 	Eastbound and westbound U-turns 
Bellaire Boulevard at Valley Parkway 	Intersection only 	Northbound, southbound, eastbound and westbound U-turns 
Edmonds Lane at Corporate Drive 	Intersection only 	Southbound U-turn 
Josey Lane at Windhaven Parkway 	Intersection only 	Northbound and southbound U-turns 
Justin Road at the Wal-Mart driveway 	Intersection only 	Westbound U-turn 
Main Street at Edmonds Lane 	Intersection only 	Eastbound and westbound U-turns 
Main Street at Railroad Street 	Intersection only 	Eastbound U-turn 
SH 121 Business at First Median Opening East of Valley Ridge Boulevard 	Intersection only 	Westbound U-turn 
State Highway 121 Business at Railroad Street 	Intersection only 	Northbound U-turn 
State Highway 121 Business at Southwest Parkway 	Intersection only 	Northbound and southbound U-turns 
Valley Parkway at the Fire Station No. 1 driveway 	Intersection only 	Northbound and southbound U-turns 
Valley Parkway at the Police Station driveway 	Intersection only 	Northbound and southbound U-turns 
Valley Parkway at Timbercreek Drive 	Intersection only 	Southbound U-turn 
 
(Code 1990, § 10-5-6; Ord. No. 2879-11-2002, § 1, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 3828-12-2010 , § 1, 12-20-10; Ord. No. 3918-01-2012 , § 1, 1-9-12; Ord. No. 3943-06-2012 , § 1, 6-4-12; Ord. No. 4007-07-2013 , § 1, 7-1-13; Ord. No. 4318-10-2016 , § 3, 10-3-16; 0136-19-ORD , § 1, 8-5-19)  
Sec. 15-88. - Certain turns prohibited. 
Upon those streets and intersections and portions of streets and intersections described and enumerated in this section, motor vehicle turns in the direction indicated shall be prohibited when official traffic control devices are placed within or adjacent to such streets or intersections indicating certain vehicle turns are prohibited: 
Street or Intersection 	Extent 	Type of Turn Prohibited 
Bellaire Boulevard at Gilani Lane during the hours of 7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. on school days only 	Intersection only 	Left turn 
Bellaire Boulevard at the Founders Academy and Lillie J. Jackson Early Childhood Center driveway during the hours of 7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. on school days only 	Intersection only 	Left turn 
Bellaire Boulevard at the Hedrick School east driveway during the hours of 7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., and 2:45 p.m. to 4:45 p.m. only 	Intersection only 	Left turn 
Bellaire Boulevard at the Hedrick School west driveway during the hours of 7:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., and 2:45 p.m. to 4:45 p.m. only 	Intersection only 	Left turn 
Big Sky Drive at Farm to Market Road 407 (also known as Justin Road) intersection 	Intersection only 	Left turn 
Main Street at Railroad Street 	Intersection only 	Eastbound left turn 
Purnell Street (westbound) at the Mill Street Elementary School east driveway 	Intersection only 	Left turn 
Roadways connecting to east and west service roads of Interstate Highway 35E at Fox Avenue Intersection 	All intersections 	All movements except right turns (vehicles on Fox Avenue may continue straight) 
West Main Street 	600 Block (excluding intersection with Degan) 	Left turn (both directions) 
 
(Code 1990, § 10-11-21; Ord. No. 1598-2-91, § 1, 2-25-91; Ord. No. 1658-11-91, § I, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 2879-11-2002, § 1, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 3828-12-2010 , § 1, 12-20-10; Ord. No. 4318-10-2016 , §§ 4, 5, 10-3-16; 0223-20-ORD , § 1, 6-15-20)  
Secs. 15-89—15-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TRUCKS 
 
Sec. 15-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial motor vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle other than a motorcycle, designed or used for the transportation of property, including every motor vehicle used for delivery purposes. 
Motor vehicle shall mean every mechanical device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or public highway, including commercial motor vehicles, truck-tractors, trailers and semitrailers, but excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Owner shall mean a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle. 
Semi-trailer shall mean every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another motor vehicle. 
Trailer shall mean every vehicle without motive power designed or used for carrying property or passengers wholly on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck-tractors shall mean every motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn, except that the term includes a motor vehicle that is otherwise a truck-tractor, that is engaged with a semi-trailer in the transportation of automobiles or boats, and that transports motor vehicles or boats on part of the truck-tractor. 
(Ord. No. 1521-2-90, § I, 2-19-90; Ord. No. 1546-5-90, § I, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 1575-10-90, § II, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 1589-12-90, § II, 12-17-90) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 15-102. - Nuisance, impoundment. 
Vehicles or trailers found to be situated so as to violate any part of this division are hereby declared nuisances and shall be impounded and shall not be allowed to be reclaimed except upon proof of ownership and payment of the towing fee and costs of storage. 
(Code 1990, § 10-13-3)  
Sec. 15-103. - Parking restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, driver or owner to leave, park or stand any truck-tractor, road-tractor, semi-trailer, bus, truck, or trailer with a rated capacity in excess of one ton upon property within any residentially zoned district, according to the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Lewisville, Texas, or upon any public street or alley within such district. It shall also be unlawful for any person, driver or owner to leave, park or stand any truck-tractor, road tractor, semi-trailer, bus, truck or trailer with a rated capacity in excess of one ton upon any public street or alley within 200 feet of any property used for residential purposes. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles in such zoned areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise. This section does not apply to recreational vehicles or special vehicles that are 45 feet or less in length and defined in section 15-134 of this Code. 
(Code 1990, § 10-13-1; Ord. No. 1728-10-92, § I, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 1808, § III, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 2352-7-98, § 1, 7-6-98) 
Cross reference— Parking buses, recreation vehicles, trailers, etc., on public streets, § 15-133.  
Sec. 15-104. - Operation restricted. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall operate, leave, park, stand or permit to be operated or parked any commercial motor vehicle with more than two axles on the following streets: 
Street Segment 	Extent 
Church Street 	From its intersection with Mill Street to its intersection with Herod Street 
College Parkway 	From the western city limit to its intersection with Interstate Highway 35E southbound service road 
College Street 	Between the service road of Interstate Highway 35E and Kealy Avenue 
Corporate Drive 	From the western city limit to its intersection with State Highway 121 Business 
Edwards Street 	East of its intersection with Charles Street 
Garden Ridge Blvd. 	From IH-35E to FM 407 
Greenland Lane 	From its intersection with Parkway Drive to a point 100 feet south of Simmons Avenue 
High School Drive 	From its intersection with the Interstate 35E northbound service road to its intersection with Mill Street 
Jones Street 	From its intersection with Interstate Highway 35E northbound frontage road to its intersection with Mill Street 
Kealy Avenue 	From its intersection with Mill Street to its intersection with Purnell Street 
Lake Park Road 	From Interstate Highway 35E to Mill Street 
Main Street 	From its intersection with Interstate Highway 35E northbound frontage road to its intersection with Mill Street 
Mullins Street 	From its intersection with College Street to its intersection with Lester Street 
Parkway Drive 	From a point beginning at the intersection of Mill Street and Parkway Drive to the intersection of Parkway Drive and Kealy Avenue 
Pine Drive 	From its intersection with Interstate Highway 35E northbound frontage road to its intersection with Yates Street 
Purnell Street 	From its intersection with Interstate Highway 35E northbound service road to Mill Street 
Simmons Avenue 	From its intersection with Greenland Lane to its intersection with Kealy Street 
 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply: 
(1)  To emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call. 
(2)  To a vehicle traveling to or from areas served directly by the streets listed in this section for the purpose of providing repair or maintenance service or loading or unloading goods, wares or merchandise, provided such vehicle is operated over the shortest possible route, and the operator of such vehicle has in his immediate possession evidence of the local destination and point of origin. 
(3)  To vehicles that are primarily pickup trucks and passenger vans (one ton capacity and under) towing one or two axle trailers. 
(Code 1990, § 10-11-90(D); Ord. No. 1521-2-90, § II, 2-19-90; Ord. No. 1546-5-90, § II, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 1575-10-90, § II, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 1589-12-90, § II, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 1645-9-91, § I, 9-9-91; Ord. No. 1702-7-92, § II, 7-6-92; Ord. No. 1739-11-92, § I, 11-2-92; Ord. No. 2372-8-98, § 1, 8-24-98; Ord. No. 2403-12-98, § 1, 12-7-98; Ord. No. 3187, § 1, 3-7-05; Ord. No. 3346-06-2006, § 1, 6-5-06; Ord. No. 3635-12-2008 , § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 3636-12-2008 , § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 3637-12-2008 , § 1, 12-15-08; Ord. No. 3639-01-2009 , § 1, 1-5-09; Ord. No. 4447-11-2017 , §§ 1, 2, 11-20-17)  
Secs. 15-105—15-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Handicapped parking, § 6-147. 
 
Sec. 15-126. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited on specific streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to stop, stand or park upon the following streets or portions thereof at any time when markings on the streets or signs designate no-stopping, no-standing and/or no-parking zones: 
Street 	Extent 
Ace Lane 	From State Highway 121 (Business) to F.M. 3040, both sides of Ace Lane 
Applegate Drive 	From the west curb line of Old Orchard Lane to a point 60 feet west of the west curb of Old Orchard Lane, the south side of Applegate Drive only 
Archer Avenue 	From F.M. 407 to Moccassin Trail, both sides of Archer Avenue 
Babbling Brook Drive 	From Old Orchard Lane to Hidden Trail Drive, both sides of Babbling Brook Drive 
Bedford Lane 	From Valley Ridge Boulevard to Colgate Drive, the east side of Bedford Lane only 
Bellaire Boulevard 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road, both sides of Bellaire Boulevard; save and except the north side of Bellaire Boulevard from the alley 150 feet east of Catalina Drive to a point 20 feet west of the curb line of Edmonds Lane 
Bluffview Drive 	From Highland Drive to Ridge Cove Drive, the west side of Bluffview Drive only 
Bogard Lane 	From McGee Lane to Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road, both sides of Bogard Lane 
Bosbury Drive 	From Wentworth Drive, 100 feet south, both sides of Bosbury Drive 
Brazos Boulevard 	From the north city limits to Garden Ridge Boulevard, both sides of Brazos Boulevard 
	From Garden Ridge Boulevard east curb line to a point 400 feet east, the south side of Brazos Boulevard only 
Breezewood Drive 	From Toronto Drive to Old Orchard Lane, both sides of Breezewood Drive 
Cain Drive 	From Mimosa Lane to F.M. 407, both sides of Cain Drive 
Canterbury Lane 	From Kirkpatrick Lane to Yorkshire Terrace, the north side of Canterbury Lane only 
	From Kirkpatrick Lane to 600 feet east, the south side of Canterbury Lane only 
Catalina Drive 	From Tiffany Lane to Monaco Drive, both sides of Catalina Drive 
Charles Street 	From the Frontage Road of Interstate Highway 35E north to the north property line of 197 Yale Avenue 
Charles Street 	Southbound from the north curb line of Lake Haven Drive to the intersection of the Frontage Road of Interstate Highway 35E 
Church Street 	From a point 75 feet west of the west curb line of Charles Street to the west curb line of Charles Street, the south side of Church Street only 
Cindy Lane 	From Autumn Trail to Corporate Drive, both sides of Cindy Lane 
Civic Circle Drive 	From F.M. 1171 to Summit Avenue, both sides of Civic Circle Drive 
Clydesdale Drive 	From Kirkpatrick Lane to Yorkshire Terrace, both sides of Clydesdale Drive 
Colgate Drive 	From Fairfield Court to McGee Lane, the north side of Colgate Drive only 
College Parkway 	From Kirkpatrick Lane to Reno Street, the north side of College Parkway only 
	From Old Orchard Lane to Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road, both sides of College Parkway, save and except the north side of College Parkway from Old Orchard Lane to Valley Parkway 
College Street 	From Mill Street to Valley Ridge Boulevard, both sides of College Street 
Continental Drive 	From State Highway 121 (Business), 200 feet west, both sides of Continental Drive 
	From Valley View Drive to 100 feet north of Timber Way Drive, the west side of Continental Drive only 
Corporate Drive 	From the west city limits to Waters Ridge Drive, both sides of Corporate Drive 
Country Ridge Road 	From Southwest Parkway to Interstate Highway 35E, both sides of Country Ridge Road 
Cowan Avenue 	From Hillside Drive to Mill Street, both sides of Cowan Avenue 
	From Perry Street to a point 200 feet north of F.M. 1171 (Main Street), both sides of Cowan Avenue 
Creekview Drive 	From Old Orchard Lane 400 feet west, the north side of Creekview Drive only 
Crestview Point Drive 	From Club Ridge Drive, 150 feet east, both sides of Crestview Point Drive 
Crosshaven Drive 	From Valley Ridge Boulevard to Yosemite Drive, the east side of Crosshaven Drive only 
Deer Run 	From F.M. 3040 to Corporate Drive, both sides of Deer Run, save and except the section of Deer Run from Antler Trail South to Antler Trail North 
Degan Street 	From Main Street to Richland Avenue, both sides of Degan Street 
Denton Tap Road 	From the south city limits to State Highway 121 (Business), both sides of Denton Tap Road 
Drexel Drive 	From Columbia Drive to College Parkway, the east side of Drexel Drive only 
East Hill Park Road 	From State Highway 121 (Business) to a point 1,500 feet northwest of the north line of State Highway 121, both sides of East Hill Park Road 
Edmonds Lane 	From Denton Tap Road to F.M. 1171 (Main Street), both sides of Edmonds Lane 
Edna Avenue 	From Elm Street to F.M. 1171 (Main Street), both sides of Edna Avenue 
Elm Street 	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road to Edna Avenue, both sides of Elm Street 
	From 200 feet west of Charles Street to 200 feet east of Charles Street, both sides of Elm Street 
F.M. 407 (Justin Road) 	From the west city limits to Lake Park Road, both sides of F.M. 407 
F.M. 544 	From State Highway 121 (Business) to the east city limits, both sides of F.M. 544 
F.M. 1171 (Main Street) 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to State Highway 121 (Business), both sides of F.M. 1171, except from Charles Street to Kealy Avenue 
F.M. 2281 (Old Denton Road) 	From the south city limits to State Highway 121 (Bypass), both sides of F.M. 2281 
F.M. 3040 (Round Grove Road) 	From the west city limits to Interstate Highway 35E centerline, both sides of F.M. 3040 
F.M. 3504 (Mill Street) 	From State Highway 121 (Business) to F.M. 1171 (Main Street), both sides of Mill Street 
Forestbrook Drive 	From State Highway 121 (Business) to Oakbend Drive, both sides of Forestbrook Drive 
Fox Avenue 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to High School Drive, both sides of Fox Avenue 
	From High School Drive to Purnell Street, the west side of Fox Avenue only 
Garden Ridge Boulevard 	From Corporate Drive to Interstate Highway 35E, both sides of Garden Ridge Boulevard 
Grandy's Lane 	From McGee Lane to Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road, both sides of Grandy's Lane 
Green Slopes Drive 	From Rock Point Drive to F.M. 407, both sides of Green Slopes Drive 
Grove Drive 	From Knollridge Drive to Valley Parkway, the north side of Grove Drive only 
	From Valley Parkway to Summit Ridge, both sides of Grove Drive 
Harris Street 	From the north line of Church Street to a point 150 feet north, both sides of Harris Street 
Hawthorne Drive 	From Hawthorne Court to Valley Ridge Boulevard, the east side of Hawthorne Drive only 
Hebron Parkway 	From the Interstate highway 35E centerline to the east city limits, both sides of Hebron Parkway 
Helen Lane 	From Edmonds Lane, 100 feet north, the west side of Helen Lane only 
Hembry Street 	From McKenzie Street to Birch Street, both sides of Hembry Street 
Henrietta Street 	From Main Street to 180 feet south of Main Street, the east side of Henrietta Street only 
Highland Drive 	From Denton Tap Road to MacArthur Boulevard, both sides of Highland Drive 
Highpoint Drive 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to Daffodil Lane, both sides of Highpoint Drive 
Hilldale Drive 	From Highland Drive to Ridge Cove Drive, the east side of Hilldale Drive only 
Hobart Lane 	From Edmonds Lane to Helen Lane, the east side of Hobart Lane only 
Holford's Prairie Road 	From Midway Road to State Highway 121 (Business), both sides of Holford's Prairie Road 
Houston Street 	From the east curb line of Charles Street to a point 300 feet east, both sides of Houston Street 
Huffines Boulevard 	From Corporate Drive to State Highway 121 (Business), both sides of Huffines Boulevard 
Huffines Street 	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road to F.M. 3504 (Mill Street), both sides of Huffines Street 
Interstate Highway 35E 
(Stemmons Freeway) 	From the south city limits to the north city limits, both northbound and southbound freeway lanes, ramps, shoulders, frontage roads, all ramps and connecting roadways in the Interstate Highway 35E/State Highway 121 (Bypass) Interchange, Interstate Highway 35E/F.M. 3040/Hebron Parkway Interchange, Interstate Highway 35E/Corporate Drive Interchange, Interstate Highway 35E/State Highway 121 (Business) Interchange, Interstate Highway 35E/Fox Avenue Interchange, Interstate Highway 35E/Valley Ridge Boulevard Interchange, Interstate Highway 35E/F.M. 407 Interchange, Interstate Highway 35E/Garden Ridge Boulevard Interchange, shoulders, frontage roads and all areas within the Interstate Highway 35E right-of-way 
Jones Street 	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road to Kealy Avenue, both sides of Jones Street 
Kathy Lane 	From Alice Lane to Valley Parkway, both sides of Kathy Lane 
Kay Lane 	From the north curb line of Purnell Street to a point 300 feet north, both sides of Kay Lane 
Kealy Avenue 	From F.M. 3504 (Mill Street) to Jones Street, both sides of Kealy Avenue 
Keeson Trail 	From McGee Lane, 100 feet north, the west side of Keeson Trail only 
Kent Street 	From Edmonds Lane to Huntington Drive, both sides of Kent Street 
Kingston Drive 	From Westwood Drive to Valley Parkway, the north side of Kingston Drive only 
Lake Park Road 	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road to a point 500 feet east of the centerline of Mill Street, both sides of Lake Park Road 
Lake Vista Drive 	From MacArthur Boulevard to Vista Ridge Mall Drive, both sides of Lake Vista Drive 
Lakepointe Drive 	From Hebron Parkway to Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road, both sides of Lakepointe Drive 
Lakeside Circle 	From Hebron Parkway (500 feet west of Lakepointe Drive) to Hebron Parkway (2,000 feet east of Lakepointe Drive), both sides of Lakeside Circle 
Lakeway Drive 	From Corporate Drive to Bennett Lane, both sides of Lakeway Drive 
Lakeway Drive 	From Lakepointe Drive to a point 100 feet north on both sides and 50 feet on either side of any existing driveway 
Lakeway Drive 	From Lakepointe Drive to Corporate Drive 
Len Mar Drive 	From Christopher Lane to Summit Avenue, both sides of Len Mar Drive 
Lindsey Trail 	From McGee Lane to Brittany Place, the east side of Lindsey Trail only 
MacArthur Boulevard 	From the south city limits to F.M. 3040, both sides of MacArthur Boulevard 
Marblehead Drive 	From Valley Parkway to Laguna Bay, the north side of Marblehead Drive only 
McCartt Drive 	From Country Ridge Road to State Highway 121, both sides of McCartt Drive 
McGee Lane 	From Valley Ridge Boulevard to Bogard Lane, both sides of McGee Lane 
McKenzie Street 	From Mill Street to Lone Oak Street, both sides of McKenzie Street 
Meadowglen Drive 	From F.M. 3040 to Kirkwood Drive, both sides of Meadowglen Drive 
Mesquite Street 	From Mill Street to Hembry Street, both sides of Mesquite Street 
Midway Road 	From Huffines Boulevard to F.M. 544, both sides of Midway Road 
Mill Street 	From the north curb line of Walters Street to a point 400 feet north of the centerline of Lake Park Road, both sides of North Mill Street 
Moccassin Trail 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road 
Monarch Drive 	From Valley Parkway to Kamla Drive, the north side of Monarch Drive only 
North Cowan Avenue 	From a point 400 feet south of the south curb line of Morningside Drive on the west side of North Cowan Ave., continuing around the cul-de-sac, to a point 490 feet south of the south curb line of Morningside Drive on the east side of North Cowan Avenue 
Oak Knoll Circle 	From State Highway 121 (Business) to the east end, both sides of Oak Knoll Circle 
Oakbend Drive 	From F.M. 3040 to Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road, both sides of Oakbend Drive 
Oakridge Boulevard 	From Lake Park Road to Marcus Drive, both sides of Oakridge Boulevard 
Oaks of Bellaire 	From Bellaire Boulevard to Clear Creek Drive, both sides of Oaks of Bellaire 
Oak Tree Lane 	On or within 25 feet of the bridge located approximately 300 feet west of Holford's Prairie Road 
Oakwood Lane 	From State Highway 121 (Business) to Bellaire Boulevard, both sides of Oakwood Lane 
Old Orchard Lane 	From FM 3040 to Valley Ridge Boulevard, both sides of Old Orchard Lane, save and except the east side from Settler's Way north approximately 420 feet; and, save and except the east side from Grove Drive to Juniper Lane; and, save and except the west side from Juniper Lane to Valley Parkway; and, save and except the east side from Valley Parkway to Summit Run 
Olympic Court 	From Parkside Trail to a point 120 feet north of Parkside Trail, the west side of Olympic Court only 
Orchid Drive 	From Edmonds Lane, 100 feet west, both sides of Orchid Drive 
Palisades Drive 	From the east curb line of Tahoe Drive to a point 150 feet east, the north curb line of Palisades Drive only 
Park Vista Drive 	From Vista View Drive to Club Ridge Drive, both sides of Park Vista Drive 
Parkside Trail 	From a point 150 feet west of Olympic Court to Olympic Court, the south side of Parkside Trail only 
Peachtree Lane 	From F.M. 3040 to Shady Elm Lane, the east side of Peachtree Lane only 
Poydras Street 	From Elm Street to Church Street, the east side of Poydras Street only 
Princeton Street 	From Valley Parkway to Drexel Drive, both sides of Princeton Street 
Purnell Street 	From 200 feet west of Mill Street to Kealy Avenue, both sides of Purnell Street 
	From Hardy Street to Railroad Street, both sides of Purnell Street 
	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road 250 feet east, both sides of Purnell Street 
Quaker Lane 	From Hershey Lane to McGee Lane, the south side of Quaker Lane only 
Raldon Street 	From the east curb line of Edmonds Lane to a point 200 feet east, both sides of Raldon Street 
Richland Street 	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road to Degan Street, both sides of Richland Street 
Ridge Point Drive 	From Club Ridge Drive to Ridge Point Drive, the south side of Ridge Point Drive only 
Ridgegate Drive 	From Highland Drive to Vista Bluff Boulevard, both sides of Ridgegate Drive 
Ridgemont Drive 	From State Highway 121 (Bypass) (Spur 553) to Highland Drive, both sides of Ridgemont Drive 
Roberts Drive 	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road to Hebron Parkway, both sides of Roberts Drive 
Rockbrook Drive 	From State Highway 121 (Bypass) (Spur 553) to Uecker Drive, both sides of Rockbrook Drive 
Samuel Street 	From the west curb line of Charles Street to a point 200 feet west, the north side of Samuel Street only 
Savage Street 	From Oakridge Boulevard to Point Drive, the east side of Savage Street only; and from 350 feet south of Sandra Drive to Oakridge Boulevard, the west side of Savage Street only 
Seneca Place 	From Stillwater Place to Valley Parkway, the south side of Seneca Place only 
Seneca Way 	From Valley Parkway to Kamla Drive, the south side of Seneca Way only 
Settlers Way 	From Old Orchard Lane, 120 feet east, the north side of Settlers Way only 
Shannon Drive 	From Waterford Drive to Niagara Boulevard, both sides of Shannon Drive 
South Shore Place 	From the Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road to a point 100 feet west, the south side of South Shore Place only, and from Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road to Ridgecrest Drive, the north side of South Shore Place only 
Southwest Parkway 	From Corporate Drive to Bellaire Boulevard, both sides of Southwest Parkway 
Spinks Road 	From Duncan lane to Valley Parkway, both sides of Spinks Road 
Springwood Street 	From Valley Parkway to Sweetbriar Drive, both sides of Springwood Street 
St. Gallen Lane 	From Bregenz Lane to Bellaire Boulevard, the north side of St. Gallen Lane only 
Stanford Lane 	From Purdue Drive and Summit Avenue, the north side of Stanford Lane only 
Starling Lane 	From Oriole Drive to McGee Lane, both sides of Starling Lane 
State Highway 121 
(State Highway 121 Business) 	From the south city limits to the east city limits, both sides of State Highway 121 and including all ramps and connecting roadways in the State Highway 121/F.M. 3040 Interchange and in the State Highway 121/Interstate Highway 35E Interchange 
State Highway 121 
(State Highway 121 Bypass) 
(Spur 533) 	From Denton Tap Road to the east city limits, both eastbound and westbound freeway lanes, ramp lanes, shoulders, frontage roads and all areas within the State Highway 121 right-of-way 
Sterling Drive 	From Kirkpatrick Lane to Yorkshire Terrace, both sides of Sterling Drive 
Summerwind Lane 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to Summerwind Court, the north side of Summerwind Lane only 
Summit Avenue 	From F.M. 1171 (Main Street) to Moccassin Trail, both sides of Summit Avenue 
Summit Park 	From Summit Pointe to Summit Avenue, the north side of Summit Park only 
Summit Run 	From Old Orchard Lane, 100 feet east, the south side of Summit Run only 
Summit Trail 	From Courtney Lane to Summit Avenue, both sides of Summit Trail 
Sunset Lane 	From Wentworth Drive to Mustang Drive, the east side of Sunset Lane only 
Sunswept Terrace 	From Garden Ridge Boulevard to Mayflower Lane, the south side of Sunswept Terrace only 
Surf Street 	From the south curb line of F.M. 1171 (Main Street) to a point 300 feet south, both sides of Surf Street 
Tahoe Drive 	From Monaco Drive to Palisades Drive, both sides of Tahoe Drive 
	From Palisades Drive to Marblehead Drive, the west side of Tahoe Drive only 
Taylor Lane 	From Valley Ridge Boulevard to Jennifer Place, both sides of Taylor Lane 
Tennie Drive 	From Oakwood Drive to Mill Street, both sides of Tennie Drive 
Texas Street 	From Pine Street to State Highway 121, both sides of Texas Street 
Tiburon Bend 	From Clarendon Drive to Abilene Drive, the east and north sides of Tiburon Bend only 
Tucson Drive 	From Kirkpatrick Lane to Reno Street, both sides of Tucson Drive 
Uecker Drive 	From Rockbrook Drive to Corporate Drive, both sides of Uecker Drive 
Uecker Lane 	From Oakbend Drive to Rockbrook Drive, both sides of Uecker Lane 
Valley Oaks Drive 	From Oak View Place to Valley Parkway, the south side of Valley Oaks Drive only 
Valley Parkway 	From the east curb line of Olympic Court to the west curb line of Garden Ridge Boulevard, the south side of Valley Parkway only 
	From Edmonds Lane to Garden Ridge Boulevard, both sides of Valley Parkway, save and except the west side of Valley Parkway from Springwood Drive to a point 150 feet north of the centerline of Kathy Lane; and, save and except the west side of Valley Parkway from Grove Drive to Laramie Drive 
	From Kirkpatrick Lane to Autumn Breeze Lane, the north side of Valley Parkway only 
Valley Ridge Boulevard 	From the west city limits to Mill Street, both sides of Valley Ridge Boulevard 
Valley Ridge Circle 	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road to Valley Ridge Boulevard, both sides of Valley Ridge Circle 
Valley View Drive 	From State Highway 121 (Business), 1,300 feet west, both sides of Valley View Drive 
Valleybrook Drive 	From Edmonds Lane to Wallbrook Drive, both sides of Valleybrook Drive 
Village Drive 	From Pleasant Run Drive to Fox Avenue, the east side of Village Drive only 
Vista Drive 	From F.M. 3040 to Cassion Drive, both sides of Vista Drive 
Vista Ridge Mall Drive 	From Denton Tap Road to Interstate Highway 35E southbound Frontage Road, both sides of Vista Ridge Mall Drive 
Waters Ridge Drive 	From Interstate Highway 35E northbound Frontage Road to Bennett Lane, both sides of Waters Ridge Drive 
Whatley Street 	From Mill Street to Kealy Avenue, the northside of Whatley Street only 
Willow Grove Drive 	From F.M. 3040 to Golden Grove Drive, both sides of Willow Grove Drive 
Willow Springs Drive 	From Edmonds Lane to Ridgeway Circle, the south side of Willow Springs Drive only 
Willow Street 	From the south curb line of Purnell Street to a point 200 feet south, both sides of Willow Street 
Willowross Drive 	From Valley Parkway to Mayflower Lane, the west side of Willowross Drive only 
Winnipeg Drive 	From Valley Ridge Boulevard, 150 feet west, the south side of Winnipeg Drive only 
 
(Ord. No. 1454, § 1, 4-3-89; Code 1990, § 10-9-6(B); Ord. No. 1574-10-90, § 1, 10-15-90; Ord. No. 1597-2-91, § 1, 2-25-91; Ord. No. 1632-8-91, § I, 8-19-91; Ord. No. 1694-5-92, § I, 5-4-92; Ord. No. 1821-7-93, § 1, 7-12-93; Ord. No. 1931-6-94, § I, 6-20-94; Ord. No. 2029-7-95, § 1, 7-3-95; Ord. No. 2049-9-95, § 1, 9-11-95; Ord. No. 2069-11-95, § 1, 11-20-95; Ord. No. 2190-2-97, § I, 2-3-97; Ord. No. 2784-03-2002, § 1, 3-4-02; Ord. No. 2842-08-2002, § 1, 8-26-02; Ord. No. 2880-11-2002, § 1, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 3176-02-2005, § 1, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 3177-02-2005, § 1, 2-21-05; Ord. No. 3731-12-2009 , § 1, 12-21-09; Ord. No. 3751-03-2010 , § 1, 3-1-10; Ord. No. 3850-04-2011 1, § 1, 4-4-11; Ord. No. 4008-07-2013 , § 1, 7-1-13; Ord. No. 4042-01-2014 , § 1, 1-6-14; Ord. No. 4142-12-2014 , § 1, 12-15-14; Ord. No. 4262-04-2016 , § 2, 4-18-16; Ord. No. 4357-02-2017 , § 3, 2-6-17; Ord. No. 4447-11-2017 , § 3, 11-20-17; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-126.5. - Prohibiting parking in proximity to driveways and other areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, or permit any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain parked upon streets or street intersections or in certain lanes that serve a turning vehicle: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  On or within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(3)  On a railroad track; 
(4)  In front of or within 25 feet of a private driveway (except in front of residential driveways), private-gated streets and public street or street-alley intersections; 
(5)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(6)  Within 200 feet on the approach to a flashing signal or traffic-control signal located at a street intersection; 
(7)  Within a right-turn deceleration lane that does not serve through-vehicles including the taper-length of the deceleration lane; 
(8)  Within 25 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station; and 
(9)  Where an official sign prohibits parking. 
(Ord. No. 3393-11-2006, § 1, 11-20-06; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-127. - Prohibited parking on specific streets during specific hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession to be or remain parked upon the following streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, when markings on the streets or signs designating limited parking, are clearly visible. 
Street 	Extent 
Bennett Lane 	Interstate Highway 35E Service Road to Railroad Street 
 
(Code 1990, § 10-9-5(G); 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-128. - Prohibited parking in front of mailboxes during specific hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession to be or remain parked, upon any street, within ten feet of any mailbox between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on regular mail delivery days. 
(Ord. No. 2273-11-97, § 1, 11-3-97; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 15-127.5 which was renumbered as herein set out above subsequent to 0004-18-ORD deleting former § 15-128 entitled "Two-hour parking in specific street," which derived from Code 1990, § 10-9-5(C)).  
Sec. 15-129. - Prohibiting parking in excess of 48 hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain parked on any street, road, highway or public property for a period in excess of 48 hours. 
(Code 1990, § 10-9-5(D); 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-130. - Private parking areas. 
(a)  Prohibition of parking. A person commits an offense if he stops, stands or parks a vehicle or trailer having a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity in excess of 2,000 pounds located within any private parking area in the city in violation of authorized signs which have been erected prohibiting or restricting stopping, standing or parking within such private parking area. 
(b)  Erection of signs. The owner or operator of any private parking area is authorized to erect clearly legible signs of uniform size and design upon approval of the city manager or his designated representative, which shall be placed in the parking area advising the public of the limits of the parking regulations which are set forth in subsection (a) above. The provisions of subsection (a) shall not be effective until such signs are so placed. 
(c)  Violations for unattended vehicles. If a vehicle or trailer is found unattended or unoccupied within a parking area covered by this section when parking is prohibited, the registered owner of the vehicle or trailer shall be presumed to be the person who illegally parked it. The records of the state highway department or the county highway license department showing the name of the person to whom the state highway license was issued shall constitute prima facie evidence of ownership by the named individual. 
(d)  Enforcement. Only a police officer of the city shall be authorized to issue citations for offenses in violation of this section. 
(e)  Not mandatory. Compliance with the provisions of this section are not mandatory upon the owner or operator of any private parking area. 
(Code 1990, § 10-9-5(E); 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-131. - Selling of vehicles in a signed parking facility. 
(a)  Definition. 
Parking facility shall have the same meaning as currently assigned in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2308.002, as it now exists or may be hereafter amended. 
(b)  Prohibition of parking. A person commits an offense if he knowingly stops, stands or parks a vehicle in a parking facility to offer the vehicle for sale, lease or trade and the parking facility bears authorized signs prohibiting such stopping, standing or parking. Stopping, standing or parking a vehicle to offer the vehicle for sale, lease or trade shall be unauthorized parking. 
(c)  Erection of signs. The owner or operator of any parking facility is authorized to erect clearly legible signs prohibiting unauthorized parking to sell a vehicle. Such signs shall be placed in the parking facility advising the public of the parking restriction set forth in subsection (b) above and it shall not be effective until such signs are erected. 
(d)  General requirements for signs prohibiting unauthorized parking to sell vehicles. Signs prohibiting unauthorized parking shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Face and be conspicuously visible to drivers entering a parking facility; 
(2)  Be situated on the right side of each driveway or curb cut through which a vehicle can enter the facility, including an entry from an alley abutting the facility; 
(3)  Be permanently mounted on a pole or post; 
(4)  Be installed so that the bottom edge of the sign is no lower than five feet and no higher than eight feet above ground; 
(5)  Be constructed of weather-resistant material; 
(6)  Bear the words "NO PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SALE OR TRADE" in at least two-inch letters, black or blue in color with a white background. 
(e)  Presumptions. In a prosecution for an offense under this section, it shall be presumed that: 
(1)  The registered owner of the vehicle is the person who stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. 
(2)  The parked vehicle is for sale, lease or trade if the vehicle or the area immediately surrounding the vehicle bears inscriptions, signs, placards, markings, symbols or language commonly accepted as an offer to sell, lease, trade or otherwise vend the vehicle. 
(f)  Enforcement. Only a police officer or code enforcement officer of the city shall be authorized to issue citations for offenses in violation of this section. This section does not affect any regulation regarding the towing, removal, impoundment or capturing of a parked vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2800-05-2002, § 1, 5-6-02; Ord. No. 2818-06-2002, § I, 6-17-02; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-132. - Obedience to no parking signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain parked upon public property when markings on said property or signs prohibiting, regulating, or restricting parking are clearly visible. 
(Ord. No. 4352-01-2017 , § II, 1-23-17; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18) 
Editor's note— Formerly codified as § 15-132.5 which was renumbered as herein set out above subsequent to 0004-18-ORD deleting former § 15-132 entitled "Back-in parking," which derived from Ord. No. 4352-01-2017 , § I, adopted Jan. 23, 2017.  
Sec. 15-132.5. - Parking within designated spaces. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be parked on public property unless the vehicle or trailer is parked in a marked parking space. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be parked in any public parking space in a manner such that any part of the motor vehicle or trailer extends over any sidewalk, into any lane of traffic, including a bike lane, on or across a line marking a parking space, or over any driveway. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-133. - Parking buses, recreational vehicles, trailers, etc., on public streets. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Bus shall mean a motor-driven passenger vehicle, 25 feet or greater in length, which has the capacity to accommodate more than 15 persons. 
Recreational vehicle shall mean any vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and which is primarily designed to serve as temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping or travel use and including, but not limited to, travel trailers, camping trailers, converted buses and self-propelled motor homes. This definition does not include pickup trucks equipped with camper units, pickup trucks with bed caps or vans that have a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of three-fourths ton or less. 
Semi-trailer shall mean every vehicle of the trailer type so designed or used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of its own weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
Trailer shall mean every vehicle designed or used to carry its load wholly on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle, including those vehicles described in section 15-101. 
(b)  Parking prohibited; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any bus, recreational vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer on a public street within the city. This provision shall not prevent the temporary parking or standing of a recreational vehicle engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers or contents on a public street in any single-family, attached or detached, or two-family zoned district for a period not to exceed four hours, or the temporary parking or standing of a bus, trailer, or semi-trailer engaged in the loading or unloading of passengers or contents for a period not to exceed 20 minutes, or parking otherwise permitted by this Code. This section shall not apply to street construction, maintenance and repair equipment, trailers and vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities, other vehicles when actually parked at a designated loading zone, municipal vehicles in the course of a performance of city business, or when it is lawful to park a commercial motor vehicle for the sole purpose of accepting of delivering portable goods. 
(Code 1990, § 10-13-2; Ord. No. 1663-12-91, § 1, 12-16-91; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18; 0054-18-ORD , § 1, 8-20-18) 
Cross reference— Truck parking restricted, § 15-103.  
Sec. 15-134. - Special vehicles, recreational vehicles and other vehicle storage or parking in single-family zoned districts. 
(a)  Definitions: 
Distinguishable border shall mean a permanent curbing of concrete, wood or brick, which shall form a perimeter at least one foot greater than the stored or parked vehicle. All area within said curbing shall be filled in with concrete, asphalt, paving stones, brick, gravel or crushed rock. 
Improved driveway shall mean a location that is built of concrete or asphalt and is in the required front yard. 
Main structure shall mean a building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. 
Mobile home/trailer coach shall mean any registered vehicle within the State of Texas having no foundation other than wheels and so designed and constructed as to permit occupancy for dwelling or sleeping purposes, and so used, or a house trailer that is used as a permanent residence and is not capable of being moved without a state permit from the Texas Department of Transportation and does not have the ability to be self-propelled; and shall abide by chapter 7 - Licenses and Business Regulations, section 7-125, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Parking surface (PAD) shall mean a location that is built as concrete or asphalt located in the required front yard setbacks or built as concrete, asphalt, paving stones, brick, gravel or crushed rock with a distinguishable border with dimensions of one foot greater than the exterior dimensions of the vehicle being stored or parked, located in other areas of the property except front yard setbacks. 
Recreational vehicle shall mean any vehicle used for leisure-time activity or entertainment. 
Required front yard shall mean a "yard" that extends along a lot line and at right angles to such a lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations of the zoning districts in which such building is located. 
Special vehicle shall mean any camper, travel trailer, mobile home/trailer coach, bus, boat or any other special or recreational vehicle. 
Vehicle shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved exclusively by human power. 
(b)  Unlawful parking. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or allow to be parked on any property under his/her control any vehicle, including recreational or special vehicles, as defined herein, on any portion of a lot in any single-family, attached or detached, or two-family zoned district, except by compliance with the following: 
(1)  No special vehicle or recreational vehicle may be parked or stored on public streets, easements, or rights-of-way, except as stated in chapter 15 - Traffic and Vehicles, section 15-133 - Parking buses, recreational vehicles, trailers, etc., on public streets, of this Code. 
(2)  No part of a special vehicle or recreational vehicle may extend over a public right-of-way. 
(3)  No special vehicle, recreational vehicle, or other vehicle stored on a single-family, attached or detached, or two-family zoned district lot, may be used for housekeeping, living, sleeping quarters, storage or office use. 
(4)  All vehicle licensing and registration shall comply with state laws relating to abandoned motor vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(5)  Stored special vehicles, recreational vehicles, and all other vehicles shall be secured with wheel-stops or maintained so as not to present a safety problem. 
(6)  Special vehicles, recreational vehicles, and all other vehicles shall be stored or parked on an all-weather parking surface pad with a distinguishable border. Gravel or crushed rock may be used in the side or rear yards and shall have a distinguishable border. All access drives and parking areas in the required front yard shall be concrete or asphalt, with the exception of existing legal nonconforming, all-weather driveways. All access drives behind the required front yard shall be constructed of concrete, asphalt, paving stones, brick, gravel or crushed rock. It shall be unlawful for any owner of property used for detached single-family or duplex residential use to allow a driveway or parking surface in the required front yard setback to exceed 27 feet in width on lots 60 feet wide or greater or 45 percent of the lot width for lots less than 60 feet in width. For purposes of this requirement, the lot width shall mean the width of the lot measured at the front yard setback. In no case shall the parking or driveway area cover more than 45 percent of the required front yard of the lot. Driveways shall be paved with concrete except that expansion of an existing driveway may be with concrete or a continuation of an existing non-conforming material adjacent to the side of the driveway being expanded, provided that the total parking area complies with the width requirement herein and not more than 45 percent of the required front yard shall be used for parking. Access drives and parking surfaces shall be maintained in good repair at all times. A permit is required for all driveway and parking surface improvements. 
(7)  Special vehicles, recreational vehicles and vehicles in excess of 22 feet in length shall be stored behind the required front yard. 
(8)  All parking in the required front yard shall be on an all-weather parking surface pad, provided that access to the pad is in compliance with subsection (b)(6) hereinabove. The all-weather surface shall be one foot greater than the exterior dimensions of the vehicle being stored or parked, with a distinguishable border. 
(9)  All special vehicles, recreational vehicles, and vehicles exceeding the minimum of 22 feet in length shall have a minimum setback of ten feet from the main structure. 
(10)  No parking is allowed in the front yard unless there is access from a legal front-entry driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1808-6-93, § V, 6-7-93; Ord. No. 3405-01-2007, § 3, 1-22-07; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-135. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in alleys. 
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any alley. 
(Ord. No. 2036-8-95, § I, 8-7-95; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-136. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in fire lanes; right to remove vehicle; assessment of costs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or stand a vehicle in a fire lane. 
(b)  Exceptions: Subsection (a) shall not apply if the vehicle is being used for the immediate loading or unloading of passengers or merchandise; nor shall subsection (a) apply to authorized emergency vehicles operated by the fire department, police department or other governmental divisions needed to assist in public safety activities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of property to permit or allow a vehicle, other than those specifically excepted, to be left parked, stopped or standing in a designated fire lane. 
(d)  Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 684.011 and 684.012, the owner of the premises shall have the right to remove, or cause to be removed, any vehicle illegally parked, stopped or standing in a fire lane. 
(e)  The city shall have the right to remove, or caused to be removed, any vehicle illegally parked, stopped or standing in a fire lane and to assess any costs for removal against the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2547-3-2000, § I, 3-6-00; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-137. - Transportation Code presumption. 
In a prosecution for an offense under state law involving the stopping, standing, or parking of an unattended motor vehicle, it shall be presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle is the person who stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2732-10-2001, § 1, 10-1-01; 0004-18-ORD , § I(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Secs. 15-138—15-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIANS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 15-156—15-165. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to permit charitable solicitation in roadway, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 81(c). 
 
Sec. 15-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable contribution shall mean a contribution to a charitable organization. 
Charitable organization shall mean and include associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and corporations as well as individuals or groups of individuals which meet the definition of charitable organization established by the Internal Revenue Service. 
Director shall mean the director of the community development department or that person's designee. 
Solicit or solicitation shall mean any oral or written request securing or attempting to secure money or property. 
(Ord. No. 1557-8-90, § I, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 3220-07-2005, § 1, 7-11-05)  
Sec. 15-167. - Solicitation by pedestrians. 
(a)  A person may not stand, sit, or otherwise occupy a position in a roadway, median or public right-of-way to solicit a ride, contribution, employment, or business from an occupant of a vehicle, except that a person may stand in a roadway, median or public right-of-way to solicit a charitable contribution to the extent allowed by section 552.0071 of the Transportation Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(b)  A person may not stand, sit or otherwise occupy a position on or near a roadway, median or public right-of-way to solicit the watching or guarding of a vehicle parked or to be parked on a roadway, median, public right-of-way or private property. 
(Ord. No. 1557-8-90, § II, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 2555-3-2000, § I, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 3220-07-2005, § 2, 7-11-05)  
Sec. 15-168. - Application for permit. 
A permit to stand in a roadway, median or public right-of-way in the city to solicit charitable contributions to the extent allowed by section 552.0071 of the Transportation Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended, shall be granted only after an application for such purpose is filed with the director no earlier than 30 days, nor less than 11 days, prior to the initiation of the proposed solicitation. Such application shall conform with the provisions section 552.0071 of the Transportation Code, as it now exists or may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1557-8-90, § III, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 2555-3-2000, § I, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 2855-09-2002, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. 3220-07-2005, § 3, 7-11-05)  
Sec. 15-169. - Time and place regulations. 
Notwithstanding any provision in this division to the contrary, it shall be unlawful to stand in a roadway, median or public right-of-way to solicit charitable contributions in the city except: 
(1)  At the following crossings or intersections: 
a.  Bellaire at State Highway 121 Business. 
b.  Southwest Parkway at Corporate. 
c.  Valley Parkway at Main Street. 
d.  Garden Ridge at F.M. 407. 
e.  Lake Park at F.M. 407. 
f.  Garden Ridge at College Parkway. 
g.  Valley Ridge at McGee/Old Orchard. 
(2)  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 1557-8-90, § IV, 8-20-90; Ord. No. 2555-3-2000, § I, 3-20-00; Ord. No. 3220-07-2005, § 4, 7-11-05)  
Secs. 15-170—15-180. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3220-07-2005, §§ 5, 6, adopted July 11, 2005, repealed §§ 15-170, 15-171, in their entirety. Former §§ 15-170, 15-171 pertained to appeals and time and place regulations, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 1557-8-90, §§ V, VI, adopted Aug. 20, 1990; Ord. No. 2555-3-2000, § I, adopted Mar. 20, 2000.  
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSPORTATION BOARD[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-46 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-181. - Established. 
A transportation board consisting of seven members is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 1686-3-92, § I, 3-2-92)  
Sec. 15-182. - Membership. 
(a)  Qualifications. Members shall be residents of the city. 
(b)  Terms. Members shall be appointed by the city council for two-year terms; provided, however, appointments shall be in accordance with the following provisions: effective March 2, 1992, currently appointed transportation board members shall serve their previously appointed terms until their terms expire. 
(c)  Appointments. In each even year the city council shall appoint four members to the board, and in each odd year the city council shall appoint three members to the board. 
(d)  Successors. If a replacement has not been designated by the end of a member's term, then that member shall continue serving until a successor is appointed. 
(e)  Vacancies. In the event of a vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to serve for the unexpired term. Any member may be removed by the city council at will. 
(Ord. No. 1686-3-92, § II, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 3577-06-2008, § 7, 6-2-08)  
Sec. 15-183. - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings. The transportation board shall meet quarterly. 
(b)  Special meetings. The transportation board shall meet for a special meeting if called by the chairman, or the vice-chairman if the chairman is unavailable. 
(c)  Quorum. A majority of members shall constitute a quorum. 
(d)  Absences. The members absent from any meeting shall be so stated in the minutes of such meeting. In the absence of a quorum for a meeting, the chairman will submit, or cause to have submitted, a report to the city council stating those members who are absent. 
(Ord. No. 1686-3-92, § III, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 3577-06-2008, § 8, 6-2-08)  
Sec. 15-184. - Officers. 
(a)  Election. Members of the transportation board shall elect, annually at the first meeting following June 30, the following officers: 
(1)  Chairman. 
(2)  Vice-chairman. 
(b)  Duties. 
(1)  Chairman. The chairman shall preside at all meetings and shall perform such other duties as usually pertain to his office or as may be instructed by the board. 
(2)  Vice-chairman. It shall be the duty of the vice-chairman to perform the duties of the chairman in his absence. 
(Ord. No. 1686-3-92, §§ IV, V, 3-2-92)  
Sec. 15-185. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The city council maintains the right to act independently on all matters pertaining to transportation without transportation board consideration or recommendation. The transportation board may, however, act in an advisory capacity to the city council by making recommendations to the city council with regard to: 
(1)  A review and update, at least annually, of the city's master thoroughfare plan; 
(2)  Requested amendments to the thoroughfare plan or thoroughfare standards; 
(3)  Requested variances to the thoroughfare plan or thoroughfare standards; 
(4)  Appeals of staff interpretation of the thoroughfare plan or thoroughfare standards; 
(5)  Review issues and provide recommendations regarding existing or proposed thoroughfare plans which may be presented by the city staff or by direction of the city council; 
(6)  Other transportation issues as directed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1686-3-92, § VI, 3-2-92; Ord. No. 3577-06-2008, § 9, 6-2-08)  
ARTICLE VII. - AUTOMATED TRAFFIC SIGNAL ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 15-186. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department shall mean the Lewisville Police Department. 
Intersection shall mean the place or area where two or more streets intersect. 
Owner shall mean the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the state department of transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country. 
Photographic traffic signal enforcement system shall mean a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a camera system installed to work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic-control signal; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing at least two recorded images that depicts the license plate attached to the rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic-control signal. 
Recorded image shall mean an image recorded by a photographic traffic monitoring system that depicts the rear of a motor vehicle and is automatically recorded on a photograph or digital image. 
System location shall mean the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic monitoring system is directed and in operation. 
Traffic-control signal shall mean a traffic-control device that displays alternating red, amber and green lights that directs traffic when to stop at or proceed through an intersection. 
(Ord. No. 3478-08-2007, § 1, 8-20-07)  
Sec. 15-187. - Imposition of civil penalty for violations. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that a vehicle that proceeds into an intersection when the traffic-control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal damages the public by endangering motor vehicle operators and pedestrians alike, by decreasing the efficiency of traffic control and traffic flow efforts, and by increasing the number of serious accidents to which public safety agencies must respond at the expense of the taxpayers. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c) below, the owner of a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty of $75.00 if, while facing only a steady red signal displayed by an electrically operated traffic-control signal located in the city, the vehicle is operated in violation of the instructions of that traffic-control signal, as specified by section 544.007(d) of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(c)  An owner who fails to timely pay the civil penalty shall be subject to a late payment penalty of $25.00.  
Sec. 15-188. - Enforcement; procedures. 
(a)  The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article. 
(b)  In order to impose a civil penalty under this article, the department shall mail a notice of violation to the owner of the motor vehicle liable for the civil penalty not later than the thirtieth day after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred to: 
(1)  The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the state department of transportation; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the state department of transportation. 
(c)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the violation alleged; 
(2)  The location of the intersection where the violation occurred; 
(3)  The date and time of the violation; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(5)  The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(6)  A copy of a recorded image of the violation limited solely to a depiction of the area of the registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty for which the owner is liable; 
(8)  The number of days the person has in which to pay or contest the imposition of the civil penalty and a statement that the person incurs a late payment penalty if the civil penalty is not paid or imposition of the penalty is not contested within that period; 
(9)  A statement that the owner of the vehicle in the notice of violation may elect to pay the civil penalty by mail sent to a specified address instead of appearing at the time and place of the administrative adjudication hearing; and 
(10)  Information that informs the owner of the vehicle named in the notice of violation: 
a.  Of the owner's right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person in an administrative adjudication hearing; 
b.  That imposition of the civil penalty may be contested by submitting a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing before the expiration of the period specified under subsection (8); and 
c.  That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner is an admission of liability and a waiver of the owner's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty. 
(11)  A statement that if the owner of the motor vehicle fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty imposed against the owner: 
a.  An arrest warrant may not be issued for the owner; and 
b.  The imposition of the civil penalty may not be recorded on the owner's driving record. 
(12)  Any other information deemed necessary by the department. 
(d)  A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received on the fifth day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. 
(e)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may mail a warning notice to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 3478-08-2007, § 1, 8-20-07)  
Sec. 15-189. - Presumption. 
(a)  It is presumed that the owner of the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation mailed to the person if the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system belongs to the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(b)  If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation, the presumption under subsection (a) is rebutted on the presentation of evidence establishing that the vehicle was at that time: 
(1)  being test driven by another person; 
(2)  Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person; or 
(3)  Owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding section 15-190, the presentation of evidence under subsection (b) by a person who is in the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or did not own the vehicle at the time of the violation must be made by affidavit, through testimony at the administrative adjudication hearing under section 15-190, or by a written declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted by mail to the department. 
(d)  If the presumption established by subsection (a) is rebutted under subsection (b), a civil penalty may not be imposed on the owner of the vehicle or the person named in the notice of violation, as applicable. 
(e)  If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image taken by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual, the owner of the motor vehicle shall provide to the department the name and address of the individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the photograph or digital image and a statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the vehicle. The owner shall provide the information required by this subsection not later than the thirty-fifth day after the date the notice of violation is received. If the owner provides the required information, it is presumed that the individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation and the department may send a notice of violation to that individual at the address provided by the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 3478-08-2007, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 3514-12-2007, § 1, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 15-190. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice of violation may contest the imposition of the civil penalty by filing a written request for an administrative adjudication hearing. The request for a hearing must be filed no later than the thirty-fifth day after the date the notice of violation was mailed. 
(b)  On receipt of a timely request for an administrative adjudication hearing, the department shall notify the person of the time and date of the hearing. The hearing must be held no later than the thirtieth day after receipt of the request for a hearing. 
(c)  The administrative adjudication hearing shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. The hearing officer shall have the authority to administer oaths and issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. 
(d)  In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(e)  The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the violation may be attested to by affidavit of an officer or employee of the city or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. 
(f)  An affidavit of an officer or employee of the city that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is: 
(1)  Admissible in an administrative adjudication hearing and in an appeal under this article; and 
(2)  Evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit. 
(g)  The hearing officer shall enter a finding of liability for the civil penalty or a finding of no liability for the civil penalty. A finding under this subsection must be in writing and be signed and dated by the hearing officer. 
(1)  A finding of liability for civil penalty must specify the amount of the civil penalty and late penalty for which the person is liable. 
(2)  If the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability, a civil penalty for the violation may not be imposed against the person. 
(3)  A finding of liability or no liability entered under this subsection may: 
a.  Be filed with the person designated by the city; and 
b.  Be recorded on microfilm or microfiche or by using data processing techniques. 
(h)  A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the civil penalty and costs within 31 days of the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of civil liability. 
(i)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the imposition of civil liability under this article, to be proven by a preponderance of the evidence, that: 
(1)  The traffic-control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person; 
(2)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a police officer; 
(3)  The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic-control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle; 
(4)  The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code and that the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter; 
(5)  The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner; 
(6)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued; 
(7)  The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed that would make compliance with this article more dangerous under the circumstances than non-compliance; or 
(8)  The person who received the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor-vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(j)  To demonstrate that at the time of the violation the motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle or the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle was a stolen plate, the owner must submit proof acceptable to the hearing officer that the theft of the vehicle or license plate had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 3478-08-2007, § 1, 8-20-07; Ord. No. 3514-12-2007, § 2, 12-3-07)  
Sec. 15-191. - Admission of liability. 
(a)  A person who fails to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner or who requests an administrative adjudication hearing to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person and fails to appear at that hearing is considered to: 
(1)  Admit liability for the full amount of the civil penalty stated in the notice of violation mailed to the person; and 
(2)  Waive the person's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), a person who receives a notice of violation and who fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty or fails to timely request an administrative adjudication hearing is entitled to an administrative hearing if: 
(1)  The person submits a written request for the hearing to the designated hearing officer, accompanied by an affidavit that attests to the date on which the person received the notice of violation; and 
(2)  The written request and affidavit are submitted to the hearing officer within the same number of days after the date the person received the notice of violation as specified under section 15-188(c)(8). 
(Ord. No. 3478-08-2007, § 1, 8-20-07)  
Sec. 15-192. - Appeal. 
(a)  The owner of a motor vehicle determined by a hearing officer to be liable for a civil penalty may appeal that determination to a judge by filing an appeal petition with the clerk of the court. The petition must be filed with the city's municipal court. 
(b)  The petition must be: 
(1)  Filed before the thirty-first day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of liability for the civil penalty; and 
(2)  Accompanied by payment of the costs required by law for the court. 
(c)  The court clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner of the motor vehicle and the department of the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(d)  An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner of the motor vehicle. The owner shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation to perfect the owner's appeal. 
(e)  An appeal under this section shall be determined by the court by trial de novo. 
(Ord. No. 3478-08-2007, § 1, 8-20-07)  
Sec. 15-193. - Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy. 
(a)  The imposition of a civil penalty under this article is not a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(b)  A civil penalty may not be imposed under this article on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of the vehicle was arrested or was issued a citation and notice to appear by a peace officer for the same violation of section 544.007(d) of the Texas Transportation Code recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(c)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit to enforce collection of a civil penalty imposed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 3478-08-2007, § 1, 8-20-07)  
Sec. 15-194. - Penalties collected. 
The penalties collected from the imposition of civil liability under this article shall be distributed and used in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 3478-08-2007, § 1, 8-20-07)  
ARTICLE VIII. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS IN CASTLE HILLS 
 
Sec. 15-195. - Adoption state traffic laws. 
State traffic laws, as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, shall be applicable upon all streets within the Castle Hills Service Area and are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-196. - Violating posted limits. 
It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of any speed limit provided in this article when signs are in place giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-197. - General limit. 
No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the Castle Hills Service Area at a greater speed than 25 miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-198. - Effect of adverse, hazardous conditions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(b)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, drive at an appropriate, reduced speed when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or street or highway conditions. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-199. - Maximum speed limits on specific streets. 
The following streets or portions thereof shall be designated as special speed zones. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle thereon at a speed greater than indicated. 
Street/Road/Highway 	Extent 	Speed 
(mph) 
Windhaven Parkway 	From Old Denton Road (F.M. 2281) to F.M. 544 	30 
Windhaven Parkway 	From a point being the western limit of District 1-F at the City Limit boundary of the City of Lewisville to Josey Lane. 	30 
 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-200. - Maximum speed limits near schools. 
On days when school is in session, the prima facie reasonable and prudent maximum speed of the school zones designated below shall be a speed of 20 miles per hour. No person shall drive a vehicle on any portion of a public street or highway designated as a school zone at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then-existing. Any speed in excess of the maximum speeds listed in the paragraph above shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable and prudent, and therefore, unlawful: (1) when school is in session; and (2) provided that an appropriate sign giving notice thereof is erected. The posted signs shall state the prima facie maximum speed and the times during which the school zone is in effect or operation, or shall state the prima facie maximum speed when flashing and shall be accompanied by a flashing beacon or light during the times the school zone is in effect. The areas or portions of streets designated as school zones are as follows: 
Street/Road/Highway 	Designated School Zone 	Speed 
(mph) 
Avalon Drive 	From Sir Astamore Lane to Holy Grail Dr. 	20 
Holy Grail Drive 	From 180 feet south of Lady of the Lake Blvd. to 130 feet north of Sir Percival Lane. 	20 
King Bors Lane 	From Sir Percival Lane to Avalon Dr. 	20 
King Pelles 	From Avalon Dr. to end of the road. 	20 
Lady Lore Lane 	From 130 feet north of Holy Grail Dr. to Holy Grail Dr. 	20 
Queen Guinevere Drive 	From Sir Percival Lane to Holy Grail Dr. 	20 
Queen Margaret Drive 	From 160 feet west of Sir Constantine Dr. to Holy Grail Dr. 	20 
 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10; 0148-19-ORD , § 1, 9-9-19)  
Sec. 15-201. - Maximum speed limits near schools during the summer months. 
The maximum speed limit within the designated school zone during the hours posted shall be 20 miles per hour during the months of June, July and August during the hours such schools are open for summer school on all such streets and when signs are erected as provided for in section 15-202. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle at a speed greater than such limit. 
Street/Road/Highway 	Designated School Zone 	Speed 
(mph) 
Avalon Drive 	From Sir Astamore Lane to Holy Grail Dr. 	20 
Holy Grail 	From Lady of the Lake to 100 feet north of Avalon. 	20 
King Bors Lane 	From Sir Percival Lane to Avalon Dr. 	20 
King Pelles 	From Avalon Dr. to end of road. 	20 
Lady Lore Lane 	From 130 feet north of Holy Grail Dr. to Holy Grail Dr. 	20 
Queen Guinevere Drive 	From Sir Percival Lane to Holy Grail Dr. 	20 
Queen Margret Drive 	From 160 feet west of Sir Constantine Dr. to Holy Grail Dr. 	20 
 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10; 0148-19-ORD , §§ 2, 3, 9-9-19)  
Sec. 15-202. - Speed limit signs. 
Whenever the speed limit of 25 miles per hour, as prescribed by this article, is, by the provisions of this article or other provisions of this chapter, increased at any intersection or other place or upon any part of a street, the Denton County Fresh Water Supply District No. 1-A ("District") shall erect appropriate signs giving notice of such speed limit, and no such limit shall be effective unless such signs are erected at such intersection or other place or part of such street. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-203. - Altering turns, traffic movement. 
The district shall put up markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to the intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this article be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-204. - Certain turns prohibited. 
Upon those streets and intersections and portions of streets and intersections described and enumerated in this section, motor vehicle turns in the direction indicated shall be prohibited when official traffic control devices are placed within or adjacent to such streets or intersections indicating certain vehicle turns are prohibited: 
Street or Intersection 	Extent 	Type of Turn Prohibited 
Holy Grail Drive entrance to the Castle Hills Elementary School 	Intersection only 	Left turn during school zone hours 
Windhaven Parkway (eastbound) at the first median opening east of Josey Lane 	Intersection Only 	Eastbound U-turn 
 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10; 0237-20-ORD , § 1, 8-3-20)  
Sec. 15-205. - Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited on specific streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to stop, stand, or park upon the following streets or portions thereof at any time when markings on the streets or signs designate no-stopping, no-standing, and/or no-parking zones: 
Street 	Extent 
Avalon Drive 	From Queen Guinevere to King Pelles, both sides of Avalon Drive on school days. 
Holy Grail Drive 	From Castle Hills Elementary School driveway on Holy Grail Drive to Queen Margret Drive, east side of Holy Grail Drive, school days between 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
Polser Road 	From Holy Grail Drive to 650 feet west of Holy Grail Drive, north side of Polser Road. 
Queen Guinevere 	From Holy Grail to Avalon, both sides of Queen Guinevere on school days. 
 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10; 0229-20-ORD , § 1, 7-6-20)  
Sec. 15-206. - Prohibiting parking in excess of 72 hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain parked on any street in the Castle Hills Service Area for a period in excess of 72 continuous hours. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-207. - Amendments to traffic regulations. 
The city shall not make any change to this article without the consent of the district. The city must give 30-days' notice to the district of the specific change and the district may object in writing. If the district does not object in writing within 30 days of receipt of notice, the district shall be deemed to consent to the proposed change. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
Sec. 15-208. - Future traffic regulations. 
(a)  The creation of any future traffic regulations affecting the Castle Hills Service Area, including the posting of speed limits, provision of restricted traffic areas for school zones, installation of traffic control devices and imposition of necessary parking restrictions will be the sole responsibility of the district. Any traffic regulation proposed by the district must comply with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and all applicable state laws, including the Texas Transportation Code. The district shall substantiate any such proposal with an engineering study. 
(b)  The district shall provide written notice to the city of the need to add a new traffic regulation. If the city does not object to the proposed regulation, it shall take all steps necessary to adopt said regulation. The city and district must both consent to the adoption of any new traffic regulations within the Castle Hills Service Area. 
(Ord. No. 3827-12-2010 , § 3, 12-20-10)  
ARTICLE IX. - PARKING VIOLATIONS IN THE OLD TOWN ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 15-209. - Applicability. 
A violation of any provision of this article related to the parking or stopping of a motor vehicle or trailer occurring in the Old Town Entertainment District, as defined in section 9-1 of the city Code, is a civil offense governed by this article. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-210. - Two-hour parking on specific streets and alleys. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain parked upon the following streets or portions thereof for a longer period of time than two hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, when markings on the streets or signs designating two-hour parking, are clearly visible: 
Street 	Extent 
Alley north of West Main Street and South of the Wayne Ferguson Plaza 	From the west curb line of North Mill Street, to the east curb line of North Charles Street, unless otherwise provided in section 15-211 
East and West Main Street 	From the west curb line of Kealy Street, to the east curb line of Charles Street, both sides of East and West Main Street, unless otherwise provided in section 15-211 
North Mill Street 	From the south curb line of West Church Street to the north curb line of West Main Street, west side of North Mill Street only 
West Church Street 	From the west curb line of North Mill Street, to the east curb line of North Charles Street, unless otherwise provided in section 15-211 
 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-211. - Twenty-minute parking in marked spaces and alleys. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain parked upon the following streets or portions thereof for a longer period of time than 20 minutes, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, when markings on the streets or signs designating 20-minute parking, are clearly visible: 
Street 	Extent 
Alley north of West Main Street and South of the Wayne Ferguson Plaza 	From the west curb line of North Mill Street, to the east curb line of North Charles Street, in marked spaces only 
East and West Main Street 	From the west curb line of Kealy Street, to the east curb line of Charles Street, both sides of East and West Main Street, in marked spaces only 
 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-212. - Overnight parking prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain parked in any public parking lot continuously between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. when signs are posted. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-213. - Back-in parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain parked upon any street or portions thereof in any manner other than by backing into the parking space, when markings on the streets or signs designating back-in parking are clearly visible. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-214. - Loading zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to stop, stand or park in a loading zone for a longer period of time than 20 minutes when markings on the streets or alleys, or signs designating loading zones are clearly visible. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-215. - Vehicles loading or unloading on a specific portion of West Main Street. 
(a)  Between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to load or unload said vehicle or trailer from a travel lane on West Main Street between the east curb line of Charles Street and the west curb line of Mill Street. 
(b)  At all days and times other than the days and times specified in subsection (a), it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to load or unload said vehicle or trailer from a travel lane on West Main Street between the east curb line of Charles Street and the west curb line of Mill Street for a longer period of time than 20 minutes. 
(c)  While loading or unloading a motor vehicle or trailer as allowed in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer said vehicle or trailer registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to: 
(1)  Block any portion of an adjacent travel lane; or 
(2)  Stand the vehicle or trailer in such a manner that it along with another vehicle or trailer loading or unloading from the adjacent travel lane block all the travel lanes to through traffic. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-216. - Imposition of civil penalty for parking violations. 
(a)  A person found to be in violation of any provision of this article related to the parking or stopping of a motor vehicle or trailer occurring in the Old Town Entertainment District shall be liable to the city and shall owe a civil administrative penalty in an amount not less than $1.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(b)  A hearing officer may, or upon proper appeal, the municipal judge, may assess a parking violation fee in an amount greater than or less than that established by the promulgated schedule of parking violation fees found in section 2-201 of this Code; but said fee may not exceed the limits established by subsection (a). 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-217. - Hearing officers. 
(a)  The city manager or her designee shall appoint one or more hearing officers to administratively adjudicate parking violations for which a parking citation is issued under this article. 
(b)  Hearing officers shall have the authority to administer oaths and to issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. 
(c)  An order compelling the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents may be enforced by the municipal court. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-218. - Citation. 
(a)  A citation for parking or stopping violations may be issued by a peace officer or a parking control officer on a form provided by the chief of police or his designee. Parking control officers shall include any person designated by the city manager or her designee to enforce the provisions of this article in regards to the parking or stopping of motor vehicles or trailers. 
(b)  The citation shall contain all information required by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 682.006 as it now appears or as it may be amended. 
(c)  If the owner or operator of the vehicle is not present at the time of issuance of the citation, the citation may be issued by affixing the citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. The original and all copies, including electronic copies, of a citation are prima facie evidence that the citation was issued and that an attempt at service was made in accordance with this section. 
(d)  The citation shall provide that the owner or operator of the vehicle charged with a parking or stopping offense shall have the right to an administrative adjudication hearing or an instanter hearing to determine the issue of liability for the charged offense. Said hearing shall be held within 30 calendar days of the date of the citation. 
(e)  Payment of civil fines, costs and fees assessed under this article operates as an admission of liability for the parking or stopping violation and is the final disposition of the violation charge. 
(f)  The original or any copy of the citation or summons is a record kept in the ordinary course of business in the city and is rebuttable proof of the facts it contains. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-219. - Presumption of ownership. 
(a)  In a hearing under this article, it is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person who parked or stopped the vehicle at the time and place of the offense charged. The Texas Department of Transportation's computer generated record of the registered vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record. 
(b)  A registered owner is not liable if, not later than the 30th calendar day after the date upon which the citation was issued, the owner provides to the parking adjudication office: 
(1)  An affidavit and documents that establish that the vehicle was sold prior to the date and time of the violation; or 
(2)  A copy of the police report and an affidavit stating that the vehicle was stolen at the time of the violation. 
(c)  A registered owner engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles under written rental or leasing agreements is not liable if, not later than the 30th calendar day after the date of the citation, the owner provides to the parking adjudication office: 
(1)  An affidavit stating the name, address, and driver's license number with state of issuance, of the person in possession of the vehicle at the time the parking citation was issued; or 
(2)  A copy of the lease or rental agreement in effect at the time the parking citation was issued that includes the name, address, and driver's license number of the person that leased the vehicle, along with an affidavit. 
(d)  If the registered owner provides the information required in subsection (c), it is presumed that the individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the citation and a citation may be sent to that individual at the address provided by the owner of the motor vehicle. 
(e)  A registered owner engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles who fails to comply with subsection (c) is liable for civil fines, costs, and fees as the registered owner of a vehicle. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-220. - Answering the citation. 
A person issued a citation shall answer the citation in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Not later than the 30th calendar day after the date of the citation, pay the applicable civil fine and any additional fees which may apply. A person may pay in person, by mail, or by other method of payment provided for by the city manager or her designee; 
(2)  Not later than the 30th calendar day after the date of the citation, appear before a hearing officer at a hearing at the time and place provided for in the citation; or 
(3)  Not later than the 30th calendar day after the date of the citation, appear before a hearing officer at an instanter hearing. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-221. - Hearings. 
(a)  At a hearing before the hearing officer, the owner or operator of the vehicle may either admit or deny the alleged infraction. 
(b)  The Texas Rules of Evidence do not apply to a hearing under this article. 
(c)  At a hearing, the issues must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(d)  No formal or sworn complaint shall be necessary. The hearing officer shall examine the contents of the citation and the evidence related to ownership of the vehicle in question, and shall hear and review the testimony and evidence presented by the owner or operator of the vehicle and the individual who issued the citation, if present. The person who issued the citation or summons is not required to attend the hearing. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue an order stating whether or not the person charged is liable for the violation of any provision of this article related to the parking or stopping of a motor vehicle or trailer and the amount of any civil penalties, costs, or fees assessed against the person. The order shall be filed with the city secretary's office and kept in a separate index and file, in compliance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 682.009 as it now appears or as it may be amended. All such orders shall be kept in a separate index or file by the city secretary using appropriate data processing techniques. 
(f)  A person who is found liable for a violation of any provision of this article related to the parking or stopping of a motor vehicle or trailer after a hearing shall pay the civil penalty and fees and costs, if any, within 30 calendar days of the hearing unless an appeal has been filed. A late payment fee shall be due for failure to pay within said 30 calendar days unless an appeal has been filed. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-222. - Failure to appear. 
(a)  Failure to appear at a hearing within 30 calendar days of the date on the citation shall constitute an admission of liability for the charged offense (i.e., administrative default). 
(b)  A person who is found liable for a civil penalty by administrative default shall pay the civil penalty and fees and costs, if any, within 30 calendar days of the finding of administrative default. A late payment fee shall be due for failure to pay within said 30 calendar days. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-223. - Appeal of the administrative hearing. 
(a)  An administrative default may not be appealed to municipal court. 
(b)  A person may appeal the hearing officer's determination to the municipal court of the city by filing a petition and a cash bond with the clerk of the municipal court not later than the 30th calendar day after the date of the hearing officer's order. The amount of the cash bond shall include the civil penalty, fees and costs, if any, and an additional appellate filing fee. 
(c)  After receiving a petition for appeal and the cash bond, the municipal clerk shall schedule a hearing before the municipal judge and notify all parties of the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(d)  The appeal hearing shall be a trial de novo. The municipal court judge shall examine any evidence presented and if the municipal judge determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the violation was committed by the owner or operator of the vehicle, the municipal court judge shall find the owner or operator of the vehicle liable therefore. A person who is found liable upon appeal shall pay the civil penalty, fees and costs within ten calendar days of the hearing. The cash bond provided may be used to pay any civil penalties, fees or costs assessed. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-224. - Enforcement. 
An order filed by a hearing officer under this article finding liability or a fine, cost, or fee imposed under this article following an administrative default may be enforced by: 
(1)  Impounding the vehicle if the offender has committed three or more vehicle parking or stopping offenses in a calendar year; 
(2)  Placing a device on the vehicle that prohibits the movement of a motor vehicle if the offender has committed two or more vehicle parking or stopping offenses in a calendar year; 
(3)  Imposing an additional fine to a civil fine not paid within the specified time; 
(4)  Denying issuance of or revoking a parking or operating permit, as applicable; or 
(5)  Filing an action to collect the fine, cost or fee in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-225. - Procedures for immobilization and/or impoundment. 
(a)  When a vehicle is found parked, whether legally or illegally, at any time upon a public street or public property in the city and such vehicle has met the criteria for immobilization or impoundment as provided in section 15-224, any police officer may immobilize the vehicle by the installation on or attachment to the vehicle of a device designed to prohibit the movement of the vehicle. In the alternative, such vehicle may be towed and impounded, provided that the towing and impoundment is authorized at the direction of a peace officer. 
(b)  At the time of immobilization, the police officer shall also conspicuously attach to the vehicle a written notice on a form provided by the city; said notice to contain the following information: 
(1)  Notice that the vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to this article, and that attempted movement may cause damage to the vehicle; 
(2)  That release of the vehicle may be obtained at a designated place; 
(3)  That the owner may request a meeting regarding the immobilization; and 
(4)  That the vehicle may be towed and impounded after a designated period of time. 
(c)  Any vehicle which remains immobilized at 4:00 p.m. on the day it was immobilized may be towed and impounded, provided that the towing and impoundment is authorized at the direction of a peace officer. 
(d)  In the event that a vehicle is towed and impounded, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for payment of applicable fees for towing, impoundment, and storage in addition to the fines, costs, and fees provided for under this article. Towed vehicles that are not redeemed within 30 days shall be subject to disposition in the manner provided by state law. 
(e)  This section is to be cumulative of existing law, and nothing herein shall be construed to restrict or limit the right to tow and impound vehicles under other applicable law. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-226. - Immobilization device removal and payment of towing fees. 
(a)  The registered owner of an immobilized or impounded vehicle, or other authorized person, may secure the release of the vehicle upon payment of fines and fees or the posting of a cash bond in the amount of the fine, fees, if any, and costs, if any, for each delinquent parking citation in addition to an immobilization device fee, if applicable. 
(b)  If, prior to release of the vehicle from impoundment, or prior to removal of the immobilization device, the owner or operator of the vehicle posts a cash bond in the total amount of the fine and all fees for each parking citation and the immobilization device fee, if applicable, the posting of the bond shall constitute a notice of appeal. If after the hours of operation of the municipal court clerk's office, the bond may be posted with the police department on a bond form approved by the city manager or her designee. The municipal court, shall within 30 days after the posting of cash bond, provide the owner or operator of the vehicle with notice of the time, date and place of an administrative hearing. 
(c)  If a vehicle has been towed, the owner or authorized person shall be responsible to the towing company for all towing and storage fees. 
(d)  Payment of the fines, fees and immobilization device fee (if applicable) without first posting a bond shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest such fines and fees. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Sec. 15-227. - Certain conduct unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the city acting in the course and scope of his duties under this article, to remove or attempt to remove or to tamper in any manner with an immobilization device installed on any vehicle pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except under the direction of a peace officer, to tow or move or to cause to be towed or moved any vehicle on which an immobilization device is then installed pursuant to this article from the place where it was immobilized. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the city acting in the course and scope of his duties or the owner or operator of the vehicle of an immobilized vehicle, to remove or relocate any notice placed upon an immobilized vehicle pursuant to this article. 
(d)  Any violation of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-15 of this Code. 
( 0004-18-ORD , § II(Exh. A), 1-8-18)  
Secs. 15-228—15-250. - Reserved.  
Chapter 16 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Power regarding utilities, § 2.01; utilities, § 10.01 et seq.; franchises, § 10.02; extension of public utility, § 10.07. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 4; plumbing standards, § 4-111 et seq.; off-street parking and loading requirements, § 6-36 et seq.; permits for public works construction in the rights-of-way and easement required, § 6-61 et seq.; requirements for improvements on land served by substandard public improvements, § 6-436 et seq.; specific standard for public improvements, § 6-461 et seq.; requirements for improvements on land served by substandard public improvements, § 6-436 et seq.; cemetery sewer line requirements in the land development regulation, § 6-651 et seq.; solid waste utility, ch. 12. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 16-1—16-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Utilities, § 10.01 et seq. 
Cross reference— Inadequate sanitation constituting substandard building, § 4-311. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
After-hours shall mean between 10:00 p.m. and 6:59 a.m. on Monday through Friday and all day on Saturdays, Sundays, and designated city holidays. 
Approved shall mean accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the control authority. 
Basin shall mean a holding tank used to equalize the flow of wastewater and allowing for settling or mixing. 
Combined inspection port shall mean a point of access where all wastewater discharged from a facility is combined prior to entering any other discharge line. 
Control authority shall mean the director of the health and code enforcement division of the department of community development, or other official designated by the city manager of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Disposal shall mean the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid, semi-solid or liquid waste, organic compounds, septage or any other contaminant into or on any land or water. 
Disposal site shall mean a permitted site or part of a site at which interceptor waste or septage is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which such waste will remain after closure of the disposal site. 
Disposer shall mean a person who receives, stores, retains, processes or disposes of waste. 
Food service establishment shall mean an establishment whose primary function is preparing food that is intended for individual consumption on site. 
Generator shall mean a person who causes, creates, generates or otherwise produces interceptor waste or septage. 
Hazardous waste shall mean any liquid, semi-liquid or solid waste (or combination of wastes), which because of its quantity, concentration, physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Be toxic, corrosive, an irritant, a strong sensitizer, flammable or combustible, explosive or otherwise capable of causing substantial personal injury or illness; and/or 
(2)  Pose a substantial hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise improperly managed, and is identified or listed as a hazardous waste as defined by the Texas Solid Waste Disposal Act or the Administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended. 
Industrial waste hearing board shall mean a board appointed according to the provisions of section 16-51 et seq. 
Interceptor shall mean a device designed and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious or undesirable matter such as grease, oil, sand and grit from normal waste and permit normal sewage or liquid waste to discharge into the sewer system by gravity. 
Interceptor waste shall mean undesirable matter such as grease, oil, sand or grit separated and retained in an interceptor. 
Manifest system shall mean a system consisting of a four-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of interceptor waste and septage. 
Milligram/liter (mg/l) shall mean one part of a substance by weight per every one million parts of water by weight. 
Normal working hours shall mean between 7:00 a.m. and 9:59 p.m. on Monday through Friday. 
Owner shall mean the person who owns a facility or part of a facility and generates waste either solid, liquid or gaseous. 
Permit shall mean the formal written document issued to a person by the control authority authorizing the collection of interceptor waste and septage. 
Permittee shall mean a person granted a permit under this article. 
Person shall mean an individual, corporation (including a government corporation), organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission, or any other legal entity. 
Private line shall mean the privately-owned sewer line from the building or dwelling to the right-of-way. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not normally admitted. 
Septage shall mean waste removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic tank. 
Single service kitchen shall mean a fast food type of restaurant operation where all plates, cups, knives, forks, spoons, etc. used for serving and consuming food products are used only one time and then discarded. 
Special wastes shall mean any waste that, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, require special handling and disposal to protect human health or the environment. 
Spill shall mean the accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of interceptor waste, septage or other material normally not found in the affected area. 
Tank shall mean a device designed to contain an accumulation of interceptor waste or septage which is constructed primarily of nonearthen materials (i.e. concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the containment. 
TDH shall mean the Texas Department of Health. 
TNRCC shall mean the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. 
Transporter shall mean a person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting waste. 
Trap shall mean a device designed to retain grease from one to a maximum of four fixtures that does not exceed a grease retainment capacity of 100 pounds or exceed a rate of flow per minute of 50 gallons. 
Trip ticket shall mean the shipping document signed by the transporter, generator and disposer of waste which contains the information required by the control authority. 
TWC shall mean the Texas Water Commission. 
Vehicle shall mean a mobile device in which or by which waste may be transported upon a public street or highway. 
Waste shall mean interceptor waste and septage for the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 2, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 2210-4-97, § I, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 3797-09-2010 , § 1, 9-13-10) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-27. - Purpose. 
It is the intention of the city to enact an ordinance designed to protect the generators and transporters of interceptor waste and septage. Authorization to enact such ordinance is vested in the general police powers of the city and state and is more specifically granted under the rules developed by the Texas Department of Health consistent with the Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 361.022, 361.024, 361.036 and 361.097—361.108, and "Dillon's Rules," the latter principle of jurisprudence stating that the city may enact rules equal to or more stringent than state rules. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 1, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-28. - Enforcement. 
The control authority shall be vested with the authority and responsibility for the enforcement and implementation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 17, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-29. - Penalties. 
(a)  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment. 
(b)  Any person, operator or owner who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-15. Each violation and each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be charged accordingly. 
(c)  Any person found to be guilty of violating provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate clean-up and proper disposal of such waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of the assessed clean-up costs shall be levied by the city against the guilty person. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 16, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-30. - Connection to sewer required. 
All owners or occupants of buildings, or agents for the owners, situated in any section of the city where a sanitary sewer exists, and where the property line of the land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within 100 feet of any such sewer are hereby required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on their property, and connect the same with the city sewer, under the supervision of the sanitary inspector. Where there exists a septic tank in proper sanitary working condition it may be permitted to remain in use until such time as it may be found to be unsanitary, when it may be ordered removed by the sanitary inspector upon ten days' notice to the owner thereof, and all facilities shall be connected to the city sewer, as required by this article. 
(Code 1990, § 2-3-1)  
Sec. 16-31. - Privy vaults prohibited. 
It shall be the duty of any such property owners or occupants of such property to keep and maintain the water closet and connection thereof in perfect condition and free from any obstruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or use any privy vault above or below the ground in the city or on any lot or parcel of land, the property line of which, at any point, extends to within a distance of 100 feet of a city sanitary sewer. All persons now having such privies in such locations are hereby required to abate the same within 30 days after notice by the sanitary inspector, to do so, and to construct and to put in water closets and connect the same with the city sewer, as required by this article. 
(Code 1990, § 2-3-2)  
Sec. 16-32. - Water closets required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building situated on a lot which extends within 100 feet of any sewer of the city and any portion of such building is used for any purpose, during any portion of the day, to fail to have at least one water closet connected with the city sewer within 30 days after notice from the sanitary inspector, to do so, and to fail to have the water closet suitably arranged for use as a urinal, unless a separate urinal is provided. 
(Code 1990, § 2-3-3)  
Sec. 16-33. - Waste water disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owners and occupants of any building, situated within 100 feet of any sanitary sewer, in which building food is cooked or clothing is washed, to fail to have a suitable sink or hopper for the reception of wastewater; provided, however, that if the water closet is of the kind suited to such use it may receive the wastewater, and the sink or hopper may be dispensed with. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, or allow any person under his control, to throw or deposit on the surface of the ground, or in any hole or vault, in or under the surface of the ground, on any lot reaching within 100 feet of any city sanitary sewer, except in the proper and necessary manuring of the soil, any water, which has been used for domestic purposes, or any liquid or solid filth, feces or urine. 
(Code 1990, § 2-3-4)  
Sec. 16-34. - Deposit of garbage in sewer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit, or cause or permit anyone under his control, to throw or deposit in any city sewer, or in any vessel or receptacles connected with any city sewer, any garbage, hair, ashes, fruits or vegetable peelings, or refuse, rags, cotton, cinders or any other matter whatsoever, except feces, urine, necessary watercloset or toilet paper and liquid slops. 
(Code 1990, § 2-3-5)  
Sec. 16-35. - Waste flowing in streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to connect all wash stands or slop stands in his house or yard with the city sewer, or to allow any slops, wash or waste waters of any kind to flow over the pavement or into any open gutter or into the street. 
(Code 1990, § 2-3-6)  
Sec. 16-36. - Notice of issuance of sewer connection permit. 
It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector, whenever any permit for sewer connection shall be granted by him to file a statement of that fact with the water department. 
(Code 1990, § 2-3-7)  
Sec. 16-37. - Right to enter property. 
(a)  The control authority and other duly authorized representatives of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the activities of a city employee. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 19, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-38. - Hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any person who generates, transports, stores or disposes of any waste classified as hazardous must comply with all federal and state regulations governing hazardous waste. 
(b)  Transporters of hazardous wastes must have the applicable Texas Department of Health or Texas Water Commission permit and use the appropriate manifest system. 
(c)  No vehicle transporting hazardous material shall be allowed to enter a residential area. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 14, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-39. - Rules and regulations. 
The control authority may promulgate rules and regulations and may undertake immediate action as necessary to carry out the provisions of this article and protect the public from health and safety hazards. The control authority may amend any permit issued hereunder to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 12, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-40. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes false statements, representation or certification on any application, records, reports, plans or other documents filed or required pursuant to this article or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate methods for disposal as required by this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-15. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 20, 11-19-90)  
Secs. 16-41—16-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE HEARING BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-46 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-51. - Creation. 
The industrial waste hearing board shall be established to meet as needed for arbitration of differences between the control authority and a permittee or sewer users on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article. The board shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this article shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 18(a), 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-52. - Membership. 
The industrial waste hearing board shall consist of the same members appointed to the zoning board of adjustment provided for in section 17-35(a)(2). 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 18(b), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 2687-6-2001, § 1, 6-4-01)  
Sec. 16-53. - Officers. 
The industrial waste hearing board shall select from among its members a chairman and vice chairman each of whom shall serve for a period of one year or until his successor is elected. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 18(c), 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-54. - Meetings. 
Meetings of the industrial waste hearing board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings which shall be filed and maintained in the office of the control authority. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 18(d), 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-55. - Petitioners. 
Petitioners shall request, in writing, to appear before the industrial waste hearing board. Requests to appear should be addressed to the control authority. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 18(e), 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-56. - Fee. 
A fee, as set out in section 2-201, will be charged to the petitioner for actions involving the industrial waste hearing board. This fee shall be used to cover administrative costs and should be included with the written request. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 18(f), 11-19-90)  
Secs. 16-57—16-65. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 16-66. - Accumulation of waste. 
A person commits an offense if he allows waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health to accumulate upon property under his control. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 7, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-67. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he unloads or offers for sale or exchange waste, except at a place permitted by the city, state or federal government. 
(b)  Waste from chemical/portable toilets and/or septic systems located within the city may be disposed of at the city's wastewater treatment facility at a designated disposal site by a city permitted waste hauler. 
(c)  Interceptor waste shall not be deposited into the city's collection system, streams or treatment facilities. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if he deposits or discharges waste onto a street, into a storm sewer, or an area that drains into an improved or nonimproved storm sewer system, drainage system, onto the ground or into any surface water. 
(e)  A transporter whose business establishment is located in the city and is in compliance with this section may dispose of chemical/portable toilet and/or septic system waste at the city's wastewater treatment facility at a designated disposal site. Disposal fees applicable to industrial customers shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 8, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 2210-4-97, § I, 4-14-97)  
Sec. 16-68. - Responsibilities of waste generators. 
(a)  A generator of waste shall have all such waste material collected from the premises by a transporter who holds a valid permit from the city. The waste shall be transported to an approved site for disposal. 
(b)  A generator of wastes shall not have hazardous wastes or waste in combination with hazardous waste removed from his premises by a waste hauler operating under a city permit. 
(c)  A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter when the waste is received by the transporter and shall keep a copy of all trip tickets for a period of two years. The control authority may inspect collection or disposal records during normal business hours. 
(d)  A generator shall: 
(1)  Install or provide a collection device of size and type specified by this article; 
(2)  Maintain collection devices in continuous, proper operation; 
(3)  Supervise proper cleaning of collection devices; 
(4)  Report spills and accidents involving collection devices to the control authority immediately; 
(5)  Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material disposed of by a permitted transporter by proper means; and 
(6)  Clearly post emergency telephone numbers for all employees. 
(e)  No person shall discharge flammable substances, grease, wastewater containing grease, oil or sand/grit into the sanitary sewer system. If existing operations generate such discharges, interceptors or traps shall be required. 
(f)  The owner shall be responsible for the design and installation of the interceptor or trap. The interceptor or trap shall inhibit the specific material from entering the wastewater collection system. 
(g)  Oil, sand and grease interceptors or traps shall be required on new nonresidential waste-generating facilities as determined by the control authority. Existing facilities may be required to install an interceptor or trap if their wastewater discharge contains concentrations of fats, oils and grease in excess of 100 mg/l or contains sand and grit in concentrations determined by the control authority to be detrimental to the collection and treatment system. 
(h)  Any person responsible for discharge requiring an interceptor or trap shall, at his own expense: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity acceptable to the control authority. The control authority shall not be held liable for inefficient devices or design; 
(2)  Locate the interceptor or trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; 
(3)  Maintain the interceptor or trap in an effective operating condition; and 
(4)  Provide routine inspection and cleaning every six months, or when discharges of fats, oils, or grease are in excess of 100 mg/l, or whenever sludge in the bottom of the unit exceeds ten inches in depth, or as deemed necessary by the generator and/or control authority. 
(i)  Interceptors and traps shall be installed outside of the food preparation building at all times. Exceptions will be granted only through action of the industrial waste hearing board as described in section 16-51 et seq. 
(j)  Policy may be established to allow for sampling and monitoring of all interceptors and traps. Should the interceptor or trap fail to meet the requirements of this article and allow a discharge of fats, oils or grease in excess of 100 mg/l or sand/grit in excessive concentrations, modification or replacement of the unit may be required. 
(k)  Influent to interceptors and traps shall not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(l)  The control authority, upon review, may require a larger interceptor or trap based upon experience of the industrial process, documented compliance or noncompliance of interceptors or traps, or monitoring of such commercial user. 
(m)  Garbage grinders, mop sinks, hand sinks, scullery sinks and floor drains in the food preparation area shall be required to drain through the grease unit. 
(n)  All interceptors and traps shall be installed to conform with the city's plumbing code and this article. 
(o)  All waste generators covered under this section shall be required to have a combined inspection port. 
(p)  Existing facilities that change ownership or operation may be required to meet all requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 9, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 2210-4-97, § I, 4-14-97)  
Secs. 16-69—16-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3102-08-2004, § II, adopted Aug. 2, 2004, repealed sections 16-69—16-72 in their entirety. Former sections 16-69—16-72 pertained to sizing of grease receptacles, sand/grit and oil interceptors, and acid/alkali dilution basins, and derived from Ord. No. 1583-11-90, §§ 10(a)—(d), adopted Nov. 19, 1990; Ord. No. 2210-4-97, § I, adopted April 14, 1997  
Sec. 16-73. - Responsibilities of waste disposers. 
(a)  A waste disposer commits an offense if he allows accumulation of waste on his premises so that rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or health hazard. 
(b)  A waste disposer shall: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits required by local, state or federal regulations; 
(2)  Accept waste only from a permitted transporter; 
(3)  Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two years; 
(4)  Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by local, state, and/or federal licenses or permits; and 
(5)  Make available all records for inspection by the control authority during normal business hours. 
(c)  The city wastewater treatment facility will accept, at a designated disposal site, domestic waste from chemical/portable toilets and septic tank systems located within the city. The city has the right to refuse any waste. 
(d)  Interceptor waste shall not be received by the city wastewater facility. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 11, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 2210-4-97, § I, 4-14-97)  
Secs. 16-74—16-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TRANSPORTING WASTE 
 
Sec. 16-86. - Waste transportation permit—Required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a vehicle for the purpose of transporting waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of waste and the control authority shall designate on the permit the type of waste authorized for transportation for the vehicle. A separate permit number is issued for each vehicle. 
(b)  A person who desires to obtain a permit must make application on a form provided by the control authority. 
(c)  A person who desires to obtain a permit must submit to the control authority, at the time of application, a list of approved drivers and their Texas driver's license numbers. 
(d)  The control authority shall not issue a permit unless the applicant submits for inspection by the control authority, the vehicle the applicant proposes to use to transport waste and the vehicle is found by the control authority to be constructed and equipped in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  A permit is not transferable. 
(f)  Permits must be renewed annually and each vehicle must be inspected prior to renewal. 
(g)  No permit issued by the city shall approve the hauling of materials that are hazardous in nature. Only those wastes designated on a vehicle's permit shall be transported by such vehicle. 
(h)  Each applicant must specify the disposal site to be used for the authorized disposal of waste. The control authority shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit period. 
(i)  Permits shall be issued by the control authority. 
(j)  The permittee shall be inspected periodically as directed by the control authority. 
(k)  The control authority shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. A person shall pay a fee which is set out in section 2-201 for each vehicle operated by the person. Additional vehicles permitted will maintain the same renewal date as the initial vehicle. 
(l)  The control authority shall number permits consecutively, and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each vehicle, in a color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or larger, the business name, the TDH registration number, and the following: 
LVTX (permit #) 
The permit holder shall place the business name, the TDH registration number and the vehicle permit number on each side of the vehicle before the vehicle is operated in the city. The permit holder shall keep the permit, or a copy of the permit, in the vehicle at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 3, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-87. - Same—Denial, suspension, revocation. 
(a)  The control authority may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under this article and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee: 
(1)  Has violated a provision of this article; 
(2)  Has failed to pay a required fee; 
(3)  Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements; or 
(4)  Has failed to submit completed trip tickets to the control authority. 
(b)  After suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. If all violations have been corrected, precautions have been taken to prevent future violations and all required fees have been paid, the control authority may reinstate the permit. 
(c)  The control authority may revoke, for a period of one year or less, all city permits held by a waste transporter if the transporter or an employee of the transporter, violates this article, any rule or regulation promulgated by the control authority, applicable provisions of other city ordinances, or state or federal regulations. 
(d)  A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport or dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 13, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-88. - Same—Appeals. 
If the control authority suspends or revokes a permit, he shall send to the permit holder, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action. If issuance of a permit is denied, the reason for the denial shall be explained to the applicant verbally or in writing. In each case, the applicant shall be informed of his right to appeal the decision to the industrial waste hearing board in accordance with the procedure outlined in section 16-51 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 15, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-89. - Waste transporting vehicles—Maintenance. 
(a)  A waste transporter shall: 
(1)  Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections and other appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks; 
(2)  Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank; and 
(3)  Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and the vehicle odor-free at the beginning of each workday. 
(b)  The control authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this section, and he may authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The control authority may also revoke the permit of an improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked, an appeal may be filed by the transporter pursuant to section 16-88. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 4, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-90. - Same—Inspection. 
A waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the control authority prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit with qualifications as follows: 
(1)  Use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of vehicle to transport wastes. Portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in, or on, vehicles are prohibited. 
(2)  Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to tank and/or vehicle. 
(3)  Tank shall be liquid tight. 
(4)  Tanks, piping, valves and connections shall be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned. 
(5)  Inlets, outlets, and any other opening or connection of the vehicle shall be constructed so that collected material will not spill during filling, transferring or transporting. 
(6)  Outlets, pumps, valves, diaphragms and other appurtenances shall be of a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled, capable of operation without spillage, spray or leakage and capable of being easily disassembled for cleaning. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 5, 11-19-90)  
Sec. 16-91. - Responsibilities of a waste transporter. 
(a)  Before accepting waste for transport, a waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be transported and that the equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without spillage or leakage. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste. 
(b)  A transporter with a city waste transporter permit shall not transport materials that are hazardous as defined in section 16-26 in vehicles permitted by the city for transporting waste. 
(c)  A transporter holding a city permit must use a disposal site permitted and approved by the city, state or federal government. 
(d)  A manifest system, consisting of a five-part trip ticket, shall be used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of all waste regulated by this article generated in the city. The control authority shall not issue trip tickets to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. A person shall pay a fee which is set out in section 2-201 for trip tickets and trip tickets shall be used as follows: 
(1)  The trip tickets shall be obtained by the transporter from the control authority. 
(2)  A transporter shall complete one trip ticket for each location serviced, with the exception of chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units. Chemical/portable toilet companies servicing their own units shall complete one trip ticket for each vehicle load transported. Proof of units collected may be required at the discretion of the control authority. 
(3)  The white copy of the trip ticket, signed by the transporter and generator at the time of waste collection and yellow copy maintained by the generator. 
(4)  The white copy of the trip ticket signed by the disposer at the time of disposal and pink copy maintained by the disposer. 
(5)  The green copy of the trip ticket maintained by the transporter and the gold copy of the trip ticket to be returned to the generator. 
(6)  The white copy of all completed trip tickets shall be returned, by the transporter, to the control authority within 30 days after completion of the trip ticket, except when an alternate schedule has been approved by the control authority. 
(7)  A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained by the transporter for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 1583-11-90, § 6, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 2210-4-97, § I, 4-14-97)  
Sec. 16-92. - Rules and regulations. 
The control authority may promulgate rules and regulations and may undertake immediate action as necessary to carry out the provisions of this article and protect the public from health and safety hazards. The control authority may amend any permit issued hereunder to ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2210-4-97, § I, 4-14-97)  
Sec. 16-93. - Plan submittal. 
Required engineered plans and/or drawings shall be submitted to the city department of community development, building inspection division. All sizing of grease receptacles, sand/grit interceptors, oil interceptors, and acid/alkali dilution basins must be approved by the city. 
(1)  [The following are required to be submitted for] grease receptacles, sand/grit interceptors, oil interceptors, and acid/alkali dilution basins: 
a.  Two sets of engineer-designed and stamped drawings. 
b.  Required one-fourth-inch scale. 
c.  Size calculations. 
d.  Complete cross-sectional details. 
e.  Location of unit. 
f.  Combined inspection port. 
g.  Influent and effluent inspection ports. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2210-4-97, § I, 4-14-97)  
Secs. 16-94—16-98. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SEWER SERVICE LINE CLEANING 
 
Sec. 16-99. - Cleaning and repair of private residential sanitary sewer service lines. 
(a)  The property owner/occupant is responsible for cleaning/clearing all stoppages in the private residential sanitary sewer service line from the house to the tap at the city sewer main. The city will not clean/clear any stoppages located in the private sanitary sewer service line regardless of the location of the stoppage. 
(b)  The property owner/occupant is responsible for all repairs, including emergency repairs, to the private residential sanitary sewer service line from the house to the house side edge of the sidewalk if a sidewalk is present, or to the house side edge of the street pavement/back of curb if no sidewalk is present. If the residential sanitary sewer service line runs into the alley, the property owner/occupant is responsible for all repairs from the house to the house side edge of the alley pavement. 
(c)  The city will schedule and investigate reported private residential sanitary sewer service line defects that are located between the house side edge of the sidewalk, the house side edge of the street pavement/back of curb, or the house side edge of the alley pavement, and the city sewer main. If the city confirms that there is a defect in the private residential sanitary sewer service line, located between the house side edge of the sidewalk, street pavement/back of curb, or alley pavement and the city sewer main, the city will schedule and complete repairs to the service line at no cost to the property owner/occupant. 
(Ord. No. 3797-09-2010 , § 2, 9-13-10; Ord. No. 3981-02-2013 , § 1, 2-4-13)  
Sec. 16-100. - Procedure. 
(a)  The property owner/occupant is responsible for cleaning/clearing all private residential sanitary sewer service line stoppages. 
(b)  If the property owner/occupant determines via camera inspection by a licensed plumber, or by other valid means, that there is a defective service line pipe located between the house side edge of the sidewalk, street, or alley pavement and the city sewer main, the owner/occupant or their plumber should contact the city to schedule an inspection. 
(c)  The city may reverify property owner/occupant camera inspection report. If there is no functional clean out connection near the street for access to the service line, the property owner/occupant, who must be at least 18 years of age or older, must sign a consent/release form provided by the city before the city can perform the reverification camera inspection using the clean out near the house. The property owner/occupant is responsible for locating any clean out, or installing one if one does not exist. City employees shall not enter onto private property to perform any work to locate the clean out or make any alteration to the clean out. If the camera inspection confirms the location of the defect within the edge of the sidewalk, street or alley pavement, the city will schedule and complete repairs at no cost to the owner/occupant. 
(d)  The maintenance and repair of private residential sanitary sewer service lines is the responsibility of the property owner. All city codes and ordinances must be followed regarding repair work. 
(Ord. No. 3797-09-2010 , § 2, 9-13-10; Ord. No. 3981-02-2013 , § 2, 2-4-13)  
Secs. 16-101—16-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, adopted Feb. 4, 2010, repealed Art. III, §§ 16-111—16-137, in its entirety and replaced it with a new Art. III, §§ 16-111—16-137. Former Art. III pertained to industrial wastes and derived from Ord. No. 2540-2-2000, § I, 2-7-00; Ord. No. 2795-04-2002, § 1, 4-1-02. 
 
Sec. 16-111. - Compliance with other authority. 
(a)  Compliance with federal authority. The city shall comply with, enforce and adopt all federal general pretreatment regulations and federal categorical pretreatment regulations, including the implementation of a pretreatment program approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Industrial users within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.), the federal general pretreatment regulations and with those federal categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each. The categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N is hereby incorporated. 
(b)  Compliance with state authority. The city shall comply with, enforce and adopt all applicable sections of V.T.C.A., Texas Water Code Ch. 26, as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
(c)  Right of revision. The city reserves the right to revise and to establish, by ordinance or into industrial waste permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.13(c)(3)(f). 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-112. - Objectives. 
The objective of this article is to establish the responsibilities of the city, industry and the public to implement national pretreatment standards by providing regulations which: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's POTW, which will interfere with the operation of a POTW, including interference with its use or disposal of municipal sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's POTW, which will pass through the treatment works or otherwise be incompatible with such works; 
(3)  Improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim municipal and industrial wastewaters and sludges; and 
(4)  Protect the general public and the city's POTW personnel. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-113. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as it now exists or as hereafter amended, (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.). 
Amalgam process wastewater: means any wastewater generated and discharged by a dental discharger through the practice of dentistry that may contain dental amalgam. 
Amalgam separator: means a collection device designed to capture and remove dental amalgam from the amalgam process wastewater of a dental facility. 
Approval authority: The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). 
Authorized official: A responsible corporate officer if the industrial user is a corporation, a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively, a director or highest official appointed to oversee the operation and performance activities if the industrial user is a federal, state or local government or a representative of these individuals who is responsible for the overall operation of the facility or for environmental matters and being so, is authorized, in writing, to the control authority. 
Best management practices or BMPs: Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR Sections 403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
BOD: Biochemical oxygen demand defined as the quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/L, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees Centigrade; 
Bypass: The intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
Categorical industrial user: An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of industrial users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405-471. 
Chemical oxygen demand or COD: The quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures, usually expressed as a concentration in mg/l. 
City: The City of Lewisville, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
Code of Federal Regulations or CFR: A codification of the general and permanent rules published in the federal register by the executive departments and agencies of the federal government. 
Composite sample: A sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample: composed of discrete sample aliquots collected in one container at constant time intervals providing representative samples irrespective of stream flow; or as a flow proportional composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to stream flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots, or as defined by 40 CFR 403 Appendix E, as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Control authority or CA: The director of public services (or other official designated by the city manager) of the city, or his duly authorized agent or representative. 
Control point: A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer, also known as an inspection port and/or control manhole. 
Daily maximum: The maximum allowable discharge of pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily maximum is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily maximum is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
Dental amalgam: means an alloy of elemental mercury and other metal(s) that is used in the practice of dentistry. 
Dental discharger: means a facility where the practice of dentistry is performed, including, but not limited to, institutions, permanent or temporary offices, clinics, home offices, and facilities owned and operated by federal, state or local governments, that discharges wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). Dental dischargers are regulated industrial users according to 40 CFR Part 441. 
Discharge: To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Domestic sewage or wastewater: Water-borne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartments, houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial waste. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Gallons per day or GPD: A measurement of flow rate. 
Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15 minutes), or as defined by 40 CFR 403 Appendix E, as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Hazardous waste: As defined by 40 CFR 261, as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Indirect discharge: The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source within the jurisdiction of this article, [40 CFR 403.3(i), as it now exists or as hereafter amended]. 
Industrial user or user or IU: A source of indirect discharge, [40 CFR 403.3(j), as it now exists or as hereafter amended]. 
Industrial waste: Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business. 
Industrial waste surcharge: The charge assessed an industrial user for discharging into the city's sewer system, an industrial waste which is of greater strength than domestic sewage. 
Inspection port: See definition of Control point. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit: The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and duration of the sampling event. 
Interceptor: A device designed and installed to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from normal wastewater and permit normal sewage or liquid waste to discharge into the disposal system by gravity. 
Interference: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES or TPDES permit, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued there under, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act; or as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(k), as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Medical waste: Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
mg/L: Milligrams per liter as a weight-to-volume ratio, equivalent to parts per million. 
Monthly average limit: The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
National categorical standard orpretreatment standard: Any regulations containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the approval authority in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, that apply to a specific category of industrial user. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. in accordance with 40 CFR 403.3(l), as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of sections (1)b or (1)c above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph; or as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(m), as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Non-contact cooling water: Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Normal domestic sewage: Normal sewage for the city in which the concentration of total suspended solids and five-day 20° C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) is established at 240 milligrams per liter, by weight, on the basis of the normal daily concentration of 0.20 pounds per capita, per 100 gallons. 
NPDES permit: The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to the POTW pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act. 
Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirements of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation; or as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(p), as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trusts, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH: The logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration (the negative log of the hydrogen ion). 
Pollutant: Dredge spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and concentration characteristics of certain wastewater. 
Pollution: A condition created by the presence of harmful or objectionable material, pollutants. 
Pretreatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard, or as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(s), as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Pretreatment requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard, or as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(r), as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Pretreatment standards: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits including, but not limited to, national pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, prohibited discharge limits and local discharge limits. 
Process wastewater: Any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges: Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in subsection 16-114(a) of this article. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW: The city's publicly owned treatment works including any devices and systems used in storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature. This definition also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. The term also includes the city which has jurisdiction over the discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works. 
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act or RCRA: Statutory provisions and regulations as provided in Title II of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA). 
Sanitary sewer: A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastewater or a combination of both, and into which stormwater, surface water, ground water, and other polluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Shall: Wherever used in this article will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; "may" is permissive. 
Significant industrial user or SIU: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the control authority may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user; or as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(v), as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
Significant  noncompliance or SNC: As defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii)(A-H), as it now exists or as hereafter amended, which includes: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I); 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under paragraph (f)(1)(vi)(B) of 40 CFR 403.8 to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the POTW determines will adversely affect the operation of the local pretreatment program. 
Slug: Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge, or pollutant which may include oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which may cause an interference to the POTW, pass-through to the receiving stream, sludge contamination or endangerment to the POTW personnel, or in any other way violate the control authority's regulations, local limits, or permit conditions, as defined in 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(2)(vi). 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) code: As defined by the U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census and further defined in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm sewer: A public sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage, into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
TCEQ: The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, any duly authorized official of said agency, or any successor agency. 
Total suspended solids or TSS: Solids measured in mg/L that float on the surface or, are in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
TPDES: The Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, or the state regulatory authority to administer the NPDES program and requirements of certain sections of the federal Clean Water Act. 
Unpolluted wastewater: Stormwater, unpolluted groundwater, roof runoff, downspouts, yard fountains, pools, cooling water, drainage, or water which does not contain pollutants. 
USC: The United States Code. 
USEPA: The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Wastewater: A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater service charge: The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater. 
Watercourse: A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-114. - Discharge prohibitions and limitations. 
(a)  General discharge prohibitions. 
(1)  No person shall discharge into public sewers: 
a.  Any substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or excessive loading, interference or pass-through to the POTW. 
b.  Solid or viscous substances, or substances which may become solid or viscous at temperatures between zero and 40 degrees Centigrade in amounts capable of causing obstruction of the flow in the POTW. 
c.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the POTW's discharge permit. 
d.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
e.  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil and other flammable or explosive liquids which can cause the explosion meter to read ten percent of the lower explosive level (LEL). 
f.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 60 degrees Centigrade (140 degrees Fahrenheit) as measured by the test method specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
g.  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants, (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
h.  Hazardous waste as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act is prohibited from entering the POTW. 
i.  Slug loads are prohibited. 
j.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
k.  Medical wastes, unless otherwise authorized by the control authority. 
l.  Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, unpolluted groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or other unpolluted drainage. In compliance with state and federal statutes, the control authority may, in writing, designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage may be discharged. 
(b)  General discharge limitations. 
(1)  No waste or wastewater discharged to the public sewer shall: 
a.  Have a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 standard units or possess any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel at the POTW. 
b.  Have a temperature which will cause inhibition of biological activity at the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case contain heat in such quantity as to cause the temperature at the POTW treatment plant to exceed 40°C (104°F). 
c.  Contain grease or oil in concentrations greater than 200 mg/L or in such a quantity as to clog the sewer, and/or overload skimming and grease handling equipment. 
d.  Contain pollutants which may result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
e.  Contain concentrations of TSS and/or BOD, determined by the control authority to be detrimental to the POTW. 
f.  Contain garbage, unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. 
g.  No person shall discharge to the public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other waste shall: 
1.  Injure or interfere with POTW processes or facilities; 
2.  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; 
3.  Pass through to receiving waters of the POTW effluent; 
4.  Cause toxicity in the receiving waters; 
5.  Render the sludge from the POTW unfit for use or disposal; and/or 
6.  Cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit. 
(c)  Specific pollutant limitations. 
(1)  At the discharge point to the public sewer system, no wastewater shall contain concentrations of pollutants greater than the following specified limits: 
Heavy Metals 	Daily Maximum Discharge Limits (mg/L) 
Arsenic 	0.78 
Cadmium 	0.43 
Chromium (Total) 	8.41 
Copper 	1.15 
Cyanide 	0.50 
Lead 	3.71 
Mercury 	0.001 
Nickel 	8.37 
Selenium 	0.60 
Silver 	0.50 
Zinc 	1.58 
 
(2)  Industries subject to federal categorical standards as found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N are required to meet the categorical limits at end of regulated processes and the applicable local limits at end of pipe. 
a.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the control authority may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
b.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the control authority shall impose alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
c.  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA, when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
d.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(3)  Based on treatment technology and environmental standards, specific numerical limits may be developed for any pollutant and incorporated into an industrial waste permit. Permit specific numerical limits are fully enforceable under this article. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-115. - Approval of wastewater discharge conditions for new and existing sources. 
(a)  General acceptance. 
(1)  If discharge or proposed discharge to public sewers violates any provision of section 16-114, the control authority shall require: 
a.  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewer system; and 
b.  Control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(2)  The control authority may reject any waste, which does not meet the requirements of subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)  The control authority may require any information from an industrial user necessary to determine the characteristics of the user's wastewater discharge prior to the commencement of such discharge to the POTW. 
(4)  The control authority may deny or condition new or increased contributions. 
(b)  For new sources. 
(1)  The industrial user shall consult with the control authority concerning the type(s), concentration and volume of industrial waste proposed for discharge. Conditional approval as to the general requirements must be obtained from the control authority. 
(2)  Design calculations, plans, specifications, and other pertinent information relating to proposed industrial waste pretreatment or processing facilities shall be submitted to the control authority for approval prior to start of construction if the effluent from such facilities is to be discharged into the public sewers. 
(3)  Where required by the control authority, the industrial user shall modify or eliminate wastes that are harmful to the structures, process, or operations of the sewage works; the industrial user shall provide, at its expense, such preliminary treatment or processing facilities as may be determined necessary to render its wastes acceptable for admission to the public sewer. 
(4)  Review and acceptance of the conditions for new sources by the control authority shall be obtained prior to the proposed discharge into the public sewers of any wastes and waters having the following: 
a.  A five-day 20 degrees C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) greater than 240 mg/L; 
b.  Total suspended solids (TSS) greater than 240 mg/L; 
c.  Substances prohibited or limited by section 16-114. 
(c)  For existing sources. 
(1)  At the discretion of the control authority, existing sources may be required to meet the review and acceptance conditions for new sources under subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Within a specified time limit following written notice by the control authority, the industrial user will submit a compliance plan, which will achieve acceptable discharge conditions. 
(3)  If an acceptable plan has not been submitted within the specified time limit, the control authority may prescribe a suitable compliance plan. 
(4)  If the industrial user fails to fulfill the conditions of the prescribed compliance plan, he shall be in violation of this article and subject to penalties and enforcement actions as described in sections 16-123 and 16-137 of this article. 
(d)  Pretreatment provisions. 
(1)  If pretreatment or control is required, the control authority shall review and either accept or deny the proposed design and installation of equipment and processes. Acceptance of a proposed pretreatment plan by the control authority shall not relieve the industrial user of responsibility and/or liability for failure of that pretreatment to achieve acceptable discharge. 
(2)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(3)  Any industrial user responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at its own expense. 
(4)  Persons discharging industrial wastes, which exhibit none of the characteristics of wastes prohibited in this article other than excessive BOD or TSS, may be required to pretreat the industrial wastes to meet the requirements of "normal domestic sewage". 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-116. - General discharge restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any unpolluted wastewater into sanitary sewers if a storm sewer is available, except in cases where there is an existing facility erected prior to the enactment of this article, in accordance with plans approved by the city until required to alleviate such condition by the city after reasonable notice. 
If a storm sewer is not available, unpolluted wastewater may be discharged into the sanitary sewer by an indirect connection whereby such discharge is cooled, if required, and flows into the sanitary sewer at a rate not in excess of three gallons per minute. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any pollutants into or adjacent to any waters or any area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  In cases where, in the opinion of the control authority, the character of the sewage from any manufacturer or industrial plant, building or other premises is such that it will damage the sewer system or cannot be treated satisfactorily in the system, the city shall have the right to require such waste be disposed of otherwise, in accordance with all applicable regulations, and prevent it from entering the city's system. 
(d)  No person shall discharge industrial waste, interceptor waste, or any other waste determined by the control authority as not acceptable, into the public sewer from a vehicle, tank truck, portable tank or other container used for transportation of industrial waste. 
(e)  No person shall discharge domestic wastewater or septage from a tank truck, portable tank or other container used for transportation of waste, into a public sewer without written permission from the city as provided in this Code regulating the generation, transportation and disposal of such waste, and then only at a designated discharge point. The control authority reserves the right to refuse any such discharge. 
(f)  No person shall discharge wastewater or industrial waste into a sewer appurtenance intended for maintenance, including but not limited to, a manhole or clean-out connection or inspection port without written permission from the control authority. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-117. - Dilution prohibition as substitute for treatment. 
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard. Although wastestreams may be mixed prior to discharge to the POTW, no industrial user may dilute for the express purpose of compliance with local discharge limits. 
The control authority may impose mass limitations on industrial users, which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-118. - Accidental or slug discharges. 
(a)  Spill containment/slug control. The control authority may require spill containment or slug control measures for storage and use of any substance it deems a potential threat to the collection and treatment system or the environment should such substance be accidentally discharged. Such spill containment or slug control measures shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan as required by the control authority. At the discretion of the control authority, industrial users may be required to submit accidental discharge or slug control procedures prior to commencing contribution to the POTW. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Industrial pretreatment system upset and/or bypass. Upsets and/or bypasses of industrial pretreatment systems shall be subject to the provisions of the V.T.C.A., Water Code § 7.251 and 40 CFR Part 403.17 respectively. A violation of pretreatment standards or V.T.C.A., Water Code Ch. 26, that would otherwise be found in violation of this article, the industrial waste permit or other regulatory requirements, may be found not in violation should the violation have been caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe. Bypass of a pretreatment system is prohibited except under the conditions stated in 40 CFR Part 403.17(d). 
(c)  Notification of potential problem. In the case of an accidental discharge, slug discharge, upset or unavoidable bypass, it is the responsibility of the user to notify the control authority within 24 hours of the incident. The notification shall include location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective action. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the control authority a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(d)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of an accidental or slug discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental or slug discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-119. - Volume of waste. 
When water is contained in a product, evaporated, or discharged as unpolluted waste to surface drainage, an application may be made for a reduction in the volume of waste discharged to the public sewer. Supporting data, satisfactory to the control authority, must be furnished. 
This data shall include a flow diagram, destination of the water supply and/or wastes, supported by sub-metering data installed on said process piping at the expense of the user. Any metering device used to measure actual sewage flow must meet all requirements set forth by and be approved by the control authority. The design and installation costs are the responsibility of the user. Upon installation and acceptance, the control authority shall assume ownership of and maintain any such device in proper working condition to accurately measure such flow. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-120. - Control of admissible wastes. 
Any person desiring to deposit or discharge any industrial waste into the public sewers of the city or any sewer connected therewith, or who is now so doing may require an industrial waste permit (including both new and existing connections). 
(1)  The control authority shall have the legal authority and responsibility through any interjurisdictional pretreatment agreement to perform the technical and administrative activities necessary for implementation of a pretreatment program. 
(2)  Any person discharging or desiring to discharge an industrial waste mixture into the sanitary sewer of the city or any sewer connected therewith, shall be required to provide and maintain in a suitably accessible position on the permittee's premises, or such premises occupied by him, an inspection port or manhole near the outlet of each sewer, drain, pipe, channel or connection which communicates with the sewer or sewer works of the city or any sewer connected therewith. Each such manhole or inspection port shall be of such design and construction which will prevent infiltration by ground and surface waters, and shall be so maintained by the user discharging wastes so that any authorized representative of the city may readily and safely measure the volume and obtain samples of the flow at all times. Plans for construction of the control manholes or inspection port, including such flow measuring devices as may be required shall be reviewed, and approved by the control authority. The control authority also reserves the right to require installation of other monitoring equipment if deemed necessary. 
(3)  The control authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive, if needed, suitable pretreatment within the provisions of law, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(4)  The control authority may request material safety data sheets for chemicals stored or used at a facility. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-121. - Industrial waste permits. 
No significant industrial user shall discharge industrial waste into the sanitary sewer without obtaining and maintaining a valid permit from the control authority. The control authority may require other users to obtain a discharge permit as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(1)  Conditions stipulated in the industrial waste permits shall be based on plans and specifications of pretreatment facilities, on-site inspections, and industrial waste permit applications. 
(2)  Industrial waste permits may dictate: 
a.  Discharge limits, including BMPs if applicable; 
b.  Self-monitoring requirements; 
c.  Reporting requirements; 
d.  Notification and record keeping requirements (five years, including BMPs), including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored; 
e.  Sampling locations, frequency and sample type; and 
f.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the control authority to ensure compliance with this ordinance including, but not limited to, a statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties and slug discharge control requirements (if necessary). 
(3)  The control authority shall issue a permit if it is determined that: 
a.  Pretreatment facilities are adequate for efficient treatment of discharged waste; 
b.  Applicant is not discharging waste in violation of this article; and 
c.  Applicant is in compliance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(4)  The control authority may issue a compliance schedule in conjunction with an industrial waste permit if conditions in subsections 16-121(3)a—c above, are not being met. The compliance schedule shall contain deadlines for the commencement and completion of major events leading to compliance with applicable requirements. 
(5)  It is the responsibility of the industrial user to notify the control authority prior to any change in process, change in character or quantity of wastewater, change in ownership or change in signatory authority. These changes may require issuance of a new permit. 
(6)  Permits shall not be transferred except with the express written permission of the control authority. Upon transfer of ownership the permittee must provide a copy of the existing permit to the new owner. 
(7)  Permits shall be valid for a period not to exceed three years from the date of issuance. They shall be reviewed annually, but may be modified at any time, as the control authority deems necessary. At least 60 days prior to permit expiration or within a minimum of 60 days from promulgation of a pretreatment standard or being designated as an SIU, an application for permit renewal must be received by the control authority. 
(8)  Permits may be revoked if the requirements for self-monitoring, reporting, compliance and any other requirement set forth in the permit and this article are not being met. The industrial user must immediately cease discharge upon permit revocation. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-122. - Inspections, sampling and testing. 
(a)  The control authority shall randomly sample and analyze the effluent from industrial users and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by industrial users, occasional and continuing noncompliance with pretreatment and pollution control standards. 
(b)  The control authority shall inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year and evaluate, within one year of being designated as significant, whether each significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control slug discharges in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi). The results of these activities shall be retained by the CA and be available to the approval authority upon request. If the SIU is required to develop a slug discharge control plan, or other action, the CA is required to specify the appropriate requirements in the IU permit. 
(c)  The control authority shall investigate instances of noncompliance with pretreatment standards or pollution control requirements, as indicated in required reports, analytical results, inspections and surveillance activities. 
(d)  Collection of information by the control authority shall be performed with sufficient care to produce evidence admissible in enforcement proceedings or in judicial actions. 
(e)  All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA administrator pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act and 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Analyses shall be performed on flow weighted samples, where feasible, taken at the inspection port provided or other control point authorized by the control authority. 
(f)  BOD and TSS shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(g)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, TSS and/or other wastewater constituents. Chain of custody procedures shall be followed. 
(h)  The city is entitled to select the time of sampling. 
(i)  Samples shall be taken at six-month intervals (at minimum) to establish the BOD and TSS of the industrial waste for billing purposes, or at such intervals determined by the control authority as necessary to maintain control over the discharge. 
(j)  Sampling and testing of industrial waste streams shall be conducted for the purpose of monitoring compliance with federal, state and local discharge regulations. The control authority shall determine the frequency of sampling and the pollutants (unless categorical) to be monitored for each industrial user. 
(k)  The control authority shall maintain records of all information resulting from monitoring activities required by 40 CFR Part 403, including documentation associated with BMPs. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-123. - Noncompliance notification and procedure. 
(a)  Each noncompliance with local, state or federal regulations may result in the person receiving a verbal notice and/or written notice of violation. A written notice of violation shall require that the person respond, in writing, to the control authority within 15 working days from the date of the notice of violation. 
(b)  In addition to the notice set forth in subsection (a), noncompliance may result in enforcement actions by the control authority, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Issuance of a warning citation; 
(2)  Issuance of a citation; 
(3)  Setting a compliance meeting; 
(4)  Issuance of a compliance schedule; 
(5)  Termination of water and/or sewer service; 
(6)  Revocation of an industrial waste permit; 
(7)  Administrative orders including consent orders, compliance orders, and cease and desist orders; and 
(8)  Any other supplemental enforcement actions as noted in the control authority's enforcement response plan, i.e., show cause hearings. 
The control authority shall determine the level of enforcement needed to promote compliance. 
(c)  A compliance schedule shall specify deadlines for initiating and completing actions needed to remedy a noncompliance. Failure to meet the deadlines specified in a compliance schedule or continued noncompliance after the final compliance date may result in escalation of enforcement actions by the control authority. 
Compliance schedules developed for meeting categorical pretreatment standards shall comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(c), including required BMPs. 
(d)  No action by the control authority shall relieve an industrial user from being published for significant noncompliance as described in section 16-129 of this article. 
(e)  The control authority, may by use of all legal means available, stop an actual or threatened discharge by verbal order to cease discharge if, in the opinion of the control authority, the discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment or which may be in violation of local, state or federal regulations. 
If the person does not voluntarily comply with the order to cease discharge, the control authority shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including, but not limited to, severance of the sewer connections and/or suspension of water service, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or environment or endangerment to the public. Prior to service being restored, the person must demonstrate to the control authority that permanent corrective measures have been taken to prevent reoccurrence of the offense. Any cost incurred by the control authority for sampling, analysis, assessment or remediation may be recovered from the person, or its authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-124. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Initial compliance reports. 
(1)  All industrial users, including new sources that are subject to categorical pretreatment standards must submit baseline monitoring reports (BMRs) to the control authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b). The BMR includes: 
a.  Identifying information; 
b.  Other environmental permits held; 
c.  Description of operations; 
d.  Flow measurements; 
e.  Measurement of pollutants, and documentation to demonstrate compliance with a BMP where a required BMP or pollution prevention (P2) alternative is part of the categorical standard; and 
f.  Certification of compliance with pretreatment standards. 
(2)  Within 90 days following the commencement of the contribution of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user classified as a regulated categorical industrial user, and therefore subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards, shall submit to the control authority a 90-day compliance report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d). The 90-day compliance report includes: 
a.  Flow measurements; 
b.  Measurement of pollutants, and documentation to demonstrate compliance with a BMP where a required BMP or pollution prevention (P2) alternative is part of the categorical standard; and 
c.  Certification of compliance with pretreatment standards. 
(3)  Significant industrial users not classified as categorical industrial users may, at the discretion of the control authority, be required to submit a baseline monitoring report and/or a 90-day compliance report. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Categorical standard industries subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of new sources, after commencement of the discharge to the POTW, shall submit a semi-annual compliance report to the control authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(e). 
(2)  Significant non-categorical industrial users are required to submit a semi-annual compliance report to the control authority in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(h). 
(3)  Semi-annual compliance reports required under subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) of this section shall be based on sampling and analytical data collected during the period covered by the report by both the control authority and the industrial user if self monitoring is performed. Sampling and analytical data shall be representative of the conditions occurring during the reporting period. The CA shall require the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by IUs with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Additionally, categorical industrial users shall submit documentation to demonstrate compliance with a BMP where required BMPs or pollution prevention alternatives are part of the categorical standard. Semi-annual compliance reports must be submitted to the control authority each year by July 15th for the January through June reporting period, and by January 15th for the July through December reporting period. 
(c)  Self-monitoring reports. 
(1)  Categorical industrial users shall perform self-monitoring sampling and analysis of the regulated process wastestream at a frequency stipulated by the industrial waste permit. Additionally, categorical industrial users shall submit documentation to demonstrate compliance with a BMP where required BMPs or pollution prevention alternatives are part of the categorical standard. 
(2)  Categorical industrial users and significant industrial users may be required to perform self-monitoring on non-categorical wastestreams, should the control authority deem it necessary. Categorical and significant industrial users are required to report data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report which data are representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. 
(3)  Self-monitoring samples shall be collected, preserved and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136. 
(4)  For each self-monitoring sample, the industrial user shall submit, and maintain for a minimum period of five years, an industrial self-monitoring sampling report which shall include: 
a.  The date, exact place, sampling method, preservation method, times of sampling and the name of the person(s) who collected the samples; 
b.  The dates the analyses were performed; 
c.  Name of the person(s) who performed the analyses; 
d.  The analytical techniques/method used; and appropriate QA/QC documentation; and 
e.  The results of the analyses. 
f.  If an industry monitors more frequently, at the designated sampling port, than required by the permit using approved test methods, they must submit those sample results along with the required self-monitoring report. 
g.  All samples collected must be representative of the discharge (over the course of the discharge) according to 40 CFR §§ 403.12(g)(1), (3), (4) and (5). 
(5)  For categorical industrial users, at least once during each semi-annual compliance reporting period, self-monitoring samples shall be analyzed for all federally regulated parameters. 
(6)  If self-monitoring indicates a violation, the industrial user shall notify the control authority within 24 hours of receiving the results. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. For industrial users required to self monitor each month, the next month's self-monitoring may be used as the repeat sampling so long as the sample is analyzed for the violating parameter and the 30-day submission deadline is observed. Similarly, if the control authority is sampling in lieu of the industrial user, the CA will repeat sampling within 30 days. 
(d)  Signatory authority. All initial and periodic compliance reports and all self-monitoring sampling reports must be signed by an authorized official of the industrial user in accordance with 40 CFR Part 403.12(l). The authorized official may designate a representative, in writing, to the control authority. The authorization must specify either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the industrial user. If the authorization becomes invalid because of changes in responsibilities or personnel, a new written authorization must be submitted to the control authority prior to or along with any report being signed and submitted by the new representative. A change in signatory authority shall not negate existing enforcement action. 
(e)  Certification statements. All initial and periodic compliance reports, self-monitoring sampling reports and the industrial waste permit application must include this statement: 
 "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervised in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(f)  Report on changed conditions. All industrial users shall promptly notify the control authority in advance of any substantial change in volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, or of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge [§ 403.8(f)(2)(vi)]. 
(g)  Discharge of hazardous waste. Hazardous waste as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act is prohibited from entering the POTW. An industrial user shall notify the control authority, the EPA regional waste management division director, and the state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(h)  Fraud and false statements. The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained under this section shall be subject to: 
(1)  The provisions of 18 U.S.C. Section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements; 
(2)  The provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Clean Water Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation, or certification; 
(3)  The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Clean Water Act regarding responsible corporate offices; and 
(4)  Section 16-134 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-125. - Industrial waste surcharge. 
(a)  Industrial wastes which exhibit none of the characteristics of wastes prohibited previously but having a BOD or TSS concentration in excess of "normal domestic sewage" as defined in section 16-113, may require pretreatment; however, such wastes may be accepted for treatment if the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The waste will not cause damage to the collection and treatment facility; 
(2)  The waste will not impair the treatment process; 
(3)  The waste will not cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit; and 
(4)  The donor of the waste pays the sewer service charge and industrial waste surcharge. 
(b)  The basis for surcharge on industrial waste is capital and operating costs and is an assessment over and above published water and sewer rates. The surcharge shall be calculated for billing purposes utilizing the following formula: 
S.C. 	= 	V [(A)(BOD-240) + B(TSS-240)] 
S.C. 	= 	Surcharge in dollars for time related to volume 
V 	= 	Volume in 1,000 gallons based on metered water unless an approved effluent metering device is installed 
BOD 	= 	5 days @ 20 degrees C. of industrial waste (mg/L) 
TSS 	= 	Total Suspended Solids of industrial waste (mg/L) 
A 	= 	Capital and operating cost for removal of BOD per mg/L 
B 	= 	Capital and operating cost for removal of TSS per mg/L 
Rates for A and B will be set periodically by action of the city council 
 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-126. - Requirements for interceptors. 
All requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 16, article II, sections 16-26— 16-110, of this chapter regulating the transportation and discharge of such waste as it now exists or as hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-127. - Requirements for building sewers. 
(a)  Any user responsible for discharge through a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall, at such user's own expense and as required by the control authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible and safely located control manhole; 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste as may be required; and 
(3)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-128. - Requirements for dental offices. 
All existing and new dental users subject to the dental office category regulation as codified in 40 CFR Part 441 must comply with the requirements of the regulation. Compliance reports must be completed and submitted to the CA in the required timeframe. 
( 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20) 
Editor's note— 0220-20-ORD amended art. III in its entirety and added new provisions as § 16-128 and renumbering existing §§ 16-128—16-137 as §§ 16-129—16-138, as herein set out.  
Sec. 16-129. - Public notice of significant noncompliance. 
A notice shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW each year as required by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(viii), as it now exists or as hereafter amended for significant noncompliance. The notification shall include the industry name and address plus a description of said violation(s). The notification shall be for a designated 12-month period in which any IUs were in SNC with applicable pretreatment requirements. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-130. - Charges and fees. 
(a)  The city may adopt charges and fees, which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for permit applications; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for industrial waste surcharges as provided for in section 16-125; 
(7)  Cost for laboratory analyses of industrial discharge; and 
(8)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(b)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other applicable fees chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-131. - Billing. 
Industrial waste surcharge provided for in this article shall be included as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges and shall be paid monthly in accordance with the existing billing practices of the city. Surcharges shall be paid at the same time that the water, sewer, and sanitation charges of the person becomes due and payment for water and sanitation services shall not be accepted without payment also of the sewer service charges and industrial waste surcharges. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-132. - Failure to pay bills. 
Failure to pay fees and monthly bills for water, sanitary sewer service or industrial waste surcharge when due shall be sufficient cause to disconnect any and all services to the water and/or sanitary sewer of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-133. - Access to industrial user records. 
(a)  The control authority and the approval authority shall have access to, and the right to inspect and copy, any and all industrial user records which pertain to that industry's discharge to the POTW, disposal and/or generation of hazardous waste and discharges into the environment. The industrial user shall be required to retain records of all information resulting from any monitoring or reporting activity required by these regulations for a minimum of five years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or POTW or when requested by the approval authority. 
(b)  The constituents and characteristics of wastewater discharged by an industrial user shall not be considered confidential and shall be available to the public without restriction. Other information obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests, in writing, at the time the information is known to be obtained by the control authority that the information is to be considered confidential. Information submitted to the control authority by the industrial user shall be stamped "Confidential Information" on each page containing such information that the industrial user wishes to be held confidential. If a claim of confidentiality is asserted, the control authority shall determine if such information may be held confidential in accordance with 40 CFR Part 2 (Public Information). If the industrial user does not claim the information as confidential at the time the control authority obtains the information, it will be available to the public without further notice. 
(c)  The city shall require of all non-domestic users, information needed to develop a systematic program according to the pretreatment requirements. The information must be available to the control authority for inspection and reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-134. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, notice, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or industrial waste permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall be punished by a fine of no more than $10,000.00 and may be subject to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-135. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or by criminal negligence, cause damage to, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, which is part of the POTW. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-136. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The control authority and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to: 
(1)  Enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article; and 
(2)  Enter all private property through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, maintenance or repair. 
(b)  All activities conducted under this authority shall be in full accordance with all applicable terms, rules and regulations pertaining to safety and security. 
(c)  If the control authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety welfare of the community, then the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the municipal court of the City of Lewisville, Denton County, Texas. 
(d)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any area not having direct or potential impact on the kind and source of a discharge to the public sewer system, disposal and/or generation of hazardous waste and discharges into the environment, except as provided in section 16-133. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-137. - Legal action. 
If any person discharges, permits or causes to be discharged sewage, industrial waste or other wastes in violation of V.T.C.A., Water Code Ch. 26 or into the POTW contrary to the provisions of this article, state requirements, federal pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, including injunctive relief, in the district court of Denton County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Sec. 16-138. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or by criminal negligence violates any provision of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, and upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $2,000.00, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(c)  The control authority is further authorized to prosecute and seek all criminal and civil remedies in the various courts as set forth by the Texas Water Code. 
(d)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be punished upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In no case shall a fine be recommended which is less than the economic benefit realized by the industry for violation of pretreatment standards, in accordance with the U.S. EPA's Guidance Manual for Calculation of Economic Benefit of Noncompliance with Pretreatment Standards: 1990. 
(Ord. No. 3734-01-2010 , § I, 1-4-10; 0220-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 6-1-20)  
Secs. 16-139—16-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Power to regulate use of streets, § 2.01. 
Cross reference— Plumbing standards, § 4-111 et seq.; permits for public works construction in the rights-of-way and easement required, § 6-61 et seq.; erosion control requirements, § 6-331 et seq.; requirements for improvements on land served by substandard public improvements, § 6-436 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charge shall mean a charge made against the consumer or property owner to pay for the cost of installation or extension of water and sanitary sewer mains as provided for in this article. 
Consumer shall mean the actual user of water from a city water main or of a sanitary sewer connection. 
Frontage shall be determined by the side of the lot on which the legal address is located. 
Off-site improvements shall mean water or sewer main improvements totally outside of a tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale. 
On-site improvements shall mean water or sewer main improvements totally within or adjacent to a tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale. 
(Code 1990, § 2-4-1; Ord. No. 2089-2-96, § I, 2-5-96) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-202. - To individual property owners. 
(a)  Upon request of a property owner of a given lot or tract of land, accompanied by the payment of the charges due under this article, the city may extend all necessary sanitary sewer and water mains, including valves, hydrants, and appurtenances, the distance across the frontage necessary to provide the service for which application has been made. The owner to be served shall be required to pay the charges herein provided for. The owners of all intervening property served by the given main extensions shall be required to pay the charges provided for herein at such time as their property is connected to the mains thus laid. The applicant shall pay the charges on all property owned by him and which is served by the requested extension. 
(b)  Upon approval of the city, the property owner requesting extension of water and sewer mains to his property may extend the mains himself or have same done by a competent and reputable contractor. In this case, detailed construction plans for the improvements shall be drawn and approved by the city prior to any construction, and the construction shall be inspected and approved prior to final acceptance by the city. The sizes of the above mains shall be determined by the city. The total costs of extending the mains to and across the owner's property shall be borne solely by the owner, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Upon approval and acceptance of the system by the city, on any mains larger than 12 inches, the city will refund to the owner the difference between the cost of the oversized main and the 12-inch main if the size which exceeds 12 inches is not required to service the property. 
(2)  The city shall never be liable for any payment under this section unless a written agreement outlining the terms of payment is entered into between the city and the property owner. 
(Code 1990, § 2-4-3; Ord. No. 2089-2-96, § I, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 16-203. - To and within subdivisions. 
(a)  Extensions to subdivisions. Where extensions of water and sewer mains are required to serve property which has been subdivided or platted for development and resale, the costs of approach mains fronting on property not owned by the developer but required and necessary to connect property to be developed shall be borne solely by the developer. The sizes of all aforementioned mains shall be determined by the city. Refunds for main extensions will be as follows: 
(1)  Upon approval and acceptance of the system by the city, on any mains larger than 12-inch diameter, the city will pay, upon acceptance if funds are available, or will enter into an agreement with the developer, the amount being the difference between the cost of the oversized mains and the 12-inch diameter mains or the size which is over 12 inches and is in excess of the size required to develop the property adjacent to the main. 
(2)  The city will refund to the subdivider any charges received from applicants who desire to connect to the mains which have been extended with the total refund not to exceed the amount of the subdivider's cost of the off-site improvements. 
(3)  The maximum period of time for the reimbursement to the subdivider for the off-site mains shall not exceed ten years. 
(b)  Oversized mains within subdivisions. Developers of subdivisions shall bear the entire cost of water and sewer systems within or along the boundary of their subdivisions, except that on any mains larger than 12 inches the city will refund the difference between the cost of the oversized mains and the 12-inch main. Adequate size of such water and sewer mains shall be determined by the city, and in accordance with the city general development plan and its decision will be final. 
(c)  Liability of city. The city shall never be liable for any payment under this section unless a written agreement outlining the terms of payment is entered into between the city and the developer prior to the commencement of any construction in which the city will participate. 
(Code 1990, § 2-4-5; Ord. No. 2089-2-96, § I, 2-5-96)  
Sec. 16-203.5. - Extension program procedures. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  The city council shall review all water and wastewater main extension requests on a case-by-case basis. For any request which meets all guidelines set forth in this procedure, council may choose to adopt a main extension ordinance. 
(2)  The city council shall determine all requirements for a site- specific main extension ordinance. 
(3)  Each project and associated ordinance must be approved by the city council; the ordinance shall be nontransferable, unless otherwise stated within the ordinance. 
(4)  The above requirements shall apply to situations which meet the following criteria: 
a.  The property to be serviced must be platted and the property owner must follow all general development guidelines. 
b.  All easements, dedication and public right-of-way necessary to construct the project must be acquired by the developer and filed by the city. The city may elect to use its power of condemnation to acquire the easement or right-of-way. 
c.  The extension program for reimbursement shall not include on-site projects. 
d.  Off-site projects which are less than 1,000 feet from an existing main shall not be included in the extension reimbursement program. If the site is greater than 1,000 feet from an existing main, the extension program may be utilized as authorized by the city council. 
e.  If the main has been determined as an impact fee related project, the project shall not be considered for extension reimbursement. 
(b)  Engineering requirements. 
(1)  The mains shall be extended through a development as determined by the city engineer for main extension to other developments. 
(2)  The engineering design must be performed by the developer or applicant. All engineering and construction standards must be as approved by the city and must meet the standard specifications for public works as outlined by NCTCOG. 
(3)  The developer must extend any water or sewer main at their expense from the proposed development or site to an existing main. 
(4)  The expense for the main within the development shall be that of the developer or applicant. Oversizing of water or wastewater mains will be performed by the city. The applicant will provide funding for the 12-inch portion of the project. 
(5)  If the oversizing cost is less than $5,000.00, the city may authorize the developer to construct the project with lump sum payment to the developer for the oversizing after approval and acceptance of the construction project. 
(c)  Reimbursement. 
(1)  City staff shall maintain records of expenditures for each project. Fees for inspection and management of the program shall be recovered by the city in accordance with the general development ordinance. 
(2)  The length of time for collection and distribution of funds shall not exceed ten years from the date of acceptance by the city. Reimbursement for off-site projects shall be based upon total acreage which can be serviced by the main, and is adjacent to the main, excluding rights-of-way, easements, or other public lands. 
(3)  Fees shall be assessed per acre. State or federal government properties which are not subject to development shall not be included in the acreage calculation. 
(4)  If a natural barrier exists in which service cannot be provided, that area shall not be included in the determination of the acreage. 
(5)  If a transmission main and distribution main are located along the frontage of the property, the fee will be based upon the distribution main only. 
(6)  Reimbursements will be made to the original signing party of the agreement, which is nontransferable, unless otherwise stated within the agreement. Reimbursements shall be made at six-month intervals beginning at the acceptance of the project and upon written request from the applicant. The amount reimbursed shall not exceed 100 percent of the actual construction cost, plus any interest imbedded, until the assessment is collected. The fixed interest rate shall be determined by the published prime rate in the Wall Street Journal at the time of the adoption of the ordinance. 
Extension fees shall be determined by the following calculation: 
Extension fee = Cost of project/total acreage + imbedded interest 
The imbedded interest shall be determined by the following calculation: 
Imbedded interest = Cost of project/total acreage × number of days outstanding × daily interest rate 
Monies will be collected from property owners adjacent to the main prior to the approval of the final plat, site plan, or building permit, whichever is first. The developer or applicant, as stated in the ordinance, shall request from the city any monies which have been collected pertaining to the project. 
A provision shall be made within the ordinance to allow for additional funds to be collected from the developer or applicant due to change order or improper design. 
(d)  City extension of water/sewer mains. 
(1)  The city, when acting in the capacity of a developer, may also extend certain water or sewer mains and utilize the main extension program to recover the cost of the main. 
(2)  The city may recover cost for the extension in the same manner as described herein for individuals and developers, except that the 1,000-foot minimum shall not apply. The city may collect fees for the extension regardless of the distance of the line to be constructed. 
(3)  When an extension is performed by the city, the collection of the fee shall not apply to existing single-family dwellings unless a change in use occurs within ten years from the date of passage of the applicable main extension ordinance. The change in use shall refer to any change in the building footprint or additional development of the property on which the single-family dwelling exists or a change in the single-family dwelling such that the use no longer reflects single-family occupancy. 
(4)  When an extension is performed by the city, any single-family dwelling and the property on which the dwelling resides shall not be required to plat, nor shall it be subject to the general development ordinance. If the use of the dwelling or property should change, the property shall be subject to the general development ordinance and other requirements associated with the development process. 
(Ord. No. 2089-2-96, § II, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 2240-7-97, § I, 7-21-97)  
Sec. 16-204. - Connection charges. 
(a)  General. The city shall require all buildings of residential, commercial or heavy industrial occupancy to secure services from the city for water and sewer. Solid waste disposal shall be provided by the approved franchisee. Billing for solid waste collection shall be included on the monthly water and sewer billing statement, if applicable. 
(1)  Application to secure services for water, sewer and solid waste must be in accordance with the general policies of the city. 
(2)  Connection charges do not include required deposits, local impact fees or other charges which are not associated with the direct connection or accounting procedures of the connection. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administration charge shall mean cost incurred to establish the account for water, sewer, and solid waste. The term "cost" also includes cost for processing and handling of the meter. 
Applicant responsibility shall mean cost of materials and/or labor solely assumed by the applicant. 
Construction estimate shall mean an estimate prepared by the department of public services to provide the necessary materials, labor and inspections to install a service line from a main to a point approved as the point of termination of the city's responsibility. The distance shall not exceed 100 linear feet unless otherwise approved by the public services director or designated representative. The estimate shall include associated administrative and engineering charges. 
Labor cost shall mean cost incurred for the installation of the required meter only. This item does not include the cost for tapping and/or the service line from the main to the approved meter location. This item, however, includes accessory parts, gaskets and similar items. 
Meter cost shall mean cost incurred for the purchase of the required water meter, five-eighths inch through two inches. 
Sewer service connection shall mean connection of a private building service to the city wastewater system. 
Solid waste service shall mean refuse service to all established or future residential, commercial or heavy industrial occupants by the current approved franchisee. 
Water service connection shall mean connection of a private building service to the city water system. 
(c)  Tapping of mains. Mains within the city may be tapped to secure service by the following methods: 
(1)  Taps may be performed for any service requirement by the applicant upon approval by the department of public services and the community development department; or 
(2)  For service requirements, if requested, five-eighths inch through two inches, the city may prepare a construction estimate to accomplish the tap and service line installation; however, the service line extension shall not exceed 100 feet. The director of public services or designated representative may waive the 100-foot requirement as deemed necessary. 
(d)  Amount of charges. The rates, fees and charges which may be imposed under this section are on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(e)  Construction estimate. If requested, the total cost of materials, labor, administration and engineering charges to extend service shall be estimated and presented to the applicant. No work shall be performed until the required fees are collected. 
(Code 1990, § 2-4-4)  
Sec. 16-205. - Liability for materials. 
Each property owner or subdivider shall furnish materials and shall install all water service lines and sanitary sewer laterals from the mains to the structures at his own cost and expense to meet the standard details and specifications and the approval of the city. 
(Code 1990, § 2-4-6; Ord. No. 2218-5-97, § I, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 16-206. - Relocation of utility lines or structures. 
(a)  All utilities who receive written notification from the city to relocate certain lines or structures necessitated because of public improvements shall proceed with relocation or restructuring of such utilities with promptness and shall use reasonable diligence in the pursuit of the completion of the relocation of such utilities or structures. 
(b)  Any request for reimbursement by a public utility for relocation or restructuring of lines or structures shall be directed to the city and shall be itemized and shall show specific charges for each type and quality of material used with the per quantity charge related thereto, and also for the type and nature of the labor used and the hourly charges therefor. If such utility submits a statement for reimbursement which does not comply with the provisions of this section, such statement shall be returned to the utility and no payment shall be made until such time as the itemized statement required herein is provided by the utility, such information and statement to be provided at no cost or expense to the city nor require any inspection of records or other obligation upon any city employee, but such statement shall clearly reflect the material and labors charged for and the amounts relating thereto as set forth herein. 
(Code 1990, § 2-4-7)  
Sec. 16-207. - Capital recovery fee. 
(a)  Definitions. Living Unit Equivalent (LUE) is defined herein as a measure of equivalent system capacity based on meter size to serve a single-family residential water or sewer service customer. The single-family residential meter shall be defined as one LUE. All LUE's determination for residential or nonresidential users shall be based upon the meter use required, as defined in Exhibit A of section 2-201. 
(b)  Continuation. A capital recovery fee for water and wastewater is hereby continued per living unit equivalents for all property served by the city with such utility services in the sums stated in Exhibit A of section 2-201. 
(c)  Effective date for fees. The effective date for the amending of water and wastewater impact fees shall be November 1, 2018. Capital recovery fees shall be assessed in accordance with the schedule of capital recovery fees per LUE as established in Exhibit "A" of section 2-201. 
(d)  Extraordinary situations. In the event an extraordinary structure or use is proposed, in which the meter equivalence method is not appropriate, the city manager or his designee shall determine the appropriate fee for such situation based on specific information provided and generally accepted engineering practices. 
(e)  Collection of fees. The fees established herein shall be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit except when a permit is issued for a shell building, in which case the fees shall be collected at the time the interior finish permit is issued. If a permit is requested for plumbing unrelated to building finishout, then the fee shall be paid at the time of issuance of the plumbing permit. 
(f)  When fee not required. No such fees shall be paid where a structure is being replaced or remodeled where the replacement construction is composed of the same number of LUE's or meter size. 
(g)  Reimbursement. If a portion of a main is designated as a capital recovery project and is constructed by others, they would, with prior approval of the city, be reimbursed the construction cost of that portion of the main from the capital recovery project impact fees. 
(h)  Deposit of funds. All water capital recovery fees generated by this section shall be deposited in the water capital recovery fee account of the water and sewer fund and all fees and interest accrued in the account shall be used to finance water capital improvement projects. All wastewater capital recovery fees generated by this section shall be deposited in the wastewater capital recovery fee account of the water and sewer fund and all fees and interest accrued in such account shall be used to finance wastewater capital improvement projects. 
(i)  Appeals. The city council or a board designated by the city council shall serve as an appeal board in the event one affected by this section wishes to file an appeal from its application. All expenses incurred in connection with such appeal shall be paid by the appellant. Written notice of appeal shall be given within ten days from the date of action or decision by the city staff, and a decision shall be made by the appeal board within 30 days thereafter, which decision shall be final. 
(j)  Periodic review. This section and its administration shall be reviewed by the city council no less frequently than every five years. 
(k)  Waiver of fees. The city council may waive the collection of such fees for construction performed by the tax supported entities and for persons in owner occupied single-family dwelling units who meet community development block grant property and income requirements. 
(l)  Installment payments. The property owner of an existing single family structure located in a single family zoned district to which water and/or sewer service is not currently provided by the city may request to pay water and/or sewer capital recovery fees in installment payments in lieu of a one-time lump sum. 
(1)  Owners of property located in commercial, multifamily or any other non-single family zoned property are not eligible for installment payment agreements. 
(2)  An eligible property owner may request installment payments from the community development department, using the application form provided by the city. The completed form must include a copy of the property's most recent receipt or statement from one of the taxing entities, which include Denton County, Lewisville Independent School District or the City of Lewisville. 
(3)  Prior to application for installment payments, all associated fees, including, but not limited to, permit fees, deposit fees, water fees, administration fees, monthly usage fees and monthly garbage service fees, must be paid in full. Payment of these fees is in addition to payment of the capital recovery fee. 
(4)  The term of the installment payment agreement may be for 12, 24, 36, 48, or 60 months, whichever is chosen by the property owner. 
(5)  The principal amount shall be established based upon the capital recovery fee for the year in which the installment payment agreement is signed. The capital recovery fee shall be adjusted annually on January 1 of each year and is calculated every year to establish the annual requirements. 
(6)  Interest will be included in the installment payments. 
(7)  The installment payment amount shall be included on the water (usage) bill. Accordingly, the water bill will include the capital recovery fee installment amount, actual water service fee and garbage fee. Failure to pay the installment amount in addition the monthly water and garbage fees will result in termination of service. 
(8)  If the property is sold, transferred, or undergoes any transition in which new ownership occurs, the balance of the installment payment agreement is required to be paid in full prior to reconnection of service. 
(9)  If the property is rented/leased and the renter/lessee agrees to make the installment payments, the renter/lessee and the property owner must apply for the installment payment agreement. Although both the renter/lessee and the property owner apply for the installment payments, the property owner is ultimately responsible for the payment of any unpaid fees associated with the agreement. If the renter/lessee changes during the term of the agreement, a new deposit and agreement shall be required to continue the installment payments. It is the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that a new agreement is signed by the new renter/lessee and returned to the city. 
(Code 1990, § 2-4-8; Ord. No. 1513-1-90, §§ II—XI, 1-22-90; Ord. No. 1871-1-94, §§ II—XII, 1-17-94; Ord. No. 2391-11-98, § 1(a), 11-2-98; Ord. No. 2394-11-98, § 1, 10-19-98; Ord. No. 2768-01-2002, § 1, 12-10-01; Ord. No. 3431-04-2007, § 1, 4-2-07; Ord. No. 3797-09-2010 , § 3, 9-13-10; Ord. No. 3929-04-2012 , § 1, 3-5-12; 0075-18-ORD , § 3, 10-15-18)  
Secs. 16-208—16-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WATER REGULATIONS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Requirements for improvements on land served by substandard public improvements, § 6-436 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-231. - Unlawful acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to do, commit or assist in committing any of the following things or acts: 
(1)  To open or close any fire hydrant, meter box cover or stop cock connected with the water system, or lift or remove the covers of any gate valves or shutoffs thereof, without the permission of the director of public services, except in case of fire, and then under the direction of officers of the fire department. 
(2)  To interfere with, destroy, deface, injure or wantonly force open any gate or door, or in any way whatsoever destroy, injure or deface any part of any engine house, reservoir, stand pipe, elevated tank, building, or appurtenances, fences, trees, shrubs or fixtures or property appertaining to the water system. 
(3)  To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps, on any elevated water storage tank or stand pipe of the water system, except by permission of the director of public services. 
(4)  To resort to any fraudulent device or arrangement for the purpose of procuring water for himself or others from private connections on premises contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(5)  To place upon or about any fire hydrant, gate, valve or curb cock connected with the water system any object, material, debris or structure of any kind, or to interfere in any manner whatsoever with any of the water system, or to turn on the water after service has been discontinued. 
(6)  To make or permit to be made any connections with the main or service pipes of the water system or to turn on or use the water of the system without first obtaining a permit therefor. 
(7)  To remove any water meter or water meter lid that has been placed by the city or allowable procedure described herein, or to in any manner change, interfere with or tamper with any water meter or water meter lid; providing that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the city or to other allowable state-licensed plumbers when acting in their official capacity. 
(8)  To have in one's possession a key or master key that will unlock water meter lids. This subsection does not apply to city officials or employees, or to state-licensed plumbers for the purpose of installing an original meter as described herein. 
(9)  To install city water meters at the original time of connection for new structures, except for city employees under the direct authorization of the director of the department of public services, or as permitted and specifically directed by a state-licensed plumber. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-2; Ord. No. 2218-5-97, § I, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 16-232. - Reserved.  
Sec. 16-233. - Report of leaks. 
It shall be the duty of all employees of the city, including officers and members of the police force to report to the director of public services, upon blanks furnished for that purpose, any leaks or unnecessary waste of water that may come to their attention, also any violations of this article. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-5)  
Sec. 16-234. - Meters generally. 
(a)  All meters belonging to the water system shall be set by the employees of the city or by state-licensed plumbers or by state-licensed irrigators as it strictly relates to the permitted and allowable meter set for new structures only. If the meter becomes inoperative and fails to register, the consumer will be charged at the average daily consumption as shown by the meter when in order. All water that passes through the meter shall be charged for, whether used or not. 
(b)  If a meter is installed at an address other than the address on the corresponding meter account, an administration fee will be charged for reassignment of the meter billing in the city records. This fee is set out in section 2-201 and shall be due with the next water billing. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-6; Ord. No. 2129-8-96, § 1, 8-5-96; Ord. No. 2218-5-97, § I, 5-5-97; Ord. No. 3797-09-2010 , § 4, 9-13-10)  
Sec. 16-235. - Separate meters required. 
Each consumer of water must have a separate water connection. Additionally, there must be a minimum of one water meter per lot in all zoning categories. Service by one water meter across separate lots shall not be allowed. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-7; Ord. No. 2218-5-97, § I, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 16-236. - Private lines outside city limits. 
(a)  Private lines. The maintenance and inspection of all private lines (customer lines) extending from the city water meter shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The private line shall include the approved backflow device, if required. 
(b)  Inspection. Each installation of private water lines shall be inspected by the director of public services or his authorized agent and meet the specifications laid down by the city. The owners of the future lines in consideration of permission to tie in to the city lines must agree in writing to give the city the right to determine the number of connections that may be made to the private line by others without city connections who live or will live in reasonable proximity to the private line. The purpose of this section is to cut down frequency and difficulty of maintenance work on the lines and to prevent numerous tie-ins of private lines to city lines with the consequent waste of time, labor and money. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-8; Ord. No. 2218-5-97, § I, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 16-237. - Repair of water lines. 
In the interest of water conservation, if at any time water lines and connections from the meter loop connection into the residence, house, barn, business, yard or similar places become rusted out, broken or in general deteriorated, it shall be the duty of the owner of the premises to place his lines in a good and serviceable condition. The replaced and repaired lines must meet specifications laid down by the city for original installations. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-9)  
Sec. 16-238. - Meter deposit. 
(a)  The deposit for services furnished by the city water system is set out in section 2-201. The deposit shall be collected by the city prior to the city's rendering such services for all nonresidential accounts. For residential accounts, the deposit shall be collected by the city prior to the city's rendering such services; provided, however, the deposit may be collected in full by the city by the due date of the customer's first monthly billing if requested by the customer and approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  If such deposits are insufficient to pay an average monthly bill, or if experience has proved that a customer does not pay water bills promptly, and as due, the city manager or his designee may require the meter deposit to be in any sum deemed necessary to protect the city. 
(c)  Such meter deposit may be applied to the payment of any water, sewer, or garbage charge overdue to the city. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be refunded to the customer at any time service is discontinued. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-10; Ord. No. 2245-8-97, § 1, 8-4-97)  
Sec. 16-239. - Construction meters and deposit. 
If a user of water service desires connection to a fire hydrant outlet for construction usage, there shall be imposed a charge for the temporary construction meter. Such user shall also pay a water deposit and regular water rates for service rendered. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-10.5; Ord. No. 2218-5-97, § I, 5-5-97)  
Sec. 16-240. - Nonfranchise sale of water. 
(a)  No person located or doing business in the city shall distribute or sell water in any form or container to any person unless such water shall first have been distributed and sold by the city, or its franchisee. 
(b)  No person located or doing business in the city shall sell water indirectly or directly in any form or container to any person in the city. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the personal consumption of water by the producer thereof or the sale of ice, soft drinks or bottled water, if the same has been duly approved by the water quality board, and complies with the requirements of the state and the city health departments. 
(d)  This section shall not be applicable to anyone unless and until the expiration of 30 days from the first date that a water tap shall become available to the individual or corporation involved. 
(e)  No person shall deposit or put into the sanitary sewer system of the city any effluent whatsoever unless the same be metered by sewage meter approved by the city and installed and maintained at the sole expense of such individual or corporation so depositing the effluent. 
(f)  This section shall not be construed to apply to or require any action by any person selling or distributing water on the effective date hereof; however, this section shall apply in full force and effect to any person selling or distributing water after the effective date hereof. 
(Code 1990, § 2-2-12)  
Sec. 16-241. - Restricted access to areas surrounding raw water intake structures. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section, "raw water intake structure" means a steel or concrete pier-type structure which supports the pumps, motors and electrical equipment that is necessary to pump water from a water source to another location. 
(b)  Restrictions. 
(1)  A restricted zone of 550 feet radius from the raw water intake structure and associated works shall be established. 
(2)  All recreational activities shall be prohibited in this area. No boat launching ramps, marinas, docks or floating fishing piers which are accessible by the public may be located within 1,000 feet of the raw water intake structure. 
(3)  Any person found within the restricted zone without proper authorization from the structure owner shall be found in violation of this section and shall be subject to legal action as prescribed by law. 
(4)  The restricted zone shall be clearly designated with signs defining restrictions. The signs shall be maintained in plain view of the public and shall be visible from outside the restricted area. 
(5)  Special buoys may be required as deemed necessary by the city director of public services and the manager of the water source. 
(c)  Appendices. An appendix to Ordinance No. 2246-8-97 shall be made for each raw water intake structure to be located within the jurisdiction of the city. This appendix shall detail the physical location of the structure in order to determine the restricted zone. 
(d)  Enforcement. Strict enforcement of the provisions of this section will be implemented by the city police department. 
(e)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person who shall willfully or negligently violate any provision of this section shall, and upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(2)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall become liable to the owner for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the owner by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2246-8-97, §§ II—VI, 8-4-97) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2246-8-97, adopted August 4, 1997, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, codification of §§ II—VI of said ordinance as § 16-241 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 16-242—16-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , §§ 1, 2, adopted April 7, 2014, repealed and reenacted division 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 2 pertained to the water shortage rationing program, and derived from Ord. No. 2633-3-2001, § 2, adopted March 9, 2001; Ord. No. 2847-09-2002, §§ 1, 2, adopted August 9, 2002. 
 
Sec. 16-251. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to establish the city's policy and procedures to reduce water consumption, specifically for lawn and landscape irrigation. Water conservation measures are intended to reduce loss and waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water and to protect water as a valuable resource on a continuous basis and most essentially in the event of shortages or delivery limitations in the city's water supply. This section applies to: 
(1)  All persons and premises within the city using water from the water system. 
(2)  All retail service customers outside the city using water from the water system to the extent provided by section 16-259. 
(3)  All wholesale service customers outside the city to the extent provided by section 16-259. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 16-252. - Emergency water management plan. 
The emergency water management plan of the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  Stage 1: Water Watch—Mandatory Restrictions: 
a.  Criteria. 
1.  Conservation. Measures to ensure that the City of Lewisville can continue to deliver safe, dependable drinking water to retail and wholesale customers. The target for this first stage is to achieve a five percent reduction in total gallons per capita per day (GPCD). 
2.  Effective period. Mandatory year-round restrictions shall be in place to reduce water consumption for lawn and landscape irrigation, improve water efficiency and control for the waste and loss of water. 
i.  Single-family residential landscape watering shall follow the schedule: 
Even: Those residential addresses that are evenly numbered (0, 2, 4, 6, 8), or those customers with no street address, may irrigate landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems no more than twice per week on Tuesday and Saturdays. May 1st through September 30th of each year, outdoor irrigating is permitted only between the designated hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
Odd: Those residential addresses that are oddly numbered (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) may irrigate landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems no more than twice per week on Wednesday and Sundays. May 1st through September 30th of each year outdoor irrigating is permitted only between the designated hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
ii.  Commercial landscape, including multi-family residential shall follow the schedule: 
Commercial water customers may water on Monday and Thursdays. May 1st through September 30 of each year outdoor irrigating is permitted only between the designated hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
iii.  No landscape watering with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems will be allowed on Fridays. 
iv.  Drip irrigation, soaker hoses and hand-watering are allowed on any day between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
v.  Modifications of restrictions listed may be necessary to address water system irregularities and system delivery issues as determined by the plan administrator. 
(2)  Stage 2: Water Emergency—Mandatory Restrictions: 
a.  Triggering criteria (if one or more occurs): 
1.  Supply. 
i.  Total raw water supply in Dallas Water Utilities connected reservoirs exceeds 50 percent depletion. 
ii.  Dallas Water Utilities implements conservation measures and requests wholesale customers to implement similar measures. The target for this stage plan is to achieve a 15 percent reduction in total gallons per capita per day (GPCD). 
2.  Distribution. Failure of Stage 1 restrictions to reduce usage below supply capacity. 
3.  Other. Any unanticipated situations that limit distribution of water as determined by the director of public services. 
i.  Short-term or long-term equipment failure or failure to maintain 20 psi pressure at up to 500 service locations or up to ten fire hydrants in localized areas. 
ii.  Short-term deficiencies within a gridded pressure zone. 
b.  Actions available (implemented in total or applied as necessary): 
1.  Mayor, mayor pro tem, city manager, or city manager's designee, as administrator of the emergency water management plan, announces the beginning of Stage 2. 
2.  City staff completes projects to resolve supply or distribution problems. 
3.  Restricted water uses may include the following: 
i.  Hosing off of paved areas, buildings, or windows. 
ii.  Serving of water in restaurants unless requested by the customer. 
iii.  Swimming pool draining followed by refilling. 
iv.  Washing or rinsing of vehicles by hose. 
v.  Water use that allows runoff or other water waste. 
4.  Commercial car washing is prohibited between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. each day. 
5.  Single-family residential landscape watering is allowed only during the designated hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. following the odd or even schedule-those residential addresses that are evenly numbered (0, 2, 4, 6, 8) may water on Tuesday; odd numbered (1, 3, 5, 7, 9) may water only on Wednesday. Drip irrigation, soaker hoses and hand-watering are allowed only on the designated landscape watering days. 
6.  Commercial water customers, including multi-family residential may water landscaping only on Thursdays between the designated hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
7.  No landscape watering will be allowed on Monday, Friday, Saturday or Sundays. 
8.  Modifications of restrictions listed may be necessary to address water system irregularities and system delivery issues as determined by the plan administrator. 
9.  All commercial water users may be required to reduce water consumption by a percentage. 
10.  All rates for retail residential water usage in excess of 6,000 gallons per month may be temporarily increased by a percentage. 
11.  Exceptions: 
i.  Foundations may be watered with a soaker or hand-held hose on the same days as landscape watering. 
ii.  Golf courses using potable water or treated municipal wastewater must adhere to the following schedule: 
A.  Greens and tee boxes may be watered only on Monday and Thursdays between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
B.  Fairways may be watered only on Thursdays between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
iii.  Nurseries may water plant stock only between the designated hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
iv.  Modifications of actions listed may be necessary to address water system irregularities and system delivery issues as determined by the plan administrator. 
v.  New homes and new businesses will receive a 30-day exemption to water new landscape with the initial certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Stage 3: Water Crisis—Mandatory Restrictions: 
a.  Triggering criteria (if one or more occurs): 
1.  Supply. 
i.  Total raw water supply in Dallas Water Utilities connected reservoirs exceeds 65 percent depletion. 
ii.  Dallas Water Utilities implements conservation measures and requests wholesale customers to implement similar measures. The target for this third stage of the plan is to achieve a 20 percent reduction in total gallons per capita per day (GPCD). 
2.  Distribution. Failure of Stage 2 restrictions to reduce usage below supply capacity. 
3.  Other. Any unanticipated situations that severely limit distribution of water as determined by the director of public services. 
i.  Short-term or long-term equipment failure or failure to maintain 20 psi pressure at up to 500 service locations or up to ten fire hydrants in localized areas. 
ii.  Short-term deficiencies within a gridded pressure zone. 
b.  Actions available (applied locally or to all customers as necessary): 
1.  Mayor, mayor pro tem, city manager, or city manager's designee, as administrator of the emergency water management plan, announces the beginning of Stage 3. 
2.  All washing of vehicles is prohibited except at commercial car washes on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday during normal business hours. 
3.  All commercial water users may be required to reduce water consumption by a percentage determined by the director of public services. 
4.  All commercial and residential landscape watering is prohibited. 
5.  Exceptions: 
i.  Nurseries may water plant stock between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. only on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. 
ii.  Golf courses may water greens and tee boxes between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. only on Monday, and Thursdays. Fairway watering is prohibited. 
6.  All rates for retail residential water usage in excess of 6,000 gallons per month may be temporarily increased by a percentage. 
If situations arise which are not outlined in Stages 1 through 3, the mayor, mayor pro tem, city manager, or city manager's designee, as administrator of the emergency water management plan, shall establish requirements on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; Ord. No. 4073-05-2014 , § 1, 5-19-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 16-253. - Authority generally. 
The mayor, mayor pro tem, city manager, or his designee, shall be administrator of the emergency water management plan. The administrator is authorized to implement measures prescribed in the plan and ensure enforcement of such measures. The administrator shall not promulgate regulations that are in conflict with this section or state or federal laws in the enforcement of the plan. All city employees shall assist as needed in the notification and enforcement of the plan. The neighborhood and inspection services, public services and police departments shall be authorized to enforce penalties upon violation. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 16-254. - Authority under other laws. 
Nothing under this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the administrator of the plan to seek emergency relief under the provisions of any state or federal disaster relief act. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 16-255. - Implementation of an emergency. 
The director of public services shall advise the administrator of the plan when the conditions of a water emergency exist. The administrator shall order the appropriate stage of emergency as detailed in the plan be implemented. To be effective immediately, the order shall be made by public media. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 16-256. - Duration of the order; change and extension. 
Upon recommendation of the director of public services, the administrator may upgrade or downgrade the stage of emergency when the conditions triggering the emergency stage change. Any change in the status of the order shall be made in the same manner prescribed in section 16-255 for implementing orders. 
The administrator may terminate the order in the manner prescribed in section 16-255 when the director of public services determines that the conditions creating the emergency no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 16-257. - Offenses and penalties. 
A person commits an offense if he or she knowingly makes, causes, or permits a use of water contrary to the measures implemented. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of the plan shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 for each offense. Each day such offense is continued shall constitute a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 16-258. - Variances—Conditions for granting and revoking. 
During times the plan is operative, the administrator may grant variances in special cases after evaluation of hardship, need, or customer efforts to conserve water. 
The administrator may grant variances only when the applicant provides a written request to the administrator. The applicant must demonstrate extreme hardship or need relating to his health, safety or welfare to be granted a variance. Granting of the variance shall not cause an immediate significant reduction in the city's water supply nor shall it adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of other persons. The administrator may revoke a variance when it is determined that the conditions warranting the variance are no longer being met; the terms of the compliance agreement have been or are being violated; or the health, safety or welfare of other persons requires revocation. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; Ord. No. 4073-05-2014 , § 1, 5-19-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Sec. 16-259. - Wholesale service to customers outside city. 
The administrator of the plan shall advise retail and wholesale customers receiving retail/wholesale water service from the city of actions taken under the emergency water management plan. 
The administrator may restrict service to retail and wholesale customers outside the city as permitted under contract and in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 4059-04-2014 , § 2, 4-7-14; 0120-19-ORD , § 2, 5-6-19)  
Secs. 16-260—16-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY FEES, CHARGES, RATES AND BILLING PROCEDURE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-281. - Rates, etc., on file. 
The utility rates, fees, deposits and other charges are set out in section 2-201.  
Secs. 16-282—16-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATE DETERMINATION PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 16-291. - Effect of division. 
The rules and regulations contained in this division shall be in full force and effect as between the city and the various utility companies operating within the city by virtue of franchise agreements with the city, hereinafter referred to as the "utility." 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(A))  
Sec. 16-292. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Allocations shall mean for all utilities, the division of plant revenues, expenses, taxes and reserves between cities or between cities and unincorporated areas, where such items are used for providing utility service for more than one city or for a city and unincorporated areas. Examples of items subject to allocation include general office buildings, general administrative expenses, and income taxes. 
Public utility shall mean any person engaged in regularly supplying the public within the corporate limits with some commodity or service which is of special consequence and need, such as the electricity, gas, transportation and telephone service. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(B)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-293. - Exception. 
The provisions of this division shall not apply to the telephone communication utility operating within the city. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(J))  
Sec. 16-294. - Determination of rates. 
(a)  Fair value. Utility rates shall be based on the fair value of property used and useful in providing service to the inhabitants of the city. "Fair value" shall be a reasonable balance between original adjustment for both age and condition. 
(b)  Balance between original, replacement costs. As may be determined by the city, "reasonable balance" shall mean not less than 60 percent nor more than 75 percent weighting of original costs less depreciation and not less than 25 percent nor more than 40 percent weighting of replacement or trended costs less adjustment for both age and condition. In the city's determination of reasonable balance, it may consider inflation, deflation, quality of service being provided, growth rate of service area, capital structure and need for the utility to attract new capital. 
(c)  Deduction. In arriving at fair value rate base, the city may deduct any capital not supplied by investors. By way of example, the city may deduct contributions in aid of construction, deferred liabilities such as deferred income taxes and investment tax credit allowed by law, and customer deposits. 
(d)  Rate base. When requesting a change in rates the utility shall specify and identify for rate base purposes, the following items and the manner in which they were determined: 
(1)  Construction work in progress. 
(2)  Plant held for future use. 
(3)  Materials and supplies. 
(4)  Working capital. 
The city may, in consideration of local circumstances, require or permit, by specific action, treatment of the four items enumerated above in any manner it considers appropriate and reasonable. The city may include or exclude other items from the rate base for reasonable cause. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(C))  
Sec. 16-295. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Information to be filed. The utility shall file annually with the city secretary a complete balance sheet and operating statement of the utility and a statement of the total number of customers by classes served within the city and within the service territory covered by the operating statement. Such statements shall cover the fiscal year of the utility unless some other fiscal period shall be approved by the city; and shall be filed within 120 days after the close of such period. In addition, the utility shall file: 
(1)  A cost of service report and operating statement for the city or such other service area appropriate for establishing local rates. 
(2)  Copies of statistical and operating reports filed with other regulatory agencies such as the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Power Commission, Public Utility Commission of Texas, or the Texas Railroad Commission. 
(3)  A copy of annual and interim reports prepared for release to existing and prospective investors. 
(4)  Such other reports or special information as may reasonably be required by the city for supervision of the utility and for the regulation of local rates and service. 
(b)  Change in rates. In connection with consideration of a change in basic rates, the utility shall furnish to the city such information as is reasonably required for the city to evaluate and determine the rate base, operating income and expenses, and a fair rate of return, the burden of proof being with the utility. In addition, the utility may file, and shall file if requested by the city, schedules of present and proposed rates, analysis of customer bills or such other information necessary for the verification of revenue effect of proposed rates, schedules of rates in other jurisdictions, and such other information the city may reasonably request for a full and fair consideration of a change in rates or service. If appropriate for a fair determination of local rates, the city may consider a service area beyond its city limits and may require information thereof from the utility. 
(c)  Test year. Any requests by the utility for rate increase shall use as their "test year," the most recent 12 months for which operating data for the utility are available, and shall commence with a calendar quarter. 
(d)  Certification. The city hereby requires that information furnished by the utility to the city be supplied under oath by an appropriate official of the utility as to correctness, authenticity and adherence to accepted practices or recognized standards. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(D))  
Sec. 16-296. - Expenses. 
(a)  All reasonable and necessary expenses of operating the utility shall be allowed in the determination of net operating revenue. Expenses included in annual reports or other reports to the city shall be determined from and supported by actual expenses recorded on the utility's books. When filing for a rate increase, the utility shall show actual revenue and expenses recorded on books and adjustments necessary in order to properly present net operating revenue for the period under review. Depreciation expense shall be based upon original cost and not upon the measures of value of assets. 
(b)  The city may require an annual reporting from each utility company of all its expenditures for business gifts and entertainment, and institutional, consumption-inducing and other advertising or public relations expenses. The city shall not allow as costs or expenses for rate-making purposes any of these expenditures which the city determines not to be in the public interest. The cost of legislative-advocacy expenses shall not in any case be allowed as costs or expenses for rate-making purposes. Reasonable charitable or civic contributions may be allowed not to exceed the amount approved by the city. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(E))  
Sec. 16-297. - Rate of return. 
The utility shall be entitled to a fair return upon the fair value rate base of its property used and useful in providing service to the inhabitants of the city as provided by law. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(F))  
Sec. 16-298. - Procedural rules for rate increase. 
(a)  Application. The utility shall file its application for a general rate increase by delivering such application to the city secretary. Any such application shall include or be accompanied by the following information presented on both a system-wide and an allocated basis for the city only: 
(1)  Summary information: 
a.  A summary of the increase in revenue requirements and the spread of the revenue increase by customer classification. 
b.  A summary of the results of operations for the test year, and the fiscal year ended prior to the end of the test year. 
c.  A summary of the capital structure for the test year and the fiscal year ended prior to the end of the test year. 
d.  Construction expenditures and gross utility plant in service for the test year and the fiscal year ended prior to the end of the test year. 
e.  A summary of changes in financial position for the test year and the fiscal year ended prior to the end of the test year. 
f.  A summary showing the development of all allocation factors used in allocating data for the city. 
(2)  Rate base information: 
a.  A schedule showing the elements of original cost and current cost rate bases. 
b.  A schedule listing proposed adjustments to gross plant in service and accumulated depreciation for the original cost rate base. 
c.  A schedule demonstrating the determination of current cost less allowance for age and condition for the test period. 
d.  A schedule showing proposed adjustments to gross plant in service and the allowance for age and condition for the current cost rate base. 
e.  A schedule showing calculations in weighting used in determining fair value rate base. 
f.  A schedule showing the computation of working capital allowance. 
g.  A detailed schedule showing the development of all allocation factors used in allocating the rate base data to the city. 
(3)  Test year income statements: 
a.  A test year income statement, with any proposed adjustments. 
b.  A schedule showing the detail of all proposed adjustments. 
c.  A schedule showing the incremental taxes and other expenses on gross revenues and the computation of an incremental gross revenue conversion factor. 
d.  A detailed schedule showing the development of all allocation factors used in allocating revenues and expenses to the city. 
(4)  Cost of capital information: 
a.  A schedule summarizing the elements in the capital structure at the end of the test year. 
b.  A schedule showing the detail of long-term and short-term debt at the end of the test year and their total cost. 
c.  A schedule showing the detail of preferred stock at the end of the test year and their total cost. 
d.  A schedule summarizing conclusions of the required return on book common equity as of the end of the test year. 
e.  A statement of the fair rate of return being requested. 
(5)  Projections and forecasts: 
a.  A projected income statement for the projected year compared with actual test year results, at present rates and proposed rates. 
b.  A projected balance sheet for the projected year compared to the test year, at present rates and proposed rates. 
c.  Projected changes in financial position for the projected year compared with the test year, at present rates and proposed rates. 
d.  Projected annual construction requirements by property classification, for one to three years subsequent to the test year, compared with the test year. 
e.  Important assumptions used in preparing forecasts and projections. 
(6)  Cost of service information: 
a.  Schedule showing rates of return by customer classification at present and proposed rates. 
b.  Schedules showing approach used in allocating plant and expenses to classes of service and defined functions. 
c.  Schedules showing the development of all allocation factors used in the cost of service study. 
d.  A comparison of revenues by customer classification or other classification of revenues for the test year, at present and proposed rate. 
e.  A comparison of revenues by class of service and by rate schedule for the test year, at present and proposed rates. 
f.  A comparison of present and proposed rate schedules at representative rate schedules. 
g.  Typical bill analysis including range of seasonal high and low costs. 
(b)  Expenses of rate cases. The city shall have the right to select and employ rate consultants, engineers, accountants, auditors, attorneys and other personnel to conduct investigations, present evidence, advise the council, and conduct litigation on the establishment of rates, charges or fares; the utility shall reimburse the city for all such personnel costs and all other reasonable and necessary expense incurred; and such rate consultants, engineers, accountants, auditors and attorneys shall be qualified, competent, and of good standing in their professions. 
(c)  Rules of procedure. The city may adopt rules of procedure for public hearings, including extent and nature of presentations, order of proceeding and extent of cross-examination. 
(d)  Records of utility. Copies of requested records shall be promptly provided to any designated representative of the city without cost to the city. 
(e)  Hearings. No general rate increase shall be granted without public hearing at which the utility shall have the burden of proving, through clear and convincing evidence, the necessity for such increase. All hearings may be before the full city council. At the discretion of the city council, in each case, the city council may provide that hearings shall be conducted before a committee of the city council, a hearing examiner who may be an employee of the city, any person designated by the city council to act in such capacity. In the event the full city council does not conduct the hearings, a written report and recommendation from the committee or examiner shall be filed with the city council. In such latter case, the city council need not conduct further hearings, but may act on the basis of such report and recommendation together with any written argument which any citizen, the utility, utility representative, designated city staff member, auditor, attorney or consultant engaged by the city may wish to file within 15 days after filing of such report in response to such report or recommendation. The city, in its discretion may require that a record be made of all public hearings, at the expense of the utility, with a copy to be furnished the city. 
(f)  Evidence. All testimony of such public hearings shall be under oath and all exhibits or documentary evidence introduced at such hearings shall be supported by sworn testimony. For this purpose, oath may be administered by appropriate parties conducting the hearing. 
(g)  Time limitations. The city shall promptly review and take action on each application for a general rate increase within 90 days after its proper filing. Failure to act within such period shall be tantamount to a denial. In the event of such failure to act, the utility may appeal such decision as provided by law. Such 90-day period may be extended through agreement with the utility, or if the city council finds good cause for such extension. Good cause for extension shall include, but not be limited to, complexity or magnitude of the evidence, failure of the utility to promptly proceed, failure of the utility to promptly provide information requested and newly discovered evidence. 
(h)  Appeal. The utility may appeal the city's action as provided by law. An appeal should not be taken until the utility has exhausted its remedies under this division. 
(i)  Standards of service. The city may promulgate reasonable standards of service and requirements for extension of facilities. Failure to substantially comply with such standards, considering the revenues and expenses of the utility, may justify a lower rate of return being granted to the utility. The city's rate ordinance may provide for increases subject to the meeting of such standards or making certain extensions of facilities. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(G))  
Sec. 16-299. - Rate review by city. 
By resolution of the city council, the city may institute a review of the rates of a utility. Notice of any such review shall be given to the utility by sending a copy of such resolution by United States mail to the utility at its home or local office. Within the time specified in such notice the utility should file with the city secretary all information as required in section 16-298 in relation to an application by the utility for a general rate increase. All the provisions of this division dealing with an application for a general rate increase by a utility shall apply to a review of utility rates by the city under this section. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-1(F))  
Sec. 16-300. - Adjustments for leaks. 
(a)  Authorized. Any user or customer who is billed for a substantial increase in water usage during any one, or if related, two consecutive billing periods due to a hidden water leak, may request and receive an adjustment in the amount billed for water and sewer usage for that month in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any user or customer who is billed for a substantial increase in water usage which affects the three-month winter average provided by section 16-311 in any one billing period due to a leak which has been repaired and documented may request and receive an adjustment in the subsequent sewer amount only, billed pursuant to the sewer usage average in accordance with provisions of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hidden water leak shall mean any leak of a water pipe, line or other water conveyance equipment caused by deterioration, corrosion, unknown damage, natural forces or other similar cause which is not immediately and reasonably detectable. 
Substantial increase in water usage shall mean an increase in the amount of water metered and billed in excess of 100 percent of a water usage level based upon the average of the two monthly water usage levels billed immediately preceding the discovery of the leak or indeterminable high water usage for which the adjustment is requested at the service location and must additionally meet the test of exceeding 100 percent of the water usage level for the same month in the most immediate three-year historical period. 
(c)  Written request. Any user or customer requesting a water and sewer adjustment pursuant to this section shall make the request in writing to the customer service activity division of the finance department on forms provided for that purpose. A request for an adjustment based on a hidden leak shall state the location and cause of the leak, the date it was discovered, and the date of, and person, making the repair, with attached copies of repair labor or material bills. Repairs shall have been completed within 30 days of the discovery date of the leak to be eligible for an adjustment. All requests shall be submitted within 60 days of the billed date of the monthly bill for which an adjustment is sought. If a user's or customer's three-month winter average provided by section 16-311 is affected by the one-month substantial increase in water usage, the request shall be submitted within 60 days of the billed date of the March monthly bill. 
(d)  Water and sewer adjustment allowed. A request for an adjustment in a monthly bill for water and sewer usage shall be granted if it meets the following conditions: 
(1)  A written request, with all information in conformance as stipulated in this section is filed within the required time; 
(2)  The requested adjustment is for a monthly billing in which there is a substantial increase in water usage resulting from a hidden leak or other indeterminable caused metered water volume increase; and 
(3)  There has not been an adjustment made in the monthly billing for water or sewer usage at the same service location within the prior twelve-month period. 
(e)  Sewer only adjustment allowed. A request for an adjustment in one monthly bill and subsequent bills effected pursuant to section 16-311 for billing sewer usage shall be granted if it meets the following conditions: 
(1)  A written request, with all information in conformance as stipulated in this section is filed within the required time; 
(2)  The requested adjustment is for a substantial increase in water usage for November, December, January, or February resulting from a leak; and 
(3)  There has not been an adjustment made in the monthly billing for water or sewer usage within the prior six-month period. 
(f)  Amount of adjustment. If an adjustment is granted under this section, the customer's or user's account shall be adjusted by billing the customer or user an amount equivalent to the average of the two monthly water usage levels billed immediately preceding the excess usage. 
(g)  Inspection, verification. If a discrepancy appears in a monthly billing, the meter reading personnel of the city finance department shall inspect and verify the meter reading upon request of a customer or user. If the discrepancy is verified or a customer or user requests two or less inspections during a 12-month period, such inspection shall be of no cost to the customer or user; otherwise, the charge for a meter verification fee shall be as set out in section 2-201. 
(h)  Appeals. Any requested variance or disagreement on the part of the user, customer, or city staff pertaining to the administration of section 16-300 should be submitted to the city manager in writing stating the appealing party's position and desired resolution. The city manager will make the final decision and direct city staff accordingly. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-2.5; Ord. No. 2090-2-96, § 1, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 2633-12-2000, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-00; Ord. No. 3892-09-2011 , § I, 9-19-11)  
Secs. 16-301—16-309. - Reserved.  
Sec. 16-310. - Water rates. 
(a)  Retail water rates: The monthly rates and charges for metered water usage for retail service furnished by the city water works system are set out in section 2-201. 
(b)  Wholesale water rates: The rates and charges for treated water, as, if and when it is received by the wholesale customer city from the City of Lewisville are set out in section 2-201. 
(Ord. No. 1738-11-92, § 2, 11-2-92)  
DIVISION 3. - SEWER 
 
Sec. 16-311. - Sewer rates. 
(a)  Single-family dwelling: Current customers' rates shall be based upon the four-month winter average of monthly water consumption billed in the most recent December, January, February and March for such dwelling and charged pursuant to the fee schedule set out in section 2-201. In the event the winter average prescribed exceeds water consumption billed for any current month, the sewer billing calculation will utilize the lesser current water consumption gallons. 
(b)  Nonsingle-family dwellings. Rates shall be based upon each month's water consumption, and are set out in section 2-201. 
(c)  New customers. All new customers or current customers changing dwellings shall be charged a flat monthly fee as set out in section 2-201 until the winter average can be established at the new dwelling. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-3(A)—(C); Ord. No. 1848-9-93, § 1, 9-20-93)  
Sec. 16-312. - Landscaping. 
It shall be presumed that each water meter results in waste entering the sanitary sewer system. However, upon satisfactory proof that a water meter is installed and used solely for landscaping or other purposes whereby no water from such meter enters the sanitary sewer system, the city manager or his designee may waive sewer charges. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-3(D))  
Sec. 16-313. - Sewer only customers. 
In instances where dwellings are not served by the city water system, the charge for services furnished by the city sanitary sewer systems shall be a flat fee per dwelling unit as set out in section 2-201. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-3(E))  
Sec. 16-314. - Wholesale sewers. 
The rate for treatment of sewage received from a wholesale city customer and treated by the city sanitary sewer system is set out in section 2-201. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-3(F))  
Sec. 16-315. - Industrial surcharge. 
The factors per 1,000 gallons for the industrial surcharge ordinance are set out in section 2-201. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-3(G))  
Sec. 16-316. - Transported sewage. 
The rate for sewage transported by vehicle is set out in section 2-201. Points of collection are restricted to portable sanitary units and septic systems approved by the city. A volume charge shall be in addition to the rate charged. The city may refuse any waste if material is nonconforming with current pretreatment standards as adopted by the city. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-3(H))  
Secs. 16-317—16-325. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - BILLING PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 16-326. - Payment of bills. 
The rates and charges fixed and prescribed for the water, sanitary sewer, stormwater drainage, and garbage systems, including any payment required by a service extension agreement entered into in accordance with section 16-332, shall be paid simultaneously to the city by the users or customers of the service. Payments for such service shall become due and payable by no later than the billing due date shown on the monthly statement, unless otherwise indicated. The city may refuse to accept the payment for a part of such service unless the entire amount due is paid in full by the due date, or a partial pay/extension agreement is implemented in accordance with section 16-332. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 1793-4-93, § I, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 1863-12-93, § 1, 12-6-93; 0230-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 7-6-20)  
Sec. 16-327. - Discontinuation for nonpayment. 
(a)  If the user or customer does not pay the amount due under section 16-326 by the date the same becomes due and payable and a service extension agreement has not been implemented in accordance with section 16-332, the city shall issue a notice of "Intent to Disconnect Service Until Paid in Full" via regular mail through the city's utility billing process. The notice shall contain the account number, final due date, amount of the payment which must be received by close of business on the final due date to avoid discontinuance of service, and notice of a means by which the user or customer may cure the delinquency or dispute the validity of the reasons for the discontinuance, as provided for in subsection (c), below. The final due date shall be the close of business on the Tuesday following the subsequent month's regularly scheduled cycle billing date for the delinquent account. 
(b)  In the event payment is not received on or before the final due date set out in the notice and a service extension agreement has not been implemented in accordance with section 16-332, the city shall disconnect service to the user or customer for the referenced account location. Upon disconnection, it is hereby made the duty of the city to issue to the user or customer at the service location site a notice of "Disconnect of Service for Past Due Bill Until Paid in Full plus Reconnect and Tampering Fees" via regular mail through the city's utility billing process. Service to users or customers shall not be restored until payment in full of the past due amount, in addition to applicable reconnect and tampering fees, is received by the city, or a service extension agreement is implemented in accordance with section 16-332. Reconnect and tampering fees are set out in section 2-201. 
(c)  Any user or customer to whom a notice of "Intent to Disconnect Service Until Paid in Full" has been issued under subsection (a) may request a hearing in order to dispute the validity of the reasons for discontinuance outlined in the notice. If a hearing is requested, service shall not be disconnected until a written decision is rendered as provided for herein. 
(1)  Such a request must be made in writing and delivered to the city manager or her designee on or before the final due date provided in the notice under subsection (a), above. 
(2)  The city manager or her designee shall render a written decision within seven calendar days after the date the hearing is held. Such decision shall be delivered to the user or customer in person or by certified mail at the address of the user or customer according to the most recent records of the city. 
(3)  Further guidelines regarding the hearing process shall be promulgated by the city manager or her designee, a copy of which shall be kept in the office of the director of finance. 
(4)  This subsection (c) shall not apply to any adjustment or appeal specifically addressed by section 16-300 of this article or the stormwater drainage rules adopted by the city council. Such adjustments or appeals shall proceed under the provisions outlined in section 16-300 or the stormwater drainage rules, as applicable. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 1779-3-93, § I, 3-4-93; Ord. No. 1793-4-93, § II, 4-5-93; 0230-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 7-6-20)  
Sec. 16-328. - Reconnection fees and tampering fees. 
(a)  Fees for reconnection of utility services after disconnection thereof for nonpayment of a bill are set out in section 2-201. 
(b)  In the event the user or customer or their agent turns the water service on after service has been disconnected by the city, or if the user or customer or their agent tampers with the water meter in any manner, a tampering fee shall be assessed as set out in section 2-201. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-5; 0230-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 7-6-20)  
Sec. 16-329. - Bad check charges. 
Any utility payment made by personal check or bank draft shall be subject to a service charge as allowed by state law if such check or draft is returned by the financial institution for any reason. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-5; 0230-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 7-6-20)  
Sec. 16-330. - Transfer of account. 
Any person owing water, garbage, stormwater drainage or sewer rent and moving to other premises where there are water connections or where connections are thereafter made shall, before being permitted to use the water, pay all former delinquencies unless the person has entered into a service extension agreement for the delinquencies under section 16-332. If a person has entered into a service extension agreement under section 16-332, such agreement shall continue in full force and effect until the end of the period of extension of service regardless of a move by the person to other premises. A person's unpaid water, sewer, stormwater drainage and garbage rental may be transferred to another premises where water service is currently in use when two or more services are being rendered to the same person at the same time and one is disconnected. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-6; 0230-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 7-6-20)  
Sec. 16-331. - No free service. 
No free service shall be allowed, and to the extent that the city or any of its departments avail themselves of the services and facilities afforded by the water and sanitary sewer system, they shall pay therefor the same rates and charges prescribed for other consumers. 
(Code 1990, § 2-1-7; 0230-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 7-6-20)  
Sec. 16-332. - Partial payments and extensions of service. 
(a)  In the event a user or customer is unable to pay the amount due under section 16-326 by the date the same becomes due and payable, an extension of service will be granted if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The request for extension of service is made in writing, on a form provided by the city; 
(2)  The customer pays 15 percent of the outstanding balance at the time of the extension request; and 
(3)  The user or customer enters into a service extension agreement at the time of the extension request to pay the outstanding balance on their utility account before the end of the period of extension of service. The agreement shall not exceed six monthly payments. 
(b)  For extensions of service granted following the disconnection of service as provided for in section 16-327, the outstanding balance shall include any applicable reconnection fees and tampering fees. 
(c)  Service extension agreement guidelines shall be promulgated by the city manager or her designee and shall be kept on file in the office of the director of finance. 
(d)  Failure to make payments timely as provided for in the service extension agreement entered into under this section, along with payments for service due and payable by the billing due date shown on the regular monthly statement, shall be grounds for disconnection of service as provided for in section 16-327. 
(e)  The city may refuse to accept the payment for a part of such service unless the entire amount is paid in full by the due date or a service extension agreement as described above is executed. 
(Ord. No. 1863-12-93, § 2, 12-6-93; 0230-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 7-6-20)  
Sec. 16-333. - Activation of service fees. 
Fees for activation of utility services are set out in section 2-201. The activation of service fee is a nonrefundable fee used to assist in covering the cost of establishing or transferring utility services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 3892-09-2011 , § II, 9-19-11; 0230-20-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 7-6-20)  
Secs. 16-334—16-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 16-351. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system or the customer's private water system such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system. 
(2)  Protect the public water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolation of the customer's distribution system, which includes provisions for backflow prevention devices located at the water meter. 
(3)  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems. 
(4)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the city water system. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § I(1), 1-21-85)  
Sec. 16-352. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Approved shall mean accepted by the director of public services as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this article, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
Auxiliary water supply shall mean any water supply on or available to the premises other than the approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another public potable water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. Auxiliary waters may be contaminated, polluted or may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water utility does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow shall mean the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back-pressure or back-siphonage. 
Backflow preventer shall mean a device or means designed to prevent backflow. 
(1)  Air-gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of such vessel. An approved air-gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically, above the top of the overflow rim of the vessel; and in no case less than one inch. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle device. An assembly of two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specifications as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program resulting in an approval by a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies as listed in this text. The assembly shall operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves at an acceptance level less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. At cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the two check valves shall be less than the pressure on the public water supply side of the device. In case of leakage of either of the check valves the differential relief valve shall operate to maintain the reduced pressure in the zone between the check valves by discharging to the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure is two pounds per square inch or less, the relief valve shall open to the atmosphere. To be approved these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance and be installed in a location where no part of the device will be submerged. 
(3)  Double check valve assembly. An assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing shutoff valves on each end of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. The entire assembly shall meet the design and performance specification as determined by a laboratory and field evaluation program resulting in an approval by a recognized and approved testing agency for backflow prevention assemblies. To be approved these devices must be readily accessible for in-line testing and maintenance. 
Back-pressure shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than the intended source. 
Back-siphonage shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Contamination shall mean an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
Cross connection, as based upon the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare's Public Health Service Publication No. 525, shall mean any physical connection or arrangement of pipes between two otherwise separate water supply systems, one of which contains potable water and the other water of unknown or questionable safety, whereby water may flow from one system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure differential between the two systems. 
Cross connection control by containment shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection (meter) to any customer's premises which shall be required if determined necessary by the director of public services. 
Cross connection, controlled. A connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Cross connection section shall mean any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow may occur into the potable water system. This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tube. 
Director of public services shall mean the individual in charge of the water utilities of the city, who is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
Hazard, degree of, is a term which is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
(1)  Hazard, health. Any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which would create, or in the judgement of the director of public services or director of the health and code enforcement division of the community development department, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
(2)  Hazard, plumbing. A plumbing type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air-gap or approved backflow prevention device. 
(3)  Hazard, pollutional. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
(4)  Hazard, system. An actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Industrial fluids system shall mean any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited to, polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies, circulating cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
Pollution shall mean the presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard to or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such waters of domestic use. 
Water, nonpotable, shall mean water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Water, potable, shall mean any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
Water service connection shall mean the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the public services department loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
Water, used, shall mean any water supplied by the public services department from a public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the public services department. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § II, 1-21-85) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-353. - Responsibility for protection of potable water system; notice to install backflow prevention device. 
The director of public services shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgement of the director of public services, an approved backflow prevention device is required (at the customer's water service connection or within the customer's private water system) for the safety of the water system, the director of public services shall give notice in writing to such customer to install such approved backflow prevention devices at specific locations on his premises. The customer shall immediately install such approved devices at his own expense; and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain such devices shall constitute a ground for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § I(2), 1-21-85)  
Sec. 16-354. - Water systems. 
(a)  Utility system. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the public service department, up to the point where the customer's system begins. 
(1)  The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
(2)  The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
(b)  Customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § III(1), 1-21-85)  
Sec. 16-355. - Policies, procedures and standards. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the public services department unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulation and this article. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the public services department if a backflow prevention device required by this article is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. If required, all businesses, commercial and industrial users shall provide, maintain and routinely test an approved backflow device. The director of public services, the director of the building inspection division of the community development department, or the director of the health and code enforcement division of the community development department may require such devices as deemed necessary. Residential dwellings with any design of lawn watering devices shall require a backflow device. The device shall be determined by the director of public services, the director of the building inspection division of the community development department or the director of the health and code enforcement division of the community development department. All irregular types of lawn watering devices shall require an approved backflow device. 
(b)  The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the public services department or the health and code enforcement division of the community development department to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the director of public services or the director of the health and code enforcement division of the community development department shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance with state and city statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. Any cost of such disconnection and the estimated cost of reconnection must be paid by the customer before service shall be restored. 
(c)  No cross connection shall be permitted between any system of piping supplied by water from the mains of the public services department and any other source of supply, either public or private; or any secondary supplies known to be unsafe for drinking water, such as shallow wells, reused industrial supplies, raw surface water or swimming pools. 
(d)  Where city water is used as an auxiliary supply to a roof or suction tank, which is also supplied by water from any other source, such tank shall not be of the pressure type but open. The delivery of city water shall be above the tank overflow line and controlled by an approved automatic valve. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful, also, to maintain storage tanks supplied only with city water, unless the tanks are satisfactorily built, and covered so as to prevent the entrance of contamination. They shall also be subject to periodic inspection by the public services department and maintained in a manner wholly satisfactory to the standards and requirements of the state department of health. Pumps taking suction from the city supply, serving such building storage shall be installed or operated only upon request and/or permit from the public services department subject to their approval as to size, rate, capacity and valving arrangements. Storage tanks supplied with city water shall require an approved backflow device. In such cases, a specific backflow device shall be required at the service connection. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to interconnect private supplies, including deep well systems, with the city water system except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  Correction and maintenance, in a manner satisfactory to the state department of health and the public services department, of all existing sanitary defects in and around the private supply system. 
(2)  Provision to be made for complete bacteriological analysis by the American Public Health Association. This requirement means not less than four analyses each month of two standard samples, or more, if the analyses warrant. 
(3)  Approval from the city manager, the director of the building inspection division of the community development department, the director of public services and the director of the health and code enforcement division of the community development department. 
(4)  Provision by the owner of the private system involved to pay an equitable pro rata part of the cost of all inspections and testing herein required. The rates and method of paying for the same shall be determined by the public works department subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(g)  If required, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of a premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of a premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, or intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention device in the service line. 
(4)  Any nonresidential building greater than one story elevation. 
(5)  Any residential building structure greater than two stories elevation. 
(6)  For fire lines, approved double check detector check valves must be installed on all privately maintained fire lines. Such valves shall be installed in an underground vault located on private property at the boundary of the public/private property line. 
Exception: When the fire line serves only the automatic fire sprinkler system, and with prior written permission from the City which shall be given at its sole discretion, the double check detector check valve may be located on the interior of the building in the fire control room. The length of the fire line as measured from the nearest edge of right of way or utility easement to the interior double check detector check valve shall not exceed 50 feet, or as otherwise approved by the Fire Code Official. 
(h)  All boilers shall require internal protection such as an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle device. 
(i)  All bypass systems shall include a required backflow device as determined by the director of public service. 
(j)  The type of protective device required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly or an approved air-gap separation. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device on each service to the premises. 
(6)  Any residential or commercial user shall provide backflow prevention on all irrigation systems. Atmospheric or pressure vacuum breakers may be utilized on irrigation systems subject to the degree of hazard and approval from the director of the building inspection division of the community development department, the director of the health and code enforcement division of the community development department and the director of public services. 
(k)  Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model and size approved by the director of the building inspection division of the community development department. The term "approved backflow prevention device" shall mean a device that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled: 
AWWA C506-78 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Devices 
and have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California established by: 
Specifications of Backflow Prevention Devices #69-2, dated March 1969, or the most current issue. 
Such AWWA and FCCC and HR standards and specifications have been adopted by the director of public services. Final approval shall be evidenced by a certificate of approval issued by an approved testing laboratory certifying full compliance with AWWA standards and FCCC and HR specifications. The following testing laboratories have been qualified by the director of public services to test and certify backflow preventers: 
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control & Hydraulic Research 
University of Southern California 
University Park 
Los Angeles, CA 90007 
Texas A & M University 
Extension Services 
College Station, TX 77843-8000 
Testing laboratories other than the laboratories listed above will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by the director of public services. Backflow preventers which may be subjected to back pressure or back siphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a certificate of approval by such qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of approved backflow prevention devices may be used without further test or qualifications. 
(l)  It shall be the duty of the user at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the director of public services deems the hazard to be great, he may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by the device manufacturer's representative, public services department personnel or by a certified tester approved by the director of public services. It shall be the duty of the director of public services to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The user shall notify the director of public services in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that he or his representative may witness the tests, if so desired. These devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the user whenever such devices are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauls shall be kept and made available to the director of public services. Records shall be kept for a period of not less than three years. If devices which service a particular line, including fire hydrants, etc., must require extended repair time, the owner shall notify the director of public services and the city fire department. 
(m)  All fire lines shall utilize a double check-detector check, unless required otherwise by the director of public services. 
(n)  All backflow/backsiphonage assemblies shall be installed in accordance with current public services department standards. Vaults, dimensions, etc., shall conform to local regulations. 
(o)  All devices shall be inspected by the public services department upon completion of such project or development. 
(p)  The director of public services shall administer an inspection program to assure that backflow prevention devices are properly maintained and operated. The director of public services, in administering the inspection program, shall take into account the complexity and operating characteristics of the devices and the protection afforded the potable water system by the devices. Reduced pressure and double check backflow prevention devices installed pursuant to the Uniform Plumbing Code (the city plumbing code) are subject to inspection and testing by the public services department. 
(q)  Testers must successfully complete the state certification program directly related to backflow device certification. The approved tester must be registered by the public services department. 
(r)  Should any system supplied by the city water be operated in violation of any provision of this article, it shall be the duty of the public services department to completely disconnect all service lines serving such system until this section is properly complied with. Any cost of such disconnection and the estimated cost of reconnection must be paid by the consumer before service shall be restored. If fire protection is being supplied by the noncompliant system, the public services department shall provide necessary manpower to reconnect the system in case of an emergency. However, the owner is responsible for proper protection and liability in association with all cross connection circumstances. 
(s)  All backflow prevention devices installed as of January 1, 1985, which do not meet the requirements of this section but which were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the director of public services is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location, or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the director of public services finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this article. 
(t)  Test cocks shall be required on all devices. 
(u)  Identification, including the size, model number and serial number shall be placed on the actual unit at least one-fourth inch in height and of durable marking material. 
(v)  A plumbing permit must be obtained for installation of all backflow installations. 
(w)  All approved backflow devices should be of the type which is basically nonremovable and installed in such a manner that removal of the device would prohibit water flow. 
(x)  If a cross connection situation arises, the director of public services may recommend to the director of the health and code enforcement division of the community development department and the city manager a boil water order. The order would provide some protection in a hazardous situation. The time for such order shall be determined by the director of public services based upon laboratory analysis. 
(y)  All instances of cross connection cases shall be reported to the director of public services, the director of the health and code enforcement division of the community development department and the director of the building inspection division of the department of community development. The cases shall also be submitted to the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research as informational data only. 
(z)  Internal protection surveys and system protection surveys shall be performed once each year per establishment or as determined by need or as determined by the director of public services. 
(Ord. No. 4093-07-2014 , § 6, 7-7-14)  
Sec. 16-356. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § V, 1-21-85) 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-15.  
Sec. 16-357. - Violations, penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and such violator shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1270, § IV, 1-21-85) 
Cross reference— General penalty for Code violations, § 1-15.  
Secs. 16-358—16-370. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS OF (MS4) STORM SEWER SYSTEM[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , §§ 1—24, adopted May 17, 2010 repealed the former Art. VIII, §§ 16-371—16-392, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to discharge regulations of (MS4) storm sewer system and derived from Ord. No. 3560-04-2008, §§ 1—22, 4-7-08. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-371. - Compliance with other authority. 
(a)  Compliance with federal authority. The City of Lewisville shall comply with, enforce and adopt all applicable Federal regulations pertaining to stormwater discharges from regulated small MS4s. All persons within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with all applicable federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et. seq.) and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) regulations, as they now exist or as hereafter amended. 
(b)  Compliance with state authority. The city shall comply with, enforce and adopt all applicable sections of ch. 26 of the Texas Water Code as it now exists or as hereafter amended. The city shall comply with all applicable Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permits and requirements or any state permit, issued hereafter, for stormwater discharges from its MS4. All persons within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with all applicable state laws including the Texas Water Code and the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) regulations as they now exist or as hereafter amended. 
(c)  Right of revision. The city reserves the right to revise and to establish, by ordinance, more stringent standards or requirements on pollution prevention and discharges into, or adjacent to, water in the state. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 1, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-372. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are as follows: 
(1)  To maintain and improve the quality of surface water within the city. 
(2)  To prevent or reduce the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from construction, industrial, and residential sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and surface waters within the city. 
(3)  To facilitate compliance with federal and state rules and regulations by owners and operators of construction sites and commercial and industrial facilities within the city. 
(4)  To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 2, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-373. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Agricultural stormwater runoff. Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other non-point source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR § 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic production facilities as defined in 40 CFR § 122.24. 
Best management practice or BMP. Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent the pollution of the MS4 and waters in the state. Best management practices also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage areas. 
Cellar dirt. Construction site waste materials, such as natural rock and soil overburden. 
City. The City of Lewisville, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
Clean Water Act or CWA. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972; legislation which provides statutory authority for the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program. 
Code of federal regulations or CFR. A codification of the general and permanent rules published in the Federal Register by the executive department and agencies of the federal government. 
Commencement of construction activities. The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading or excavation activities, as well as other construction-related activities (e.g. stockpiling of fill material, demolition). 
Commercial. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry or other activity engaged in for profit. 
Common plan of development or sale. A construction activity that is completed in separate stages, separate phases, or in combination with other construction activities. A common plan of development or sale is identified by the documentation for the construction project that identifies the scope of the project, and may include plats, blueprints, marketing plans, contracts, building permits, a public notice or hearing, zoning requests, or other similar documentation and activities. A common plan of development does not necessarily include all construction projects with the jurisdiction of a public entity (e.g., a city or university). Construction of roads or buildings in different parts of the jurisdiction would be considered separate "common plans" with only the interconnected parts of a project being considered part of a "common plan" (e.g., a building and its associated parking lot and driveways, airport runway and associated taxiways, a building complex, etc.). Where discrete construction projects occur within a larger common plan of development or sale but are located one-quarter-mile or more apart, and the area between the projects is not being disturbed, each individual project can be treated as a separate plan of development or sale, provided that any interconnecting road, pipeline, or utility project that is part of the same "common plan" is not included in the area to be disturbed. 
Construction permit. The TPDES construction general permit TXR150000, any successor permit, or any alternative TPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity (if the activity does not qualify for coverage under general permit TXR150000) or the NPDES permit for oil and gas exploration activities; 
Construction site operator or operator. The person or persons associated with a small or large construction activity that meets either of the following criteria: 
Primary operator. The person or persons associated with a large or small construction activity that meets either of the following two criteria. 
a.  The person or persons that have operational control over construction plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plan and specifications; or 
b.  The person or persons that have day-to-day operational control of those activities at a construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions (e.g. they have day-to-day responsibility for directing workers at a construction site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or comply with other permit conditions). 
Secondary operator. The person whose operational control is limited to the employment of other operators or to the ability to approve or disapprove changes to plans and specifications. A secondary operator is also defined as a primary operator and shall comply with the permit requirements for primary operators if there are no other operators at the construction site. 
Any person(s) contracted by the city to conduct the day-to-day operational activities at a site of municipal construction activity shall be considered a primary operator for the purposes of this article. 
Contamination. The presence of or entry into a public water supply system, the MS4 or water in the state, any substance which may be detrimental to the public health and/or the quality of water. 
Contractor. For the purposes of this article, the contractor is the person or persons that have day-to-day operational control of those activities at a construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with local pollution prevention requirements, although they do not qualify as an operator under the construction permit. 
Control authority. The director of public services (or other official designated by the city manager) of the City of Lewisville, or his duly authorized agent or representative. For the purposes of this article, control authority shall be synonymous with MS4 operator. 
Conveyance. Curbs, gutters, man-made channels and ditches, drains, pipes, and other constructed features designed or used for flood control or to otherwise transport stormwater runoff. 
Discharge. To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Domestic sewage. Waterborne human waste and waste from domestic activities, including the use of toilet facilities, washing, bathing, and food preparation. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or any duly authorized official of said agency. 
Erosion. The process of land being diminished or worn away due to wind, water, or glacial ice. Erosion occurs naturally, but can be intensified by land-disturbing activities such as development, farming, road building, timber harvesting, etc. 
Facility. Any building, structure, installation, process or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
Fertilizer. A solid or non-solid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers. The term does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of essential plant nutrients is made. 
Final stabilization. A construction site status where any of the following conditions are met. 
(1)  All soil disturbing activities at the construction site have been completed and a uniform (e.g. evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70 percent of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as riprap or gabions) have been employed. 
(2)  For individual lots in a residential construction site, the homebuilder has completed final stabilization on the individual lot(s) as specified in condition (a) above. 
(3)  For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g. pipelines across crop or rangeland), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface water and areas, which are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use, shall meet the final stabilization conditions of condition (a) above. 
Fire protection water. Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire. 
Ground water infiltration. Ground water that enters a storm sewer system (including sewer service connections and foundation drains) through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. 
Harmful quantity. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state, or that will cause lethal or sub-lethal adverse affects on representative, sensitive aquatic monitoring organisms belonging to the city or state, upon their exposure to samples of any discharge into water in the state or the MS4. 
Hazardous substance. Any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302. 
Hazardous waste. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261. 
Herbicide. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth. 
Household hazardous waste or HHW. Any material generated in a household (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, camp grounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion provided in 40 CFR § 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. 
Illicit connection. Any man-made conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to a municipal separate storm sewer. 
Illicit discharge. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not entirely composed of stormwater, except discharges authorized under an NPDES or TPDES permit and discharges resulting from emergency fire fighting activities. 
Industrial facility operator or operator. The owner or person that is responsible for the management of an industrial facility. 
Industrial permit. The TPDES multi-sector general permit TXR050000, any successor permit, or any alternative TPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity (if the activity does not qualify for coverage under general permit TXR050000). 
Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business. 
Large construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in land disturbances of equal to or greater than five acres. Large construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than five acres of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than five acres of land. Large construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of the site (e.g., the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing right-of-ways, and similar maintenance activities). 
Maximum extent practicable or MEP. The technology-based discharge standard for municipal separate storm sewer systems to reduce pollutants in stormwater discharges that was established by CWA § 402(p). 
MS4 operator. The public entity, and/or the entity contracted by the public entity, responsible for management and operation of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system or MS4. A separate storm sewer system owned or operated by the United States, a state, city, town, county, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over the disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, that discharges to surface water in the state. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES. The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing requirements of certain sections of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Non-point source. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a "point source". 
Notice of change or NOC. A written submission to the executive director of the permitting authority, from a permittee, identifying any incorrect information, changes in information, or relevant facts that were not provided in the notice of intent. 
Notice of intent or NOI. A written submission to the executive director of the permitting authority, from an applicant, requesting coverage under a general permit. 
Notice of termination or NOT. A written submission to the executive director of the permitting authority, from a permittee authorized under a general permit, requesting termination of coverage under such permit. 
NPDES permit. A permit issued by the EPA that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general basis. In the state of Texas, the EPA retains authority for permitting oil and gas exploration activities and Indian Country land. 
Oil. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. 
Outfall. A point source at the point where a municipal separate storm sewer discharges to water in the state and does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels, or other conveyances that connect segments of the same stream or other waters of the U.S. and are used to convey waters of the U.S. 
Owner. For the purposes of this article, the owner is the person or persons that have operational control over construction plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications, although they do not qualify as an operator under the construction permit. 
Permit. Either an NPDES or TPDES permit, whichever is applicable. 
Permittee. An operator authorized under an NPDES or TPDES permit. 
Permitting authority. For the purposes of this article, the permitting authority for stormwater discharges is the state commission on environmental quality, or any successor agency. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
Pesticide. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant (as these terms are defined in § 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code). 
Point source. (from 40 CFR § 122.22) Any discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, garbage, sewage, sewage sludge, filter backwash, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term "pollutant" does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pastureland, and farmland. 
Pollution (from Texas Water Code § 26.001(14)). The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or water in the state. 
Riparian. Any area relating to or located on the bank of a natural watercourse. 
Runoff. Drainage or flood discharge that leaves an area as surface flow or as pipeline flow. 
Sanitary sewer. The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted). 
Sediment. Soil, sand, and minerals washed from land into water, usually after rain. 
Separate storm sewer system. A conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, outfalls, or storm drains), designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; which is not a combined sewer, and which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR § 122.2. 
Shall. Wherever used in this article will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; may is permissive. 
Small construction activity. Construction activities including clearing, grading, and excavating that result in land disturbances of equal to or greater than one acre and less then five acres of land. Small construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than one acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one and less than five acres of land. Small construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of the site (e.g., the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing right-of-ways, and similar maintenance activities). 
Storm drain. An opening leading to an underground pipe or an open ditch for carrying surface runoff. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or after any form of natural precipitation, including rainfall runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater associated with construction activity. Stormwater runoff from a construction activity where soil disturbing activities (including clearing, grading, and excavating) result in the disturbance of one or more acres of total land area, or are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will ultimately result in the disturbance of one or more acres of total land area. 
Stormwater associated with industrial activity. Stormwater runoff that exits any system that is used for collecting and conveying stormwater that originates from manufacturing, processing, material storage, and waste material disposal areas (and similar areas where stormwater can contact industrial pollutants related to the industrial activity) at an industrial facility described by one or more sectors of the TPDES multi-sector general permit. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan or SWPPP. A plan required by a permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity or construction activity, and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at the facility. 
Structural control (or practice). A pollution prevention practice that requires the construction of a device, or the use of a device, to capture or prevent pollution in stormwater runoff. Structural controls and practices may include but are not limited to. wet ponds, infiltration basins, stormwater wetlands, silt fences, earthen dikes, drainage swales, sediment traps, check dams, stabilized construction entrances, subsurface drains, storm drain inlet protection, rock outlet protection, reinforced soil retaining systems, gabions, and temporary or permanent sediment basins. 
Temporary stabilization. A condition where exposed soils or disturbed areas are provided a protective cover or other structural control to prevent the migration of pollutants. Temporary stabilization may include temporary seeding, geotextiles, mulches, perimeter controls, and other techniques to reduce or eliminate erosion until either final stabilization can be achieved or until further construction activities take place. 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, any duly authorized official of said agency, or any successor agency. 
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or TPDES. The state program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing requirements of certain sections of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
TPDES permit. A permit issued by the State of Texas that authorizes discharges of pollutants to water in the state and waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group or general basis. 
Water in the state. Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the Federal definition of "waters of the United States" at 40 CFR § 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Water quality standard. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in Chapter 307 of Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code. 
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 3, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-374. - Administration. 
The director of public services and the director's authorized representatives are authorized to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 4, 5-17-10)  
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEM; REGULATION; ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 16-375. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced, into the MS4, any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except those discharges listed in subsection 16-376(a). 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, into the MS4, any harmful quantity of any substance, as determined by the control authority. 
(c)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced, into the MS4, any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation, or any other construction activities, in excess of what could be retained onsite or captured by employing erosion and sediment control measures to the maximum extent practicable. 
(d)  No person shall use, store, or dispose of any harmful quantity of any substance in any manner that introduces that substance into the MS4 or the environment. 
(e)  No person shall discharge waste concrete into or adjacent to the MS4 or water in the state. 
(f)  No person shall intentionally dispose of yard wastes, such as grass clippings, leaves and tree branches into the MS4 or water in the state. 
(g)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced, into the MS4, any discharge that causes the city to violate its TPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with small MS4s or any other discharge permit for discharges from its MS4. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 5, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-376. - Allowable non-stormwater discharges. 
(a)  The following non-stormwater discharges are not prohibited and may be discharged to the MS4, provided that subsection (b) below does not apply: 
(1)  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, a TPDES or NPDES permit; 
(2)  Water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely effect aquatic life); 
(3)  Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing uncontaminated sources of potable water, groundwater, or surface water; 
(4)  Uncontaminated discharges from a potable water source; 
(5)  Uncontaminated diverted stream flows; 
(6)  Uncontaminated rising ground waters and springs; 
(7)  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration; 
(8)  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
(9)  An uncontaminated discharge from a foundation drain, or a footing drain; 
(10)  Uncontaminated air conditioning condensate; 
(11)  Uncontaminated water from a crawl space pump; 
(12)  A discharge from individual residential vehicle washing; 
(13)  Uncontaminated flows from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
(14)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(15)  A discharge from a temporary car wash sponsored by a civic group, school, religious, or nonprofit organization, where only soap and water are used and where efforts are made to minimize discharge; 
(16)  Street wash water that does not contain any detergent, soap, degreaser, or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
(17)  A discharge or flow from vehicle, exterior building and pavement wash water, from construction sites, where detergents, soaps, degreasers and other harmful cleaning substances are not used and where spills of hazardous substances have not occurred (unless spilled materials have been removed; and if local, state, or federal regulations are applicable, the materials are removed according to those regulations), and where the purpose is to remove mud, dirt, and dust; 
(18)  Uncontaminated water used to control dust at construction sites; 
(19)  A discharge or flow from emergency fire fighting activities. 
(b)  The city may, on a case-by-case basis, prohibit any of the above listed allowable non-stormwater discharges in subsection (a) provided: 
(1)  The discharge or flow in question has been determined by the permitting authority or control authority to be a substantial source of a pollutant or pollutants to water in the state or the MS4; and 
(2)  Written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 6, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-377. - Illicit connections prohibited. 
No person shall make an illicit connection to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 7, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-378. - Unpermitted discharges prohibited. 
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, stormwater associated with regulated commercial, industrial or construction activities, without first having obtained an NPDES or TPDES permit to do so. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 8, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-379. - Stormwater discharges associated with construction activities. 
(a)  General requirements and responsibilities. 
(1)  The construction site operator(s) (hereinafter referred to as operator) of large and small construction activities shall comply with all requirements of the construction permit and all other applicable regulations as may be required to ensure compliance with federal, state, and local rules and regulations. 
(2)  Any person who is contracted by the city to conduct the day-to-day operational activities at a site of municipal construction activity shall be responsible for providing, completing, submitting, displaying and retaining all documents required by, and in accordance with, the construction permit, and the implementation and maintenance of best management practices required by the construction permit and this article. 
(3)  Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not that owner is an operator, is jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the requirements in this article. 
(4)  Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract for implementing a pollution prevention control measure, including site inspections, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement that control measure. 
(5)  The city has adopted the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) integrated Stormwater Management (iSWM) Manuals. All operators, owners and contractors of construction activities shall use these manuals as a site development tool to minimize the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. Best management practices, which are not NCTCOG approved, may be considered on a case-by-case basis. The iSWM manuals can be located through the NCTCOG website at www.nctcog.org. 
(b)  Stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
(1)  Operators of all small and large construction activities shall develop, implement, and maintain (including updates and modifications) a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) in accordance with all applicable requirements of the construction permit. 
(2)  Any operator who intends to obtain coverage under the construction permit for stormwater discharges from a construction activity shall submit a copy of the completed and signed SWPPP to the control authority in conjunction with any application for a development permit, building permit, or any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction at the site. 
(3)  Upon the control authority review of the SWPPP, the city may withhold approval of any development permit, building permit, or any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction, if the SWPPP does not comply with the construction permit. 
(4)  The SWPPP shall be completed and implemented prior to the commencement of construction activities at the site. 
(5)  If the control authority observes upon a construction site inspection that the SWPPP no longer meets the requirements of the construction permit or this article, the operator will be notified of any deficiencies. The operator shall correct any deficiencies with the SWPPP within seven days of receiving notification. 
(6)  The SWPPP, with any modifications attached, shall be retained at the construction site from the date of commencement of construction activities until final stabilization has been completed on all disturbed areas or until a new operator assumes control over the construction activity and provides a new SWPPP. For a large construction activity, the SWPPP shall be retained at the construction site until a notice of termination is submitted. If the construction site is inactive or does not have an onsite location to store the SWPPP, the location of the SWPPP shall be described on the construction site notice posted at the site. The SWPPP and any modifications to it shall be made readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(7)  The following records shall be maintained and either attached to or referenced in the SWPPP, and made readily available to the control authority upon request: 
a.  The dates when major grading activities occur; 
b.  The dates when construction activities temporarily or permanently cease on a portion of the site; 
c.  The dates when stabilization measures are initiated; 
d.  An up-to-date version of the site map; and 
e.  The dates and descriptions of all pollution prevention deficiencies noted at the site as well as the corrective actions that were taken. 
(c)  Obtaining authorization to discharge stormwater. 
(1)  Primary operators of large construction activities, or who are otherwise required by the permitting authority to obtain authorization for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity, shall submit a notice of intent (NOI) to the permitting authority in accordance with the construction permit. A copy of the signed and certified NOI shall be provided to the control authority and any secondary operator in accordance with the construction permit. 
Primary and secondary operators shall sign and certify a completed TCEQ construction site notice in accordance with the construction permit. A copy of the construction site notice shall be provided to the control authority in accordance with the construction permit. 
All persons meeting the definition of secondary operator are regulated by the construction permit, but are not required to submit an NOI, provided that another operator at the site has submitted an NOI, or is required to submit an NOI and the secondary operator has provided notification to the operator of the need to obtain coverage (with records of notification available upon request). 
(2)  Primary operators shall post copies of the signed and certified NOI and construction site notice at the construction site in a location where they are safely and readily available for viewing by the general public and the control authority prior to commencement of construction activities, and shall be maintained at that location until final stabilization has been completed on all disturbed areas, or until a new operator assumes control over the construction activity and applies for permit coverage. 
Secondary operators shall post a copy of the signed and certified construction site notice at the construction site in a location where it is safely and readily available for viewing by the general public and the control authority prior to commencement of construction activities, and shall be maintained at that location until final stabilization has been completed on all disturbed areas, or until a new operator assumes control over the construction activity and applies for permit coverage. 
(3)  If the construction project is of a linear nature (e.g. highway, pipeline, etc.), the notices shall be placed in a publicly accessible location near where construction is actively underway, and shall be relocated, as necessary, along the length of the project. The notice shall be posted in a location where it is safely and readily available for viewing by the general public and the control authority. 
(4)  Discharges of stormwater runoff from construction support activities, including concrete batch plants, asphalt batch plants, equipment staging areas, material storage yards, material borrow areas, and excavated material disposal areas may not be required to be authorized under a separate NPDES and/or TPDES permit, provided that the activity is conducted in accordance with the construction permit. 
(5)  If an operator becomes aware that it submitted incorrect information, failed to submit relevant information, or that relevant information submitted in the NOI has changed, the operator shall submit a notice of change (NOC) letter to the permitting authority, and provide a copy of the signed letter to the control authority, within 14 days of discovering such information. 
(6)  Operators of small construction activities may be automatically authorized under the construction permit, and operators of these construction sites are not required to submit an NOI provided that they: 
a.  Develop a stormwater pollution prevention plan in accordance with the provisions of the construction permit; 
b.  Sign and certify a completed TCEQ construction site notice; 
c.  Post a copy of the signed and certified construction site notice at the construction site in a location where it is safely readily available for viewing by the general public and the control authority, prior to commencement of construction activities, and maintain the notice in that location through the date of final stabilization, or until a new operator assumes control over the construction activity and applies for permit coverage; and 
d.  Provide a copy of the signed and certified construction site notice to the control authority in accordance with the requirements of the construction permit. 
(7)  All notices of intent, notices of termination, notices of change letters, and TCEQ construction site notices shall be signed in accordance with 30 TAC § 305.128 and 30 TAC § 305.44. 
(8)  Construction activities that do not qualify as a small or large construction activity under the construction permit, shall satisfy all local documentation, permitting and approval requirements prior to being authorized to discharge stormwater. 
(d)  Best management practices. 
(1)  The operator, owner or contractor shall use best management practices to control and reduce the discharge, to the MS4 and water in the state, of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with clearing, grading, excavation, and any other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. Such best management practices and erosion control measures are detailed in the NCTCOG iSWM manuals and may include, but are not limited to, the following measures: 
a.  Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible and that disturbed portions of the construction site are stabilized, in accordance with the requirements of the construction permit, on portions of the construction site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased. Stabilization measures may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Temporary seeding; 
2.  Permanent seeding; 
3.  Mulching; 
4.  Sod stabilization; 
5.  Vegetative buffer strips; 
6.  Protection of trees; and 
7.  Preservation of mature vegetation. 
Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities temporarily or permanently ceased, and except as provided in (a) and (b) below, shall be initiated no more than 14 days after the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased. 
1.  Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing activities will be resumed within 21 days, temporary stabilization measures are not required. 
2.  Where the initiation of stabilization measures by the 14th day after construction activity temporarily or permanently ceased is precluded by snow cover or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable. 
Where stabilization measures are utilized, erosion and sediment control measures shall remain in place and be maintained until the area of disturbance meets the definition of final stabilization in this article. 
b.  Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the construction site to the extent feasible; 
c.  Minimization of the tracking of sediments offsite by vehicles, the generation of dust, and the escape of other wind-blown wastes from the construction site; 
d.  Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, and mortar, to the MS4 or water in the state; 
e.  Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to ensure proper cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal, and local requirements; 
f.  Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including covering and minimizing ground contact with waste materials; 
g.  Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other best management practices in good and effective operating condition; and 
h.  Installation of permanent structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed. Such installed structural measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds); 
2.  Stormwater retention structures; 
3.  Flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions; 
4.  Other velocity dissipation devices; 
5.  Infiltration of runoff onsite; and 
6.  Sequential systems, which combine several practices. 
(2)  The washing out of concrete trucks at construction sites shall be permitted, provided the following requirements are met: 
a.  Direct discharge of concrete truck wash out water to the MS4 or surface water in the state is prohibited. 
b.  Concrete truck washout water shall be discharged to areas at the construction site where structural controls have been established to prevent direct discharge to the MS4 or surface water in the state or to areas that have a minimal slope that allow infiltration and filtering of wash out water to prevent direct discharge. Structural controls may consist of temporary berms, temporary shallow pits, temporary storage tanks with a slow rate release, or other reasonable measures to prevent runoff from the construction site. 
c.  Washout of concrete trucks during rainfall events shall be minimized. The direct discharge of concrete truck washout water is prohibited at all times and the operator shall ensure that its BMPs are sufficient to prevent the discharge of concrete truck washout water as a result of rain. 
d.  The discharge of wash out water shall not cause or contribute to groundwater contamination. 
e.  If a SWPPP is required to be implemented, the SWPPP shall include concrete washout areas on the associated map. 
(3)  Vehicular traffic onto and off of the construction site shall be prohibited during rainy conditions or when muddy conditions exist, unless measures are in place that prevent mud from being tracked offsite. 
(4)  All best management practices shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the details and specifications listed in the NCTCOG iSWM Design Manual for Construction. 
(5)  All plans and specifications that are prepared for the construction of site improvements shall illustrate and describe the best management practices that will be implemented at the construction site. The city may withhold any permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction, if it determines that the best management practices are inadequate or inappropriate for the project. If the city observes upon a construction site inspection that the best management practices described in the plans and specifications are absent or ineffective at controlling or reducing the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with clearing, grading, excavation, or any other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable, the operator, owner or contractor will be notified, in writing. The operator, owner or contractor shall initiate repairs to deficient best management practices within seven calendar days of receiving notification. If no corrective measures have been initiated within seven calendar days of receiving notification of the deficiencies, the city may escalate enforcement actions including, but not limited to, issuance of a warning citation or citation, revocation or suspension of a development permit or building permit, or withholding issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final acceptance. 
If existing best management practices require repairs or modifications, or if additional best management practices are necessary, an implementation schedule (including a reasonable completion date) shall be developed and, wherever possible, those changes shall be implemented prior to the next storm event. If implementation before the next anticipated storm event is impracticable, these changes shall be implemented as soon as possible thereafter. If the deficient or absent best management practice is causing or allowing a discharge of a harmful quantity of any substance, as determined by the control authority, the operator, owner or contractor shall implement an interim control measure, or cease the activity associated with the discharge until the corrective action has been completed. 
(6)  The operator, owner or contractor shall make every reasonable effort to prevent dirt and sediment from accumulating on paved or impervious surfaces and locations where offsite discharge would occur during storm events. If installing structural control measures in these areas is impracticable, alternative measures such as frequent sweeping shall be implemented. 
(7)  If fuels, oils or other chemicals are used or stored onsite, these materials shall be used and stored in such a manner that discharge into the MS4, water in the state or the environment is prevented. In the event of a discharge of these materials, the responsible party shall remove all contamination and restore the area prior to the next storm event or as soon as possible thereafter. 
(8)  For large and small construction activities, the operator shall be responsible for the design, installation and maintenance of all stormwater pollution prevention practices in accordance with the construction permit. For all other construction activities, the owner or contractor shall be responsible for the design, installation and maintenance of all stormwater pollution prevention practices in accordance with the NCTCOG Design Manual for Construction. The operator, owner or contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of all stormwater pollution prevention practices from the time of commencement of construction activities until final stabilization has been completed on all disturbed areas or until a new operator, owner or contractor has assumed control over the construction activity. For large and small construction activities, the operator shall retain responsibility until the construction activity qualifies for termination of permit coverage and a notice of termination or final construction site notice has been submitted, in addition to any other requirements set forth in this article. 
(e)  Site inspection and monitoring requirements. 
(1)  Personnel (provided by the operator) shall inspect disturbed areas of any large or small construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, discharge locations, and structural controls for evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering the MS4 or water in the state. Personnel conducting these inspections shall be knowledgeable of the construction permit, familiar with the construction site, and knowledgeable of the SWPPP for the site. Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWPPP shall be inspected to ensure that they are operating correctly. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be inspected for evidence of offsite sediment tracking. Inspections shall be conducted at least once every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater. 
As an alternative to the above-described inspection schedule, the SWPPP may be developed to require that these inspections will occur at least once every seven calendar days. If this alternative schedule is developed, the inspection shall occur on a specifically defined day (e.g. an inspection occurs every Tuesday), regardless of whether or not there has been a rainfall event since the previous inspection. The specifically defined day, on which the inspections will occur, shall be documented in the SWPPP. The SWPPP shall clearly identify which inspection schedule will be implemented. The inspection may occur on either schedule provided that the SWPPP reflects the current schedule and that any changes in the schedule are conducted in accordance with the requirements of the construction permit. 
Where construction sites have been finally or temporarily stabilized or where runoff is unlikely due to winter conditions (e.g. construction site is covered with snow, ice or frozen ground exists), inspections shall be conducted at least once every month. 
In the event of flooding or other uncontrollable situations which prohibit access to the inspection sites, inspections shall be conducted as soon as access is practicable. 
(2)  The SWPPP shall be modified based on the results of inspections, as necessary, to better control pollutants in stormwater runoff. Revisions to the SWPPP shall be completed within seven calendar days following the inspection, or receiving written notification from the control authority. If existing BMPs are modified or if additional BMPs are necessary, an implementation schedule shall be described in the SWPPP and, wherever possible, those changes shall be implemented prior to the next storm event. If implementation before the next anticipated storm event is impracticable, these changes shall be implemented as soon as practicable. Any claims that implementation is not practicable before the next storm shall be verified and approved by the control authority. 
(3)  A report summarizing the scope of the inspection, names and qualifications of personnel making the inspection, the dates of the inspection, and major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP. Major observations should include: The locations of discharges of sediment or other pollutants from the construction site; locations of BMPs that need to be maintained; locations of BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved inadequate for a particular location; and locations where additional BMPs are needed. Actions taken as a result of inspections shall be described within, and retained as part of the SWPPP. Reports shall identify any incidents of non-compliance. Where a report does not identify any incidents of non-compliance, the report shall contain a certification that the construction site is in compliance with the SWPPP and the construction permit. 
The operator shall store the inspection reports with the SWPPP and make those reports available for onsite review within seven days from the date that the inspection was conducted. All inspection reports which are not included in the SWPPP, and which are greater than seven days old, shall be made available onsite within 24 hours of request by the control authority. 
(4)  All discharges of stormwater runoff from concrete batch plants that qualify for coverage, and that are authorized to discharge stormwater under the provisions of the construction permit, shall be monitored for compliance with benchmark values in accordance with such permit. Results of monitoring for determining compliance with benchmark values shall be recorded and, where applicable, reported to the permitting authority in accordance with the construction permit. The operator shall make records of discharge monitoring readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(5)  It shall be the responsibility of the operator, owner or contractor to clean any spills or discharges of fuel, oil or any other chemicals used or stored at the construction site. If any harmful quantity of fuels, oils or other chemicals is spilled or discharged, the operator, owner or contractor shall provide documentation indicating that the area has been cleaned and restored in accordance with state and federal rules and regulations. 
(f)  Terminating authorization to discharge stormwater. Operators who have submitted an NOI shall terminate authorization for discharges associated with construction activity by submitting a notice of termination (NOT) in accordance with the requirements of the construction permit. The NOT shall be submitted to the permitting authority, and a copy of the signed and certified NOT provided to the control authority within 30 days after: 
(1)  Final stabilization has been achieved on all portions of the construction site that are the responsibility of the operator; or 
(2)  Another permitted operator has assumed control over all areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized; and 
(3)  All silt fences and other temporary erosion controls have been removed, scheduled for removal as defined in the SWPPP, or transferred to a new operator, if the new operator has sought permit coverage. Operators are not required to remove, or schedule the removal of, erosion controls, which are designed to remain in place for an indefinite period, such as mulches and erosion mats. 
Operators of small construction activities shall also meet the requirements listed in subsections (f)(1) through (3) above in order to consider their automatic permit coverage to be terminated. Notification of the termination of automatic permit coverage shall be made to the control authority in accordance with the requirements of the construction permit. 
Operators of large and small construction activities shall remove the NOI and/or construction site notice immediately following termination of permit coverage. 
(g)  Final acceptance and certificate of occupancy. The stormwater division shall not recommend that small or large construction activities be approved for final acceptance unless those construction activities are in compliance with this article. If the operator seeking final acceptance will not be associated with any further construction activity after final acceptance is granted, the construction activity shall also meet the requirements necessary to qualify for termination of permit coverage. A final certificate of occupancy shall not be recommended until final stabilization has been achieved on all disturbed areas, all potential pollutants associated with the construction activity have been removed, and the construction activity meets any additional requirements necessary to qualify for termination of permit coverage. A final certificate of occupancy may be granted prior to meeting the above conditions, on a case-by-case basis, provided that the signatory authority certifies in writing that the construction activity will maintain compliance with the construction permit and/or this article until the construction activity has been completed. 
Recommendation for final acceptance or a final certificate of occupancy for all other construction activities shall not be made until final stabilization has been achieved on all disturbed areas. Final acceptance may be recommended, where final stabilization has not yet occurred, provided that either the disturbed soils have been temporarily stabilized or a new operator, owner or contractor has assumed control over the construction activity and the construction site will not remain inactive for more than 21 days. Approval for final acceptance and a final certificate of occupancy may also be withheld in the event of outstanding violations or enforcement actions, or failure to pay applicable fees. 
A final certificate of occupancy may be granted prior to meeting the above conditions, on a case-by-case basis, provided that the signatory authority provides written documentation to the control authority certifying that the construction activity will maintain compliance with the construction permit and/or this article until the construction activity has been completed. 
(h)  Signatory authority. All applications, notices, reports, and all other applicable documents required under the construction permit shall be signed in accordance with the signatory requirements set forth in 30 TAC § 305.44 as it now exists or as hereafter amended. The authority to sign documents other than the NOI, NOT, NOC letter and construction site notice may be delegated to other qualified personnel provided that the requirements set forth in 30 TAC § 305.128, as it now exists or as hereafter amended, are met. 
All operators, owners and contractors shall designate an authorized representative on a form provided by the control authority. The authorized representative will be the point of contact for all pollution prevention matters for the site. If no authorized representative is designated for a small or large construction activity, the signatory authority for the NOI or construction site notice shall be the default authorized representative. For all other construction activities, the default authorized representative shall be the property owner. All communications and enforcement actions shall be addressed to the authorized representative. 
(i)  Recordkeeping requirements. The operator shall retain a copy of the SWPPP, all reports, notices, applications, monitoring and inspection records and other documents required by the construction permit or this article, for the construction site, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, for a period of at least three years from the date that an NOT is submitted. For activities that are not required to submit an NOT (e.g. small construction activities that are not required to submit an NOI), records shall be retained for a period of at least three years from the date that either: 
Final stabilization has been achieved on all portions of the construction site that are the responsibility of the operator; or 
Another permitted operator has assumed control over all areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized. 
The operator shall make all documents and data, required by the construction permit or this article, readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 9, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-380. - Stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity. 
(a)  General requirements and responsibilities. 
(1)  The industrial facility operator (hereinafter referred to as operator) shall comply with all requirements of the industrial permit and all other applicable documents as may be required to ensure compliance with federal, state, and local rules and regulations. 
(2)  any owner of a facility with a stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity, whether or not he or she is an operator of the facility, is jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the requirements of the industrial permit and any additional requirements of this article. 
(3)  Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of industrial activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract for implementing a best management practices control measure, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement or maintain that control measure. 
(b)  Specific requirements and responsibilities. 
(1)  Any operator at a facility that intends to discharge stormwater associated with an industrial activity described in the industrial permit shall submit a notice of intent (NOI) in accordance with the industrial permit. The NOI shall be made readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(2)  Facilities with industrial activities described in the industrial permit, where there is no exposure of industrial materials or activities to precipitation or runoff, may qualify for a conditional no exposure exclusion from permit requirements. Qualification for the exclusion shall be determined and certified in accordance with the industrial permit. All documentation for the conditional no exposure exclusion from permit requirements shall be made readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(3)  A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in accordance with the requirements of the industrial permit, and with any additional requirements of this article. 
(4)  The operator shall complete the SWPPP prior to the submittal of the NOI and, for a new industrial operation, prior to the commencement of the industrial activity at the facility. The operator shall update and modify the SWPPP as required by the industrial permit and this article. 
(5)  The SWPPP, and any modifications to it, shall be made readily available to the control authority upon request. 
(6)  The control authority may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the requirements of the industrial permit, or any additional requirements of this article. The notification shall identify those provisions of the permit or this article, which are not being met by the SWPPP. The operator shall respond, in writing, within 15 days of receiving notification from the control authority (or as otherwise provided by the control authority), describing the changes that are to be made and the timeframe in which those changes will be completed. 
(7)  If the industrial facility is required by the industrial permit to conduct compliance monitoring, the operator shall retain records of the monitoring results at the facility and make them readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(8)  Where all stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity that are authorized by the industrial permit and this article are eliminated, or where the operator of a facility with stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity changes, the operator of the facility shall submit a notice of termination (NOT) in accordance with the industrial permit. The NOT shall be made readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(9)  The operator shall retain all notices, plans, reports, monitoring and inspection records and all other required documents in accordance with the industrial permit, and shall make them readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 10, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-381. - Responsibility of other entities. 
The control authority may require any person, whether or not they are required by federal or state rules and regulations, to develop and maintain a SWPPP and/or implement best management practices, approved by the control authority, that prevent or minimize the discharge of pollutants into, or adjacent to, water in the state. The SWPPP shall be made readily available to the control authority, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 11, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-382. - Submission of documents. 
All persons required by federal or state regulations or this article to submit documents, pertaining to discharges of stormwater or accidental discharges into the local MS4, shall submit all applicable documents to the following mailing address: 
City of Lewisville 
Department of Public Services 
Stormwater Division 
P.O. Box 299002 
Lewisville, Texas 75029-9002 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 12, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-383. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Spill containment. The control authority may require any person to implement spill containment measures for storage and use of any substance it deems a potential threat to the MS4 or the environment should such substance be accidentally discharged. Such spill containment measures shall be provided and maintained at the person's own expense. Upon notification from the control authority that containment measures are required, the person shall develop and submit detailed plans, showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection, to the control authority for review. The control authority shall approve all required spill containment measures, prior to installation or implementation. Review and approval of such plans shall not relieve the person from the responsibility to modify the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Notification of potential problem. In the event of any accidental or unavoidable discharge into the MS4 or water in the state, it is the responsibility of the responsible party to notify the control authority within 24 hours of the incident, in addition to the appropriate federal and state agencies. The notification shall include location of the discharge, type of material discharged, concentration and volume, and corrective action. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the person shall submit to the control authority a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the person of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the MS4, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property, nor shall such notification relieve the person of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. The initial notification shall be made using the following contact information: 
Stormwater Division (during normal business hours) 
(972) 219-3504 
After Hours Reporting 
(972) 219-3510 
(c)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the person's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 13, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-384. - Sampling, inspections and investigations. 
(a)  The control authority may randomly sample and analyze the stormwater runoff from any facility within the city and conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by the person or persons, occasional and continuing noncompliance with stormwater requirements of the State of Texas or this article. 
(b)  The control authority shall investigate instances of noncompliance with stormwater requirements, as indicated in required reports, analytical results, and surveillance activities. Noncompliance investigations may require that the control authority conduct an inspection of the person or facility in noncompliance. 
(c)  Collection of information by the control authority shall be performed with sufficient care to produce evidence admissible in enforcement proceedings or in judicial actions. 
(d)  All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA administrator pursuant to § 304 (h) of the Clean Water Act and 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto. 
(e)  The control authority may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine stormwater or non-stormwater constituents. Chain of custody procedures shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 14, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-385. - Noncompliance notification procedure. 
(a)  Each noncompliance with federal, state or local regulations may result in the person receiving a verbal notice and/or written notice of violation. A written notice of violation shall require that the person respond, in writing, to the control authority within 15 working days from the date of the notice of violation. 
(b)  In addition to the notice set forth in subsection (a) of this section, noncompliance may result in enforcement actions by the control authority, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Issuance of a warning citation; 
(2)  Issuance of a citation; 
(3)  Recommendation for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a development permit, building permit or any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy. 
The control authority shall determine the level of enforcement needed to promote compliance. 
(c)  The control authority may, by use of all legal means available, stop an actual or threatened discharge by verbal order to cease discharge if, in the opinion of the control authority, the discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment or which may be in violation of federal, state or local regulations. 
If the person does not voluntarily comply with the order to cease discharge, the control authority shall take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or environment or endangerment to the public. Prior to resuming activity, the person shall demonstrate to the control authority that permanent corrective measures have been taken to prevent reoccurrences of the offense. Any cost incurred by the control authority for sampling, analysis, assessment or remediation may be recovered from the person, or its authorized representative. 
(d)  Certification statements. All applications, notices, reports, and all other documents requiring certification as specified in the TPDES permit or this article shall include this statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervised in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violation." 
(e)  Discharge of hazardous waste. Hazardous waste as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act is prohibited from entering the MS4. A person shall notify the control authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the MS4 of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(f)  Fraud and false statements. The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained, under this section, shall be subject to: 
(1)  The provisions of U.S.C. Section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements; 
(2)  The provisions of Section 309(c)(4) of the Clean Water Act, as amended, governing false statements, representation, or certification; 
(3)  The provisions of Section 309(c)(6) of the Clean Water Act regarding responsible corporate officials; and 
(4)  Section 16-390 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 15, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-386. - Charges and fees. 
(a)  The city may adopt charges and fees, which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of implementing the city's stormwater management program; 
(2)  Fees for inspection, investigation, sampling and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures, SWPPPs, and construction plans; and 
(4)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(b)  These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other applicable fees chargeable by the city. 
(c)  Construction and development projects shall be subject to a construction inspection fee. The fee is based on the amount of soil disturbance created by the project, as determined by the engineering site plan, building permit, or stormwater pollution prevention plan (where applicable). Fees shall be charged in accordance with chapter 2 article VIII of this Code. Fees as set forth in this Code. The fee shall be billed monthly and applied to each regular inspection and rainfall inspection conducted. Stormwater inspections shall not be discontinued until the control authority receives notification that the construction activity has been completed, in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 16, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-387. - Billing. 
Construction inspection fees provided for in this article shall be billed on a separate invoice and shall be paid monthly in accordance with the existing billing practices of the city. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 17, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-388. - Failure to pay bills. 
Failure to pay fees and monthly bills for construction inspection fees shall be sufficient cause to recommend a stop work order and/or withhold approval for additional permits and approvals to continue or commence work, final acceptance or a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 18, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-389. - Access to records. 
(a)  The control authority shall have access to, and the right to inspect and copy, any and all persons records which pertain to that person's discharge to the MS4, disposal and/or generation of hazardous waste and discharges into the environment. The person shall be required to retain records of all information resulting from any monitoring or reporting activity required by these regulations for a minimum of three years from the termination of an applicable NPDES or TPDES permit and/or the completion of the construction, commercial or industrial activity. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the person or MS4 or when requested by the permitting authority or control authority. 
(b)  The constituents and characteristics of stormwater discharged by a facility shall not be considered confidential and shall be available to the public without restriction. Other information obtained from reports, questionnaires, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless the person specifically requests, in writing, at the time the information is known to be obtained by the control authority, that the information is to be considered confidential. Information submitted to the control authority by the person shall be stamped "Confidential Information" on each page containing such information that the person wishes to be held confidential. If a claim of confidentiality is asserted, the control authority shall determine if such information may be held confidential in accordance with 40 CFR Part 2 (public information). If the person does not claim the information as confidential at the time the control authority obtains the information, it will be available to the public without further notice. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 19, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-390. - Falsifying information. 
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, notice, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or any TPDES or NPDES permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall be punished by a fine of no more than $10,000.00 and may be subject to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 20, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-391. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or by criminal negligence, cause damage to, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, which is part of the MS4. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 21, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-392. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The control authority and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to: 
(1)  Enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article; and 
(2)  Enter all private property through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, maintenance or repair. 
(b)  All activities conducted under this authority shall be in full accordance with all applicable terms, rules and regulations pertaining to safety and security. 
(c)  If the control authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, or welfare of the community, the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate judicial authority. 
(d)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the person against loss or damage to its property by city employees through the course of their activities when representing the city, and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any area not having direct or potential impact on the kind and source of a discharge to the MS4, disposal and/or generation of hazardous waste and discharges into the environment, except as provided in [section 16-389]. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 22, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-393. - Legal action. 
If any person discharges, permits or causes to be discharged industrial waste, hazardous waste or other wastes in violation of V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 26 or into the MS4 contrary to the provisions of this article, state requirements, federal regulations, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, including injunctive relief, in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 23, 5-17-10)  
Sec. 16-394. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or by criminal negligence violates any provision of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, and upon conviction, shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $2,000.00, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder. 
(c)  The control authority is further authorized to prosecute and seek all criminal and civil remedies in the various courts as set forth by the Texas Water Code. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. In no case shall a fine be recommended which is less than the economic benefit realized by the person for violation of this article, and/or the effective permit. The economic benefit may be determined in accordance with the U.S. EPA's Guidance Manual for Calculation of Economic Benefit of Noncompliance with Pretreatment Standards, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 3770-05-2010 , § 24, 5-17-10)  
ARTICLE IX. - MUNICIPAL SETTING DESIGNATIONS 
 
Sec. 16-395. - Definitions. 
The following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Administrator shall mean the office of sustainability manager or other employee designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article. 
Affected community or affected parties shall mean those persons entitled to notice in subsection 16-397(c)(15), below. 
Authorized representative shall mean, for purposes of signing an application, if the applicant is a corporation, the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; if the applicant is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively; and if the applicant is a local government, the chief executive officer or his authorized designee. 
Contaminant of concern shall mean any contaminant that has the potential to adversely affect ecological or human receptors due to its concentration, distribution, and mode of toxicity. 
Designated groundwater shall mean groundwater that will be or is prohibited from use as potable water by a MSD. 
Designated property shall mean the property for which a MSD is being sought. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) shall mean the agency of the United States Federal Government created by executive order and any successor agency or department. 
Environmental risk assessment shall mean the qualitative and quantitative evaluation performed in an effort to define the risk posed to human health and/or the environment by the presence or potential presence and/or use of pollutants. 
Groundwater shall mean water below the surface of the earth. 
Ingestion protective concentration level shall mean the protective concentration level for human ingestion for contaminants of concern in groundwater established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction Program, determined as if there were no MSD ordinance. 
Ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone shall mean the area where concentrations of contaminants of concern from sources on or migrating from or through the designated property are greater than the ingestion protective concentration level in groundwater, determined as if there were no MSD ordinance. 
Municipal setting designation (MSD) shall mean a designation as provided by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361, subch. W, as may be amended, which authorizes the executive director of the TCEQ to certify MSDs in order to limit the scope of or eliminate the need for investigation of or response actions addressing contaminant impacts to groundwater that has been restricted from use as potable water by ordinance or restrictive covenant. 
Non-ingestion protective concentration level shall mean the protective concentration level for dermal contact or inhalation for contaminants of concern in groundwater established by the TCEQ under the Texas Risk Reduction Program. 
Non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone shall mean the area where concentrations of contaminants of concern from sources on or migrating from or through the designated property are greater that the non-ingestion protective concentration level in groundwater. 
Potable water shall mean water that is used for irrigating crops intended for human consumption, as well as water that is used for drinking, showering, bathing, or cooking purposes. 
Protective concentration level shall mean the concentration of a contaminant of concern that the TCEQ has determined can remain within the source medium and not result in a level that exceeds the applicable human health risk-based exposure limit or ecological concentration limits at the point of exposure for all applicable exposure pathways. 
Response action shall mean the control, decontamination or removal from the environment of a hazardous substance or contaminant pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361, subch. W, as may be amended. 
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) shall mean the environmental agency for the State of Texas and any successor agency. 
Texas Risk Reduction Program (TRRP) shall mean the rule established in Chapter 350 of the Texas Administrative Code concerning requirements for corrective actions at sites where a release of a contaminant of concern has impacted the environment or may pose a threat to human health. 
Texas Voluntary Cleanup Program (VCP) shall mean the program established by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 361, that provides incentives to encourage cleanup of sites burdened by real or reasonably perceived environmental issues that may hamper real estate transactions or redevelopment. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Sec. 16-396. - Use of groundwater in MSD as a potable water source prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a MSD area as a potable water source. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, or with criminal negligence uses groundwater in a MSD area for any purpose prohibited in the ordinance creating that MSD. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Sec. 16-397. - Application for city council approval of MSD. 
(a)  Before a MSD application will be considered by the city, the designated property must meet the eligibility requirements established by TCEQ: 
(1)  The designated property must be within the corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city; and 
(2)  The designated property and all properties within one-half mile of the designated property are supplied or are capable of being supplied drinking water from the existing state-approved public water supply system. 
(b)  A person, including the city, seeking city council approval of a MSD for property within the corporate limits of the city, or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall file an application with the administrator. The application shall be in a format determined by the administrator, with appropriate numbers of copies as determined by the administrator. An application may be filed in person, by United States mail, or by a document delivery service. If an electronic system for filing MSD applications is available, applicant shall utilize such electronic filing system unless another method of submission is approved by the administrator. 
(c)  An application shall contain: 
(1)  Applicant's name and address, and the name, address, daytime telephone number, and email address of a contact person; 
(2)  The location and legal description of the proposed outer boundaries of the MSD area for which the designation is sought and a copy of the deed for the designated property; 
(3)  A statement as to whether applicant has filed an application with the TCEQ for an MSD for the property, and a copy of said application, if filed; 
(4)  A statement as to whether a public drinking water supply system exists that satisfies the requirements of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 341 and that supplies or is capable of supplying drinking water to the designated property and property within one-half mile of the designated property; 
(5)  Identification of the points of origin of the contamination and identification of the person(s) responsible for the contamination of the groundwater, to the extent known; 
(6)  A description of the groundwater sought to be restricted, including the identified contaminants of concern therein and the levels of contamination known to applicant, and the identified vertical and horizontal extent of the contamination. If the applicant has not documented groundwater contamination offsite that originates from the area for which a MSD is sought, the application shall include a statement as to whether contamination more likely than not exceeds residential assessment levels off-site and the basis for that statement; 
a.  For each contaminant of concern within the ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone, the application shall include (to the extent known): 
1.  A description of the ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone and the non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone, including a specification of the horizontal area and the minimum and maximum depth below ground surface; 
2.  The level of contamination, the ingestion protective concentration level, and the non-ingestion protective concentration level, all expressed as mg/L units; 
3.  Its basic geochemical properties (e.g., whether the contaminant of concern migrates with groundwater, floats or is soluble in water); 
4.  A digital file in a format acceptable to the administrator that summarizes this information. 
b.  For each contaminant of concern within the designated groundwater, the application shall include (to the extent known): 
1.  A description of the ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone and the non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone, including a specification of the horizontal area and the minimum and maximum depth below ground surface; 
2.  The level of contamination, the ingestion protective concentration level, and the non-ingestion protective concentration level, all expressed as mg/L units; 
3.  Its basic geochemical properties (e.g., whether the contaminant of concern migrates with groundwater, floats or is soluble in water); and 
4.  A digital file in a format acceptable to the administrator that summarizes this information. 
(7)  A description of the current use, and to the extent known, the anticipated uses of the designated property and properties within 500 feet of the boundary of the designated property; 
(8)  A statement as to whether the plume of contamination is stable, expanding, or contracting, with the basis for that statement. If this is not known, a statement of why the information is not known; 
(9)  A statement as to whether contamination on and off the designated property without a MSD exceeds a residential assessment level as defined in the Texas Risk Reduction Program or analogous residential level set by EPA, if known, and the basis for that statement; 
(10)  A statement as to whether contamination on and off the designated property with a MSD will exceed a residential assessment level as defined in the Texas Risk Reduction Program or analogous residential level set by the EPA, if known, and the basis for that statement; 
(11)  A description of any environmental regulatory actions that have been taken within the past five years in connection with the designated property, to the extent known; 
(12)  A listing of all existing state or EPA registrations, permits, and identification numbers that apply to the designated property; 
(13)  A statement as to whether the designated property has been admitted to the Texas Voluntary Cleanup Program or similar state or federal program, and a description of the status of the designated property in the identified program; 
(14)  A summary of any environmental site assessment reports filed regarding any site investigations or response actions that are planned, ongoing or completed related to the designation property; 
(15)  A listing of: 
a.  All state-registered private water wells within five miles from the boundary of the property for which the designation is sought, including a notation of those wells that are used for potable water purposes (if known), and a statement as to whether applicant has provided the owners with notice as provided in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.805; 
b.  Each retail public utility that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the property for which the MSD is sought, and a statement as to whether applicant has provided the utilities with notice as provided in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.805; 
c.  Each municipality, other than the city, with a boundary located not more than one-half mile from the property for which the MSD is sought; or that owns or operates a groundwater supply well located not more than five miles from the property for which the MSD is sought; and a statement as to whether applicant has provided the municipalities with notice as provided in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.805. 
(16)  A site map, drawn to scale, including a metes and bounds description of the property, the boundary of the proposed MSD, the location of groundwater on the property, and the extent of groundwater contamination to the limits that it has been defined. 
a.  The site map shall note the watershed and identify whether the designated property is located in a floodplain or floodway. 
b.  The location of all soil sampling locations, all groundwater monitoring wells and groundwater gradients shall be noted on the site map. 
c.  The ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone for each contaminant of concern shall be noted on the site map. 
d.  The site map shall include a statement by a professional land surveyor registered by the Texas Board of Professional Surveying attesting to the accuracy of the metes and bounds property description. 
(17)  The following statement signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or licensed professional geoscientist authorized to practice in the State of Texas with expertise in environmental remediation: 
 "To the best of my knowledge and belief, based upon a review of all public and private records and other information sources available to me in the exercise of due diligence, the opinions stated and conclusions made in this application are supported by such information, and the technical and scientific information submitted with the application is true, accurate and complete. Based on such review, the Contaminants of Concern from sources on the Designated Property or migrating from or through the Designated Property more likely than not (do exceed) or (do not exceed) a Non-Ingestion Protective Concentration Level on property beyond the boundaries of the Designated Property." 
(18)  If the licensed professional engineer or licensed professional geoscientist determines that contaminants of concern from sources on the designated property or migrating from or through the designated property more likely than not do exceed a non-ingestion protective concentration level on property beyond the boundary of the designated property, then the applicant must: 
a.  Specify the name and address of the owner of each property impacted by such migration of said contaminants of concern; 
b.  Send a copy of the application to the owner of the impacted property with notice of the public meeting; 
c.  Provide documentation that the designated property has been included in a state or federal program that requires that the entire non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedance zone be addressed to the satisfaction of the agency administering the program, along with documentation of the estimated time period in which it is to be addressed. An example of such a program is the Texas Voluntary Cleanup Program; 
d.  Provide documentation upon completion of the state or federal program showing that the non-ingestion protective concentration level exceedances have been addressed to the satisfaction of the agency administering the program. 
(19)  Any other information that the administrator deems pertinent. 
(d)  The application shall be signed by the applicant or an authorized representative of the applicant and shall contain the following certification statement: 
 "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in a manner designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(e)  The signature of the applicant or authorized representative of the applicant indicates he/she has legal authority to restrict the use of groundwater on the designated property. 
(f)  An application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  Two hard copies of the application and an electronic portable digital file (pdf) of the application and all supporting material; 
(2)  An electronic file of the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (c)(15) above, in a format acceptable to the administrator and compatible with city information systems; and if requested by the administrator, a set of printed mailing labels with the names and addresses of persons listed in subsection (c)(15); and 
(3)  A non-refundable application fee as set forth in section 2-201, Fee Schedule, of this Code. 
(g)  An applicant may withdraw its application in writing by letter sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the administrator, and shall forfeit the application fee. If the administrator has not issued public notice prior to the receipt of the withdrawal letter, the applicant may reapply at any time. If public notice has issued, a new application is subject to the limitations of section 16-402 below. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Sec. 16-398. - Staff review. 
(a)  The date that an application is deemed to have been received by the city is the date the application was received by the administrator, as indicated by the file date stamped on the application package by the city. 
(b)  Upon receiving an application for MSD approval, the administrator will distribute the application for staff review. The purpose of the review is to determine whether the application is complete, and whether any current or future city property or other interests have the potential to be impacted by the proposed MSD. City staff shall not be tasked with conducting an environmental risk assessment of the application. 
(c)  City staff shall send a written report to the administrator noting any discrepancies in the application, and advising of any city interests that may potentially be impacted by the proposed MSD. 
(d)  If city staff determines it is likely that a source of a contaminant of concern originated on the designated property, and that the contaminant of concern extends to the public right-of-way adjacent to the designated property, the administrator may recommend that the MSD granted by the city include a condition that the public right-of-way adjacent to the designated property be included in the application to the TCEQ for MSD certification at no cost to the city. 
(e)  Within 30 days of receipt of the application by the city, the administrator shall notify the applicant that the application is complete or notify the applicant in writing of any deficiencies in the application and of any additional documentation required. The applicant shall have 60 days from the date of the deficiency letter to correct the deficiencies or submit additional documentation. The administrator may, for good cause, extend the deadline to correct or supplement the application. If the applicant fails to correct or supplement the application within 60 days or the extended period, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the initial application fee forfeited. No application shall be deemed complete until all supporting documentation is supplied. The administrator shall notify the applicant in writing when the application is deemed complete. 
(f)  Should the city determine that third party review of the application is necessary to ensure containment of contaminants on the property for which the MSD is sought, applicant shall be responsible for the costs for such third party review. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Sec. 16-399. - Notice of public meeting and public hearing. 
(a)  Once the administrator determines that the application is complete and notifies the applicant in writing the application is deemed complete, administrator will schedule a public meeting and a public hearing. The public meeting must be held prior to the public hearing. 
(1)  A public meeting will be scheduled approximately 60 days following the date the application was deemed complete by the city. 
(2)  The administrator shall publish notice of the public meeting at least 15 days before the public meeting. Notice shall also be mailed to all affected parties. 
(3)  The applicant may not alter, change, amend or enlarge the application after notices of the public meeting have been mailed by the administrator. 
(4)  A public hearing of the city council will be scheduled approximately 30 days following the date of the public meeting. 
(5)  The administrator shall publish notice of the public hearing at least 15 days before the public hearing. Notice shall also be mailed to all affected parties. 
(b)  Notice of the public meeting and the public hearing on an MSD application may be combined and must include the date, time and location of the two events, the identity of the applicant, the location and legal description of the property for which the MSD is sought, the purpose of the MSD, the type of contamination identified in the groundwater of the property for which the MSD is sought, and a statement that a copy of the application is available for public viewing at City Hall. Notice will be made as follows: 
(1)  The administrator will publish notice of a public meeting and a public hearing in the official newspaper of the city not less than 15 days before the public meeting; 
(2)  The administrator will provide posted notice of a public meeting and a public hearing by requesting that the city secretary post the notice at City Hall, in a place readily accessible to the general public at all times, not less than 15 days before the public meeting; and 
(3)  The administrator will serve written notice of a public meeting and a public hearing for a proposed MSD not less than 15 days before the date set for the public meeting by properly addressed and regular postage paid letter, in the United States mail. Notice will be mailed to: 
a.  The applicant; 
b.  All owners of real property lying within 1,000 feet of the subject property, as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll; and 
c.  The affected community. 
(c)  The administrator will direct the posting of at least one sign upon the area for which a MSD has been requested. Posting shall be in the same manner as zoning amendments. The sign(s) must state that a MSD has been requested for the area and that additional information can be acquired by telephoning the number listed thereon or visiting the web site address listed thereon. The erection and/or the continued maintenance of any such sign shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the holding of any public meeting or public hearing or to any official action concerning the MSD application. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Sec. 16-400. - Public meeting. 
(a)  The purpose of a public meeting is for the applicant to provide information to the affected community about MSDs and the application, and to obtain input on the application prior to a formal hearing before the city council. 
(b)  The public meeting will be held in the evening at a location convenient to the affected community. 
(c)  The applicant or applicant's representative must appear at the public meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the public meeting either in person or by representative, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(d)  The administrator will conduct the meeting. The administrator will give the applicant or the applicant's representative the opportunity to present its reasons for requesting a MSD, and will give members of the affected community the opportunity to ask the applicant questions or make oral comments on the application. 
(e)  The city will make a recording of the public meeting available for the public. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Sec. 16-401. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Prior to the hearing, the administrator will provide the city council with a written report summarizing the request for the MSD approval, including any staff comments and comments from members of the public from the public meeting. 
(b)  The applicant or applicant's representative must appear at the hearing and present the request for MSD approval. If the applicant fails to appear at the hearing either in person or by representative, the application shall be deemed withdrawn and the application fee forfeited. 
(c)  Persons wishing to speak either in favor of or against the application will be provided the opportunity in accordance with city council rules or guidelines for public hearings. 
(d)  Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may deliberate the matter of the application, and then may either: 
(1)  Approve or disapprove the application; or 
(2)  Postpone action on the application to a future date. 
(e)  In order to approve an application, the city council shall: 
(1)  Enact an ordinance prohibiting the potable use of designated groundwater from beneath the MSD property. 
(2)  The ordinance shall include the following: 
a.  A metes and bounds description of the property to which the ordinance applies, and include the maximum depth of the designated groundwater, which shall not exceed 200 feet below ground surface level unless specifically requested by applicant and approved by city council; 
b.  A listing of the contaminants of concern, and a statement that the ordinance is necessary because the contaminants of concern concentrations exceed TCEQ potable water standards; and 
c.  Any other reasonable restrictions placed on the use of designated groundwater from beneath the property, including but not limited to, specification of underground construction materials to be used in the MSD area. 
(f)  City council approval of an application shall not be deemed to waive the city's right to comment on a MSD application that has been filed with the executive director of the TCEQ as provided by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.805. 
(g)  City council approval of a MSD ordinance does not change any environmental assessment or cleanup requirements applicable to the designated property as required by TCEQ or EPA. 
(h)  City council approval of a MSD ordinance shall not be construed to subject the city to any responsibility or liability for any injury to persons or damage to property caused by any contaminant of concern. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Sec. 16-402. - Limitation on re-application. 
If after the public hearing the city council disapproves an application, or if the applicant has withdrawn its application after public notice has issued, no new MSD applications for the property shall be accepted by the city or scheduled for a hearing by the city council within a period of 12 months of the date of disapproval or withdrawal. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Sec. 16-403. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  A person who has received approval of a MSD from the city shall, upon issuance from the TCEQ, provide the administrator with a copy of the certificate of completion or other documentation issued for the designated property showing that any site investigations and response actions required pursuant to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.808 have been completed to the satisfaction of TCEQ or EPA within the time period required. 
(b)  The applicant shall provide the administrator with a copy of the MSD certificate issued by the TCEQ within 30 days after issuance of the certificate. 
(c)  Within 30 days after approval of a MSD from the city, the applicant shall provide the administrator with an electronic file showing the location of the designated property and the designated groundwater in a format compatible with the city's geographic information system. 
(d)  Within 30 days after issuance of MSD certification by TCEQ, applicant shall deliver to the administrator a file stamped and recorded copy of a deed restriction prohibiting the use of designated groundwater on the designated property for potable water purposes. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if they fail to provide the administrator with the documentation required in this section within 30 days of its issuance of MSD certification by the TCEQ. 
(Ord. No. 4158-02-2015 , § I, 2-16-15; Ord. No. 4331-10-2016 , § I, 10-17-16)  
Secs. 16-404—16-425. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 16-426. - Adoption of Act. 
The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code Ch. 552, Subch. C) (the "Act"), is hereby adopted and shall be fully implemented as provided by the Act and by the city council. The stormwater drainage of the city is hereby found to be a public utility within the meaning of the Act. The city's existing stormwater drainage facilities, materials, and supplies, including equipment, are incorporated into the stormwater drainage utility system. 
(Ord. No. 4425-10-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-17)  
Sec. 16-427. - Stormwater drainage service provided. 
The city will provide stormwater drainage for all real property within its boundaries upon payment of the determined drainage charges, as defined in the Act, and excluding certain exempted real property, and the fees, assessments, and charges will be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable, and equitable terms. For purposes of this article and in connection herewith, the service area for the stormwater drainage utility is the entire area within the boundaries of the city. The stormwater drainage charges established herein shall be for all nonexempt benefitted property as defined in the Act within the stormwater drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 4425-10-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-17)  
Sec. 16-428. - Rules. 
The city council may, by ordinance, adopt rules as it considers appropriate to operate the stormwater drainage utility system. 
(Ord. No. 4425-10-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-17)  
Sec. 16-429. - Billing for service. 
The city is hereby authorized to bill the stormwater drainage charges incurred as a result of the adoption of the Act and through the establishment of the stormwater utility system as a stormwater drainage utility fee. 
(Ord. No. 4425-10-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-17)  
Sec. 16-430. - Authority to levy charges. 
The city may levy a schedule of stormwater drainage charges upon satisfaction of the procedural requirements provided in the Act and passage of this article. The stormwater drainage charge means a levy imposed to recover the cost of providing stormwater drainage utility service and an amount made in contribution to fund future stormwater drainage system construction by the city. 
(Ord. No. 4425-10-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-17)  
Sec. 16-431. - Exemption authorized. 
The city council is authorized to exempt certain entities or persons from all charges, ordinances, resolutions, and rules which the city may adopt from time to time by ordinance in connection with the adoption of the Act and the establishment of its municipal stormwater utility system. 
(Ord. No. 4425-10-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-17)  
Sec. 16-432. - Charges. 
(a)  The city council shall establish a stormwater drainage charge on each monthly public utility statement for the city stormwater drainage utility system as set forth in section 2-201 of this Code. 
(b)  The city manager or her designee is authorized to collect such charges in a manner consistent with the city Charter, the Act, this article, and article VI, division 4 of this chapter. The stormwater drainage charges shall be a separate line item on the public utility statement and shall be clearly identified as a separate charge. Except as otherwise provided herein, the billing, charges and collection procedures shall be consistent with city collection procedures for other public utilities, as outlined in article VI, division 4 of this chapter. 
(c)  The stormwater drainage charges established pursuant to this article will apply to the accounts maintained by the city for public utility services. 
(d)  The city council may, by ordinance, establish credits available to both residential and non-residential benefitted properties which practice stormwater management. 
(e)  All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures relating to stormwater drainage charges established pursuant to this article shall be subject to the provisions of the Act and other applicable law. 
(f)  A deposit for the stormwater drainage services as a precondition to accepting surface flow from benefitted property into the stormwater drainage utility system shall not be required. All real property of the city will be provided with stormwater drainage utility system service on timely payment of stormwater drainage utility charges established herein. 
(Ord. No. 4425-10-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-17)  
Sec. 16-433. - Penalties. 
Failure to pay the stormwater drainage charges promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of any public utility services provided by the city, in accordance with the procedures adopted by the city for discontinuance of any city public utility service as outlined in article VI, division 4 of this chapter and other applicable laws. A reconnect fee will be assessed before service will be restored as provided in section 2-201 of this Code. The city retains all other remedies and penalties provided for by law and the Act for non-payment, including a lien against the property in question. 
(Ord. No. 4425-10-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 10-2-17)  
Secs. 16-434—16-455. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER DRAINAGE UTILITY SYSTEM RULES 
 
Sec. 16-456. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the establishment and operation of the stormwater drainage utility system: 
Act means Chapter 552, Subchapter C (entitled "Municipal Drainage Utility Systems") of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. 
Benefitted property means an improved parcel within the service area. 
City means the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Customer means an individual who is recorded as the customer of, or the person using, stormwater drainage utility or other service(s) for a parcel based on the records of the city. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means a unit of measurement of impervious surface area calculated for the average single-family residential property within the service area, as measured in square feet, including the residential structure, garage, out buildings and an allocation for the driveway, sidewalks, patios and any other impervious surface. 
Impervious area means a measurement in square feet of impervious surface by which the amount of stormwater drainage runoff potential for a benefitted property within a customer class is estimated. 
Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is resistant to penetration by water. An impervious surface includes, but is not limited to, compacted soil with a surface treatment, gravel, crushed stone surface or soil compacted by vehicle traffic, asphalt or concrete pavement, a parking lot, a driveway, a sidewalk or private roadway, a building or artificial structure, or any surface that changes the natural landscape and increases, concentrates, pollutes, or otherwise alters the flow or amount of stormwater drainage runoff. 
Improved parcel means a parcel that has a building, or other structure, or other improvement, on it that causes or creates an impervious surface. 
Owner means the person(s) or entity(ies) listed as the owner of a parcel in the Denton County Appraisal District's records, the Dallas County Appraisal District's records, or the city's records. 
Parcel means a platted lot, or other tract of land that is separately described (by metes and bounds or otherwise), including a leased tract of land. 
Person means an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation, business trust, estate, association, and any other legal entity. 
Service area means the geographic area within the incorporated limits of the city. 
Stormwater runoff potential means the relative potential for causing stormwater drainage runoff quantities, qualities, or velocities from an improved parcel based on the type of development or land use on the improved parcel and the size of the improved parcel. 
Stormwater drainage utility means the stormwater drainage utility system owned or directly controlled by the city, in whole or in part, including the city's existing stormwater drainage facilities, materials, and supplies and any stormwater drainage facilities, materials, and supplies hereafter constructed or utilized, and dedicated to the service of benefitted property, including future additions to the system. 
Stormwater drainage utility charge means the fee or charge established by the city that is levied against an owner or customer of a benefitted property for stormwater drainage utility services provided by the stormwater drainage utility system. 
(Ord. No. 4433-11-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-6-17)  
Sec. 16-457. - Administration. 
(a)  Utility administration. The director of the department which administers city water and sewer utilities shall administer the stormwater drainage utility system. 
(b)  Program implementation. By the adoption of these rules, the city makes no representation that all stormwater drainage problems may or will be remedied, and the city council has and retains full discretion in establishing the priorities in expending funds as they become available to meet the city's stormwater drainage utility needs. The adoption of these rules does not and shall not be construed to relieve private land owners, developers or other individuals or entities from providing stormwater drainage improvements pursuant to the ordinances, rules, codes, and regulations of the city, and federal or state laws and regulations. 
(c)  Access to benefitted properties. City employees shall have access to a benefitted property within the service area to inspect, maintain, repair, or enforce the city Code or state laws or regulations relating to stormwater drainage. 
(Ord. No. 4433-11-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-6-17)  
Sec. 16-458. - Stormwater drainage utility charge rate classes. 
(a)  Stormwater drainage utility charge rate classes. A benefitted property shall be classified and charged a stormwater drainage utility charge based on the stormwater drainage utility rate determined by the property's rate class and relative size compared to the equivalent residential unit (ERU). Depending on the use of the benefitted property, the property shall be classified as one of the following rate classes: 
(1)  Single-family residential property: Any improved parcel upon which the following is located: a detached single-family dwelling, as defined by Lewisville Code section 17-3; attached single-family or two-family dwellings as defined by Lewisville Code section 17-3 that are individually metered for water utility service; condominium units that are individually metered for water utility service; or an improved parcel owned by a homeowners association, upon which improvements were made in order to support dwelling units; or 
(2)  Non-single-family residential property: Any improved parcel that is not a single-family residential property, including improved parcels used primarily for retail, commercial, industrial, institutional, or governmental uses, and apartment complexes. A condominium, attached single-family or two-family dwelling as defined by Lewisville Code section 17-3, manufactured housing, or mixed-use property that is master metered for water utility service shall be treated as a non-single-family residential property for the purposes of calculating stormwater drainage utility charges. 
(b)  Responsible party. If there is no active customer account for water, wastewater, or solid waste/refuse service for a benefitted property recorded in the city's utility or other billing system, or if a benefitted property is considered by the city to be vacant, either on a temporary or permanent basis, the city may bill the owner of the benefitted property for the stormwater drainage utility charge. 
(Ord. No. 4433-11-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-6-17)  
Sec. 16-459. - Calculation of stormwater drainage utility charges. 
(a)  Fee calculation. The stormwater drainage utility charge shall be set by the city council in section 2-201, and shall be based on an inventory of parcels within the service area. The inventory shall evaluate the stormwater runoff potential for improved parcels within the service area based on their impervious area using approved tax plats and assessment rolls. The stormwater runoff potential shall be used to establish a rate for residential properties and non-residential properties based on the square feet of impervious area per parcel. The stormwater runoff potential shall be nondiscriminatory and shall be equitably and proportionately distributed between classes and among the parcels within each class of benefitted properties relative to the contribution of each class to stormwater drainage runoff. 
(b)  Property values. In calculating the stormwater drainage utility charge and rates, property values may not be used. 
(Ord. No. 4433-11-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-6-17)  
Sec. 16-460. - Stormwater drainage utility charge credit. 
(a)  Any property on which stormwater drainage runoff mitigation measures or best management practices (BMPs) have been implemented or which has on file with the city an approved individual stormwater drainage management permit issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) may be eligible for a credit to the stormwater drainage utility charge. BMPs that were required as part of development plan approval will not be eligible for such credits. 
(b)  The credit methodology shall be set forth in an administrative directive to be developed and maintained by the city. 
(c)  The application for credit shall be in writing and shall include documentation that the department director over the stormwater drainage utility or his designee deems necessary to properly evaluate the rationale for determining the credit for the approved stormwater drainage management techniques. Stormwater drainage credits will begin upon completion and inspection of the approved mitigation measures on the property. 
(d)  Any property served by a private stormwater drainage facility that is maintained by the city shall not receive a credit and shall be charged the normal monthly stormwater drainage utility charge. 
(e)  The credit will be only for the impervious area within the total parcel area of the property that receives the stormwater drainage management technique. 
(f)  The maximum credits available with appropriate documentation and approval by the department director over the stormwater drainage utility or his designee shall be limited to 50 percent of the total bill applicable to the improved parcel. Credits available are as follows: 
(1)  Mitigation efforts impacting stormwater drainage quality are worth up to 40 percent credit against the original charge; 
(2)  Mitigation efforts impacting stormwater drainage quantity are worth up to 40 percent credit against the original charge. 
(g)  The department director over the stormwater drainage utility or his designee shall have the right to inspect a mitigation measure or BMP at any reasonable time to determine if it is in compliance with the approved design and continues to be capable of functioning properly. If the measure's performance is affected because it fails to meet the proper operating standards, has been altered, or is in disrepair, the user or customer shall pay the monthly stormwater drainage utility charge at the normal rate, without benefit of reduction, until such time that the facility is brought into total compliance as determined by the director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 4433-11-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-6-17)  
Sec. 16-461. - Stormwater drainage utility fund. 
(a)  Stormwater drainage utility fund. A stormwater drainage utility fund is established and may consist of one or more accounts. All stormwater drainage utility fees shall be deposited as collected and received into this fund and shall be used for the following: 
(1)  Any cost of service as defined in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 552.044(2); 
(2)  To the extent permitted by law, the cost of constructing, sampling, monitoring, building, inspecting and maintaining structures needed for the city's compliance with state or federal regulations and permitting requirements for providing stormwater quality improvements for benefitted property; and 
(3)  Contribution to the funding of future stormwater drainage system construction by the city. 
(b)  Stormwater drainage utility fund accounting. 
(1)  The revenues collected from stormwater drainage utility charges shall be segregated and completely identifiable from other city funds and accounts. 
(2)  Funds and revenues in the stormwater drainage utility fund may be transferred to the city's general fund for stormwater drainage costs and expenses as allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 4433-11-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-6-17)  
Sec. 16-462. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Mandatory exemptions. Entities to which a mandatory exemption under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 580.003(a) applies and any property to which a mandatory exemption under § 552.053 of the Act applies shall be exempt from payment of the stormwater drainage utility fees. 
(b)  Permissible exemptions. City rights-of-way, including streets, sidewalks and alleys shall be exempt from payment of stormwater drainage utility fees. 
(c)  Proof of exemption. If a user or customer asserts that a parcel is exempt pursuant to this section or any other applicable law, such individual has the burden to assert such exemption by filing notice of eligibility for such exemption and sufficient evidence of entitlement to such exemption with the department director over the stormwater drainage utility or his designee. If the exemption is not granted, the owner may appeal using the procedures provided for in section 16-463 below, of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 4433-11-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-6-17)  
Sec. 16-463. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals shall be directed to the department director over the stormwater utility or his designee for evaluation and determination. An appeal shall be in writing and submitted to the director within 30 calendar days after the public utility billing statement containing the matter to be disputed. During all periods of appeal, the person or entity who owns or occupies the property and/or the account holder shall be responsible for payment of the charges in full. Appeals may be due to the following reasons: 
(1)  Exempt property has been assessed a stormwater drainage utility charge. 
(2)  Stormwater drainage utility charge for an individual property is based on an incorrect determination of the property's impervious area, as established in section 2-201 of this Code. 
(3)  Stormwater drainage utility charge for an individual property is assessed on more than one utility account. 
(4)  Stormwater drainage utility charge is assessed to individual property outside the city's jurisdictional area. 
(b)  The department director over the stormwater drainage utility or his designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30 calendar days after receiving a written notice of appeal from the landowner. The director or his designee shall deliver a copy of the appeal decision to the person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder by certified mail to the address of the landowner/account holder according to the most recent records in the possession of the city. 
(c)  Any person or entity who owns or occupies the benefitted property and/or the account holder who disagrees with the decision of the public services director or his designee may appeal such decision to the city manager in writing within ten calendar days after receipt of the decision. The city manager shall render a written decision within 30 calendar days after receipt of a timely appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(d)  No appeal for the same or substantially the same issue on the same parcel shall be allowed. If, however, the owner or customer asserts a material change of circumstances on a parcel that was the subject of a previous appeal, the owner or customer must perfect a new appeal; and in such an appeal, the owner or customer shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence the existence of a material change of circumstances. 
(e)  The owner or customer filing the appeal shall bear the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence for the relief sought in the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 4433-11-2017 , § 2(Exh. A), 11-6-17)  
Secs. 16-464—16-485. - Reserved.  
Chapter 17 - ZONING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z), § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2015, repealed the former ch. 17, §§ 17-1—17-38, and enacted a new ch. 17 as set out herein. The former ch. 17 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. No. 3984-04-2013(Z) , § 1, adopted April 1, 2013; Ord. No. 4010-07-2013 , § 2, adopted July 15, 2013; Ord. No. 4023-10-2013 , § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2013; and Ord. No. 4167-03-2015, §§ 2—5, adopted Mar. 16, 2015. The amendatory history can be found in the Code Comparative Table located at the back of this volume. Note that the appendix at the end of the chapter listing the zoning map amendments has been retained, at the discretion of the editor, for historical purposes. 
Charter reference— Authority to adopt zoning plan, § 3.07(g); platting of property, § 8.01; planning commission, § 8.03. 
Cross reference— Land development regulations, ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Lewisville Zoning Ordinance" or the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-2. - Purpose. 
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the street; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration among other things, for the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city consistent with a comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-3. - Definitions and additional use regulations. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the plural and the singular; the words "shall" and "must" are mandatory and not directive; and the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the term "used for" includes the meaning "designed for" or "intended for". Any use regulations set forth herein are in addition to those regulations found elsewhere in the zoning ordinance. Said words and terms as follows: 
Accessory building, structure, or use shall mean one which: (a) is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use; (b) is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use served; (c) contributes to the comfort, convenience and necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use served; and (d) is located on the same building lot as the principal use served. "Accessory" when used in the text shall have the same meaning as accessory use. 
Use regulation: One accessory dwelling unit in a commercial building may be allowed as an accessory use when the occupant is the owner, manager, security guard, or other person employed full-time by the business so that the accessory dwelling unit is directly accessory to the business. 
Accessory dwelling unit shall mean a detached, self-contained housing unit that is secondary to the main residence and is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the principal building or principal use served. An accessory building with shower/bath or kitchen facilities is considered an accessory dwelling unit and shall adhere to the regulations of this chapter. 
Airport shall mean any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and take-off of aircraft, including all necessary facilities for the housing and maintenance of aircraft, including and not limited to, air traffic control facilities, terminal buildings and airport auxiliary facilities. 
Alley shall mean a public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alternative energy shall mean energy sources that are renewable and are thought to be "free" energy sources. They all have lower carbon emissions, compared to conventional energy sources. These include biomass energy, solar energy, geothermal energy and hydroelectric energy sources. 
Animal slaughter or processing shall mean a building or property used for the commercial slaughtering and or processing of animals for distribution to butcher shops or retail sales establishments such as grocery stores. A slaughterhouse is designed to accommodate the confinement and slaughtering of live animals and may include packing, treating, storage, or sale of the product on the premises. 
Auction yard (vehicle) shall mean a place where operable motor vehicles are offered for sale to persons who bid on the vehicles in competition with each other. 
Bar shall mean an establishment licensed by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages that derives more than 75 percent of the establishment's gross revenue from the on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
Batch plant shall mean a manufacturing facility for the production of concrete. 
Bed and breakfast shall mean an establishment offering the use of guest rooms to the transient public for compensation. The establishment must be owner-occupied and are limited to a maximum of five bedrooms. A minimum of one meal per day shall be served on the premises for the benefit of the guests of the bed and breakfast. A bed and breakfast is a nonresidential use. 
Use regulation: 
(1)  Guests shall not stay in excess of 14 consecutive days. 
Beverage container recycling collection unit shall mean a unit used for the commercial collection and temporary storage of empty beverage containers for recycling purposes conducted totally within an enclosed structure or container. This definition does not include home recycling containers or processing except for "can banks" that crush cans as they are deposited. 
Use regulation: This use must be an accessory use to a supermarket. 
Block shall mean a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, highways, streams or corporate boundary lines. There may be more than one numbered block as shown on a plat falling within a single block as herein defined. 
Board shall mean the board of adjustment established by this chapter. 
Brewery shall mean an establishment where beer or malt liquor is brewed. 
Build shall mean to erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct or alter a building or structure. 
Buildable width shall mean the width of the building site left to be built upon after the required side yards are provided. 
Building or structure shall mean any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind. 
Building, detached shall mean a building surrounded by yards or open space on the same building lot. 
Building height shall mean the number of stories contained in a building and/or the vertical distance from finished grade to roof peak. 
Building line shall mean the rear line of a required front yard which is generally parallel to the street line forming the front lot line. 
Building lot shall mean a single tract of land located within a single block which, (at time of filing for a building permit) is designed by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. It shall front upon a street or approved place. Therefore, a "building lot" may not coincide with a lot of record. A "building lot" may be subsequently subdivided into two or more "building lots", and a number of "building lots" may be cumulated into one "building lot", subject to the provisions of this chapter and the city's general development ordinance. 
Building, mixed-use shall mean a building used partly for residential use and partly for community facility and/or commercial use. A mixed-use building is a commercial use. 
Building, principal shall mean a building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is located is conducted. All residential uses, except bona fide servant's quarters, are principal uses. 
Building, residential shall mean a building which is arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used, for residential occupancy by one or more families or lodgers. 
Car wash shall mean a building, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing automobiles using automated methods including chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices. A self-service type carwash is also considered a car wash. 
Carports shall mean an accessory structure which is not fully enclosed but is designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles for the occupants of the building to which it is an accessory. 
Cemetery shall mean land used or intended to be used for the interment of human remains and may include the following accessory uses if operated within the boundaries of said cemetery: a crematorium, mausoleum, columbarium, necessary sales and maintenance facilities and mortuaries. 
Chapter 748 operation shall mean a residential child-care operation that provides child care, including treatment services and/or programmatic services, for 13 or more children or young adults, which is regulated by Chapter 748, Title 40, of the Texas Administrative Code. 
City shall mean the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Clinic shall mean the office of one or more medical doctors, dentists, optometrists, or similar members of the medical professions. 
Columbarium shall mean a structure designed for the purpose of interring cremated human remains in sealed compartments. 
Commercial amusement (indoor) shall mean an amusement or entertainment enterprise wholly enclosed and operated within a building that is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line. This includes, but is not limited to, bowling alleys, skating rinks, health clubs, racquetball clubs, indoor tennis courts, gymnasiums, swimming pools, teen clubs, dance halls and movie theaters. 
Commercial amusement (outdoor) shall mean an enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge or to members and guests of a private association wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open. Typical uses include, but are not limited to: private sports fields, batting cages, a golf driving range, paint ball facility, archery range and miniature golf course, amusement park, water park, rodeo grounds, drive-in theater, go-cart tracks. 
Commission, planning shall mean the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Communication towers and related devices: A communications tower is a structure primarily intended to support transmission equipment for telephone, radio and other communication purposes. Communication towers are typically categorized as monopole (freestanding), lattice (self-supporting or anchored with guy wires or cables). Related devices shall be defined as follows: 
  Antenna: A signal transmission or receiving device for radio, television, telephone or other electronic signals including accessory mechanical equipment and accessory structures used solely for housing accessory equipment. An antenna may stand alone or be attached to a building, structure, rooftop, monopole or lattice tower. 
  Communication dish: Any dish-shaped device used for transmission or receiving of radio, television, telephone or other electronic signals, including accessory mechanical equipment attached to a tower and accessory structures used solely for housing of the accessory equipment. A communications dish shall be considered an antenna. 
  Lattice tower: A lattice structure used to support antennas or communications dishes, including accessory mechanical equipment attached to the tower and accessory structures used solely for housing of the tower or accessory equipment. 
  Monopole platform: That portion of a monopole tower, located on or near the top of the tower, supporting directional, transmitting and receiving antennas. Such platforms may not have a horizontal cross section area greater than 196 square feet. The depth shall not exceed four feet. 
  Monopole tower: A pole (not exceeding 42 inches in diameter) used to support antennas or communications dishes, including accessory mechanical equipment attached to the pole and accessory structures used solely for housing of the monopole or accessory equipment. 
Convenience store shall mean any retail establishment offering for sale a limited line of groceries and household items intended for the convenience of the neighborhood. 
Council shall mean the City Council of the City of Lewisville, Texas. 
Court shall mean an open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of the building. An inner court is a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space. 
Crematorium shall mean a building, structure or part thereof used for the purposes of the cremation of human remains. A crematorium is an accessory use to a cemetery, columbarium or mortuary. 
Criminal/penal institution shall mean a facility used primarily for conducting the affairs of the criminal justice system, including federal, state, county, and municipal courts, public safety departments and detention facilities. 
Day nursery or day care center shall mean any child care arrangement which provides child care on a regular basis for more than six children. 
Development or to develop shall mean the construction of a new building or any structure on a building lot, the relocation of an existing building on another building lot, or the use of open land for a new use. To "develop" is to create a development. 
Display shall mean a formal exhibition of goods done in a manner so as to cause the goods to be favorably seen. An outside display area requires the retail items, except living plants, to be placed on asphalt or concrete. 
Distillery shall mean an establishment where alcoholic liquor is distilled. 
District shall mean a zoning district which is a part of the city wherein regulation of this chapter is uniform. 
Dwelling shall mean a building or portion thereof, but not a house trailer, designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy, including one-family dwellings, two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, motels or lodging houses. 
Dwelling, attached shall mean one which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides of a party wall or walls. 
Dwelling, detached shall mean one which is entirely surrounded by open space on the same building lot. 
Dwelling, multifamily shall mean a building or portion thereof constructed for and/or occupied by three or more families and containing three or more dwelling units located upon the same building lot, or on a building constructed with at least one dwelling unit above another dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, single-family shall mean a building containing only one dwelling unit and/or occupied by only one family. 
Dwelling, two-family shall mean a building containing two dwelling units and/or occupied by only two families. 
Dwelling unit shall mean one or more rooms, which are arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used for occupancy by a single-family or group of persons living together as a family or by a single person. Individual bathrooms and complete single kitchen facilities permanently installed are not necessarily provided, but each installation of kitchen facilities consisting of at least a stove or cooking device and a sink shall constitute a separate dwelling unit unless such facilities are provided in a bona fide servants' quarters as herein defined. Individual units in extended-stay hotels which meet these requirements are considered dwelling units. 
Electrical energy generating plant shall mean a facility belonging to a privately owned utility company franchised to serve the city. 
Excavation or gravel pit shall mean an area where minerals, gravel, or other similar materials are excavated or quarried below the natural grade of the surface. 
Family shall mean one or more persons, each related to the other by blood, marriage or adoption; or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants) who are living together in a dwelling unit. 
Flea market (outdoor) shall mean a swap shop, or similar activity by whatever name, where the use involves the setting up of two or more booths, tables, platforms, racks, or similar display areas for the purpose of selling, buying, or trading merchandise, goods, materials, products, or other items offered for sale outside an enclosed building. Fundraising events sponsored by religious, charitable, educational, social or political organizations are not a flea market. 
Garage, auto repair shall mean a building or portion thereof whose principal use is for the repair, servicing, equipping, or maintenance of motor vehicles or motor vehicle components, including engines, radiators, starters, transmissions, brakes, tires and wheels, seats, and similar components. 
Garage, private shall mean an accessory building designed or used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
Garage, public shall mean a building or portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage, designed or used for storing motor driven vehicles. 
Gas and oil drilling accessory uses shall mean gas and oil drilling uses not specified within the city's gas drilling ordinance, which may include and is not limited to, a centralized natural gas compression facility, centralized water collection facility, centralized natural gas lift facility. 
Gasoline service station or service station shall mean any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels or oils. If the dispensing, sale or offering for sale is incidental to a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage. 
Grocery store shall mean a store where most of the floor area is devoted to the sale of food products for home preparation and consumption, which typically also offers other home care and personal care products, and which are substantially larger and carry a broader range of merchandise than convenience stores. 
Heavy machinery sales and storage shall mean a building or open area used for the display, sale, rental or storage of heavy machinery, either machines in general or a group of machines which function together as a unit. 
Heliport shall mean an area of land or water or a structural surface which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
Helistop or helipad shall mean a landing pad for occasional and infrequent use by helicopters. No on-site servicing of or fueling is allowed. 
Home occupation shall mean a business, occupation, or profession conducted within a residential dwelling unit on a residentially zoned lot by the resident thereof, and which shall have the following characteristics: 
Use regulations: 
(1)  The activity shall employ only members of the immediate family of the resident of the dwelling unit; 
(2)  There shall be no external evidence of the occupation detectable at any lot line, said evidence to include advertising signs or displays, smoke, dust, noise, fumes, glare, vibration, electrical disturbance, storage of materials or equipment, or traffic or parking of vehicles in a manner evidencing the conduct of business; 
(3)  Said home occupation shall not have a separate entrance for the business and shall not include continual visits by the general public; and 
(4)  Home occupations must be registered with the City of Lewisville. 
A business, occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling unit and which does not meet the aforesaid characteristics shall be construed to be a commercial activity and shall therefore be cause for the city to order a cease to all such activity within said dwelling unit. 
Hospital shall mean a legally authorized institution in which there are complete facilities for diagnosis, treatment, surgery, laboratory, X-ray, and the prolonged care of bed patients. Clinics may have some but not all of these facilities. 
Hotel, motel or inn shall mean an establishment offering lodging, the use of guest rooms or sleeping accommodations, to the transient public for compensation. Hotels, motels or inns furnish customary hotel services and may contain a restaurant, club, lounge, banquet hall, meeting rooms and other accessory uses. A hotel, motel or inn is a nonresidential use. For purposes of this chapter, if more than 20 percent of the guest rooms of the establishment are occupied by a person who has the right to use or possess a guest room for at least 60 consecutive days without interruption, then the use of such establishment shall be classified as residential. Residential usage shall not be permitted in a nonresidential zoned area. 
Iron/steel foundry shall mean a facility of a portion of a facility that melts scrap, ingot, and/or other forms of iron and/or steel and pours the resulting molten metal into molds to produce final or near final shape products for introduction into commerce. Research and development facilities, operations that only produce noncommercial castings, and operations associated with nonferrous metal production are not included in this definition. 
Junk or salvage yard shall mean a lot upon which waste or scrap materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, papers, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junk yard" does not include such uses conducted entirely within an enclosed building. A "junkyard" includes an automobile wrecking yard and automobile parts yard. 
Kennel (indoor) shall mean an establishment with indoor pens in which more than four dogs or domesticated animals are housed, groomed, boarded or trained for commercial purposes. 
Kennel (outdoor) shall mean an establishment with outdoor pens in which more than four dogs or domesticated animals are housed, groomed, boarded or trained for commercial purposes. 
Kiosk shall mean a small freestanding building or structure of 750 square feet or less intended for commercial business operation. The structure as defined may be manned or automatic without an attendant. 
Landfill, construction/demolition shall mean an engineered land burial facility for the disposal of nonbiodegradable waste resulting from road building, construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of structures. 
Landfill, sanitary shall mean an engineered land burial facility for the disposal of nonhazardous and nonmedical farm, residential, institutional, commercial or industrial solid waste which is so located, designed, constructed, and operated to contain and isolate the solid waste so that it does not pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment. 
Loading space shall mean a space within the main building or on the same lot therewith providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, together with access and maneuvering areas provided on the same building lot as the principal use for which the loading space is intended. 
Lot area shall mean the area of a horizontal plane intercepted by the vertical projections of the front, side, and rear lot lines of a building lot. 
Lot area per dwelling unit shall mean the lot area required for each dwelling unit located on a building lot. 
Lot, corner shall mean a building lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior angle of such intersection not to exceed 135 degrees. 
Lot depth shall mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line of a building lot measured at the respective mid-points of the front lot line and rear lot line within the lot boundary. 
Lot, interior shall mean a building lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot line shall mean a boundary of a building lot. 
Lot line, front shall mean that boundary of a building lot which is the line of an existing or dedicated street. Upon corner lots either street line may be selected as the front lot line providing a front and rear yard are provided adjacent and opposite, respectively, to the front lot line. 
Lot line, rear shall mean that boundary of a building lot which is most distant from and is, or most nearly, parallel to the front lot line. 
Lot line, side shall mean that boundary of a building lot which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. 
Lot of record shall mean an area of land designated as a lot on a plat of a subdivision recorded, pursuant to statutes of the State of Texas, with the County Clerk of Denton County, Texas. 
Lot, through shall mean a building lot not a corner lot, both the front and rear lot lines of which adjoin street lines. On a "through lot" both street lines shall be deemed front lot line. 
Lot width shall mean the minimum distance between the side lot lines of a building lot measured along a straight line at the rear of the required front yard and parallel to the street line or a line tangent thereto. 
Mausoleum shall mean cemetery property used for the interring of the dead and where human bodies are interred above ground in staked vaults. 
Mining shall mean all or any part of the process involved in the mining of minerals by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open pit mining or minerals naturally exposed, mining by auger method, dredging and quarrying, underground mining, and surface work incidental to an underground mine. 
Mining, accessory use shall mean any use customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to mining located on the same site, such as stockpiling, sorting, screening, washing, crushing, batching and maintenance facilities. 
Mini-storage warehouse or self-service storage facility shall mean small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the storage of household and personal property (no commercial storage). 
Use regulation: The conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units, other than storage, shall be prohibited. 
Mobile home park shall mean any premises on which one or more mobile homes are parked or situated and used for living or sleeping purposes, or any premises used or held out for the purpose of supplying to the public a parking space for one or more mobile homes whether such vehicles stand on wheels or on rigid supports. A trailer park is a mobile home park. 
Mobile homes shall mean modular buildings which are designed for living or sleeping purposes with only wheels as a foundation which can be moved only by towing and were not designed to be self-propelled. A trailer coach is a mobile home. 
Modular home shall mean a factory-built dwelling unit, attached or detached, which is wholly or partially constructed away from its building lot and moved to a building lot where it is affixed or situated as a permanent building. A modular home is a residential use. A mobile home shall not be construed to be a modular home. 
Motor freight terminal shall mean a building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or stored for shipping in interstate and intrastate commerce by motor truck. A motor freight terminal is a truck terminal. 
Motor vehicle shall mean a self-propelled vehicle not operating on stationary rails or tracks. This includes and is not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles, four-wheelers and buses. 
Motor vehicle sales shall mean the use of land for the display or sale of two or more new or used motor vehicles on commercially zoned property. 
Nightclub shall mean an establishment operated as a place of entertainment, characterized by any of the following as a principal use of the establishment: 
(1)  Live, recorded or televised entertainment, including but not limited to, performances by magicians, musicians or comedians; and/or 
(2)  Dancing. 
"Nightclub" shall not include theaters, auditoriums and stadiums with fixed row seating, private clubs, bars, teen clubs, or establishments defined elsewhere in this chapter as a sexually-oriented business. 
Nonconforming structure shall mean a structure or building that is not in conformance with current zoning or general development ordinances, but which was legally established at a prior date at which time it was in conformance with the then applicable standards. A nonconforming structure may be continued subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
Nonconforming use shall mean a use that are not in conformance with current zoning or general development ordinances, but which was legally established at a prior date at which time it was in conformance with the then applicable standards. A nonconforming use may be continued subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
Noxious matter shall mean any material which is capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects upon the physical or economic well-being or comfort of humans. 
Open area shall mean that part of a building lot, including courts or yards which: 
(1)  Is open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky; 
(2)  Is accessible to all residents upon a building lot; and 
(3)  Is not part of the roof of that portion of the building containing dwelling units. 
Open storage or outside storage shall mean the storage of any vehicles, equipment, machinery, supplies, commodities, raw materials, semi-finished materials, finished materials, building or construction materials or any similar items, when not accessory to an existing residential use, which are located outside a fully enclosed building and without regard to being formally displayed for sale. Such storage shall also be considered as a storage yard. 
Parking space shall mean a surface area, enclosed or unenclosed sufficient in size to store one automobile together with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with the street or alley and permitting ingress or egress of any automobile. 
Plant nursery (retail sales) shall mean a building or site used for the propagation and retail sale of plants, shrubs, trees and garden supplies. 
Private club shall mean an entity that has obtained a private club permit through the Texas Alcohol and Beverage Commission. 
Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) shall mean the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, gas, or steam, water and the like. 
Professional offices shall mean any offices maintained and used as a place of business in which the primary purpose is not to sell or exchange goods or merchandise. 
Public governmental agencies shall mean only the City of Lewisville, the Lewisville Independent School District, Denton County (within Denton County), Dallas County (within Dallas County), the State of Texas, and the United States Federal Government. 
Public park shall mean any publicly owned park, playground, beach, parkway, greenbelt or roadway within the jurisdiction and control of the city. 
Racing shall mean a facility or area with a course laid out for racing horses or automobiles and necessary accessory uses, including but not limited to, retail sales, automobile maintenance, veterinarian supplies and shops, exercise areas and stables. 
Recreation area shall mean a privately owned park, playground or open space maintained by a community club, property owners association or similar organization. 
Recreational vehicle (RV) park (private) shall mean a parcel of land which is used solely for the rental or lease of lots for transient campers, trailers, motor homes, or temporary parking of any other recreational vehicle that is not a mobile home or HUD-code manufactured home. Uses where unoccupied recreational vehicles are offered for sale or lease, or are stored, are not included. 
Recycling center shall mean a facility where recyclable materials, such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products, glass, metal are recycled, reprocessed, and treated in order to return such products to a condition where they may be reused. Processing means the preparation of material for shipment, or an end user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include storage and loading areas located entirely on the processing center site. Recycling of tires and shingles shall not be allowed. 
Residential storage building shall mean a detached structure used for on-site storage of items related solely to residential purposes and located in any single-family or two-family zoning district. 
Rest home or nursing home shall mean a private facility for the care of children, the aged or infirmed, or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such homes do not contain facilities for surgical care or the treatment of disease or injury. 
Self-service storage facility. See "Mini-storage warehouse". 
Servant's quarters shall mean an accessory building or portion of a main residential building located on the same lot as the principal residential building, occupied only by such persons and their families as are employed full-time by the occupants of the principal residence. 
Service station. See "Gasoline service station". 
Shooting range, indoor shall mean a facility designed to be used for shooting at targets with rifles, pistols or shotguns, and which is completely enclosed within a building or structure. 
Shooting range, outdoor shall mean an area or structure specially designed for the safe discharge and use of rifles, shotguns, pistols, silhouettes, skeet, trap, black powder, or any similar firearm. 
Stadium shall mean a commercial structure with tiers of seats rising around a field or court, intended to be used primarily for the viewing of athletic events. Stadiums or sports arena may also be used for entertainment and other public gathering purposes, such as conventions, circuses or concerts. 
State-licensed vehicle storage facility shall mean a garage, parking lot, or other facility owned or operated by a person other than a governmental entity for storing or parking ten or more vehicles per year. 
Use regulation: No vehicle shall be stored at said facility for more than 30 days. 
Stockpiling shall mean holding on land of material or products such as any soil, sand, gravel, clay, mud, debris, vegetation, or any other material, organic or inorganic, in a concentrated state. 
Storage yard shall mean an outside location for storing items without regard to being formally displayed for sale. Areas which are used for infrequent and temporary storage for a period of 30 days or less per year shall not be deemed as storage yards. 
Use regulations: 
(1)  Storage yards must be screened in accordance with the requirements of the city's general development ordinance. 
(2)  Any variance request involving the requirements or standards relating to such required screening devices shall be considered by the city council in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. 
Story shall mean that part of a building between the surface of a floor and the ceiling immediately above. 
Street shall mean a public right-of-way which affords a primary means of access to abutting property. A driveway or alley which serves only to give secondary vehicular access to a building lot or to an accessory parking or loading facility or to allow vehicles to take or discharge passengers at the entrance to a building shall not be considered a street. 
Street line shall mean the right-of-way of a street. 
Structure. See "Building". 
Theater, drive-in shall mean an open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. This definition does not include an adult theater. 
Toxic materials shall mean those materials which are capable of causing injury to living organisms by chemical means when present in relatively small amounts. 
Use of property shall mean the purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained and shall include any manner of such activity with respect to the standards of this chapter. 
Use, principal shall mean the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. 
Winery shall mean an establishment that produces wine. 
Wrecker services shall mean a business that provides wrecker or towing service to vehicles that are stored at a state-licensed vehicle storage facility. 
Yard shall mean an open space on the same building lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a rear yard, and the depth of a front yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the building site and the lot line shall be used. A "yard" extends along a lot line and at right angles to such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations of the zoning district in which such building is located. 
Yard, front shall mean a yard extending along the whole length of the front lot line between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than steps, planter box, unenclosed porches and driveways. 
Yard, rear shall mean a yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the principal building or any projections thereof other than steps, unenclosed balconies, unenclosed porches or driveways. 
Yard, side shall mean a yard extending along the side lot line from the front yard to the rear yard, being the minimum horizontal distance, measured at the building line, between any building or projections thereof except steps or driveways and the side lot line. 
Zoning district map shall mean the map or maps incorporated into this chapter as a part hereof by reference thereto. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4230-12-2015(Z) , § 1, 12-7-15; 0058-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. A), 9-10-18; 0139-19-ORD , § 1, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 17-4. - Establishment of districts and boundaries. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into 35 districts as follows: 
AO 	Agriculture Open Space District 
TE 	Towne Estate Single-family Residential District 
R-18 	Single-Family Residential District - 18,000 sq. ft. 
R-12 	Single-family Residential District - 12,000 sq. ft. 
R-9 	Single-family Residential District - 9,000 sq. ft. 
R-7.5 	Single-family Residential District - 7,500 sq. ft. 
R-6 	Single-family Residential District - 6,000 sq. ft. 
R-5 	Single-family Residential District - 5,000 sq. ft. 
DU 	Duplex Residential District 
ETH 	Estate Townhouse Residential District 
TH 	Townhouse Residential District 
TH-2 	Townhouse Two Residential District 
MF-1 	Multifamily One Residential District 
MF-2 	Multifamily Two Residential District 
MF-3 	Multifamily Three Residential District 
MHP 	Mobile Home Park District 
MHS 	Mobile Home Subdivision District 
OD 	Office District 
MD 	Medical District 
LC 	Local Commercial District 
GB 	General Business District 
GB-2 	General Business-#2 District 
OTC 	Old Town Center Business District 
OTMU1 	Old Town Mixed-use 1 District 
OTMU2 	Old Town Mixed-use 2 District 
"MU-SC" 	Mixed-use Shopping Center District 
"MU" 	Mixed-use District 
"MU-90" 	Mixed-use Ninety District 
LI 	Light Industrial District 
WH 	Warehouse District 
HI 	Heavy Industrial District 
PD 	Planned Development 
PK 	Parking District 
PU 	Public Use District 
SU 	Specific Use District 
 
The location and boundaries of the districts herein established as well as all special use permits are shown upon the official zoning map, which is hereby incorporated into this chapter. Said zoning map, together with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as is fully set forth and described herein. Said zoning map is on file in City Hall. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-5. - Official zoning map. 
(a)  Maintenance. The official zoning map shall be kept in City Hall. It shall be the duty of the city manager or his designee to keep the official map current and the copies thereof, herein provided for, by entering on such maps any changes which the city council may from time to time order by amendments to the zoning ordinance and map. 
(b)  Rules for the interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so dedicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following a drainage course or other prominent physical feature, such drainage course, other prominent physical feature or parallel line shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(4)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines of right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale of said zoning map. 
(5)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately perpendicular to the centerline or right-of-way lines of streets, highways or drainage courses, such district boundaries shall be construed to be perpendicular to said streets, highways or drainage courses. 
(6)  If unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. 
(7)  In the case of a district boundary line dividing a lot into two parts the district boundary line shall be construed to be the lot line nearest the district boundary line as shown. 
(8)  Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(9)  Where the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on the zoning map, the streets or alleys on the ground shall control. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-6. - "AO" Agriculture - Open Space District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  All general and special agricultural, farming, ranching, stock and poultry raising, dairy and other related uses so long as same does not cause a hazard to health by reason of unsanitary conditions; and are not offensive by reason of odors, dust, fumes, noise or vibration; and are not otherwise detrimental to the public welfare; and in all cases poultry or livestock shall be kept as per the city's animal control ordinances. 
(2)  Public parks and recreation areas. 
(3)  Single-family dwellings on building lots of one acre or more in areas where such dwellings can be served by city water and/or sanitary sewer services if practical or can be adequately served by water wells and/or septic tanks located on the building lot. The minimum floor area of any dwelling shall be 1,400 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(5)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(6)  Church worship facilities. 
(7)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  Accessory dwelling unit (SUP required). 
(11)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(12)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(13)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. All front, side and rear yards shall have a dimension of not less than 100 feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. No lot shall have an area of less than one acre. 
(3)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than ten percent of the total area of the lot be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-6.5. - "TE" Towne Estate Single-Family Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(5)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. Accessory building use includes a detached garage, carport, storeroom, utility room, cabana or similar use. 
(7)  A porte-cochere shall be permitted. The porte-cochere may extend into the required side yard setback if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Three sides of the porte-cochere must be open. 
b.  Columns may be a maximum width of 18 inches at any point and spaced no closer than eight feet on center. 
c.  The porte-cochere is limited to a single story, with the roof height limited to a maximum of 20 feet above the driveway. 
d.  The exterior of the main structure may be no closer to the side property line than 15 feet. 
e.  No part of the porte-cochere, including the roof overhang, shall be closer than five feet to the side property line. 
These requirements shall apply in all single-family detached residential zoning districts. 
(8)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy). (SUP required). 
(9)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(10)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten percent of the lot width or a minimum of 6-½ feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 6-½ feet. The maximum side yard required shall be eight feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than five feet. If the garage entry is from the alley and the entry side of the garage faces the alley, the garage must be set back 20 feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall not be less than 50 feet at the front building line. Irregular lots shall have not less than 30 feet minimum width at the front property line. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling shall be 2,500 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 40 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-7. - "R-18" Single-Family Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(5)  Farms, nurseries or truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises, and provided further that no poultry or livestock other than household pets shall not be located closer to any property line than allowed by city's animal control ordinances. 
(6)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(7)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(11)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(12)  Accessory dwelling unit (SUP required). 
(13)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(14)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(15)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten percent of the lot width. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. In no case shall the minimum side yard setback be less than ten feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 35 feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 18,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall not be less than 100 feet at the required front and rear building setback lines. The minimum width at the front property line shall be 50 feet. 
c.  Exception. Where a lot having less area or width than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the effective date of this chapter, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling shall be 2,400 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 25 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-8. - "R-12" Single-Family Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(5)  Farms, nurseries or truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises, and provided further that no poultry or livestock other than household pets shall not be located closer to any property line than allowed by city's animal control ordinances. 
(6)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(7)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(11)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(12)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(13)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(14)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 30 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten percent of the lot width. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. In no case shall the minimum side yard setback be less than ten feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet if there is no rear entry from an alley, and a depth of not less than 35 feet if there is rear entry from an alley. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 12,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall not be less than 100 feet at the required front and rear building setback lines. The minimum width at the front property line shall be 50 feet. 
c.  Exception. Where a lot having less area or width than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the effective date of this chapter, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling shall be 2,000 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 30 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-9. - "R-9" Single-Family Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(5)  Farms, nurseries or truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises, and provided further that no poultry or livestock other than household pets shall not be located closer to any property line than allowed by city's animal control ordinances. 
(6)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(7)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(11)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(12)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(13)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(14)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 30 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten percent of the lot width. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. In no case shall the minimum side yard setback be less than eight feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet if there is no rear entry from an alley, and a depth of not less than 25 feet if there is rear entry from an alley. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 9,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall not be less than 80 feet at the required front and rear building setback lines. The minimum width at the front property line shall be 50 feet. 
c.  Lot depth. The depth of the lot shall not be less than the width of the lot. 
d.  Exception. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the effective date of this chapter, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling shall be 1,850 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 35 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-10. - "R-7.5" Single-Family Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(5)  Farms, nurseries or truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises, and provided further that no poultry or livestock other than household pets shall not be located closer to any property line than allowed by city's animal control ordinances. 
(6)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(7)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(11)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(12)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(13)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(14)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 30 feet, except where entrance to the garage is provided from an alley in the rear of the house, in which case the minimum front yard may be 25 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than ten percent of the lot width. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. In no case shall the minimum side yard setback be less than 6.5 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet if there is no rear entry from an alley, and a depth of not less than 25 feet if there is rear entry from an alley. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 7,500 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall not be less than 65 feet at the required front and rear building setback lines. The minimum width at the front property line shall be 40 feet, or a minimum of 50 feet if there is a driveway in the front. 
c.  Exception. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the effective date of this chapter, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling shall be 1,700 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 40 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-11. - "R-6" Single-Family Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling units. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(5)  Farms, nurseries or truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises, and provided further that no poultry or livestock other than household pets shall not be located closer to any property line than allowed by city's animal control ordinances. 
(6)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(7)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(11)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(12)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(13)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(14)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a required depth of not less than 25 feet, except where entrance to the automobile parking area is provided from an alley in the rear of the house in which case the minimum front yard shall be 20 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required 25-foot front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than 6-½ feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet if there is no rear entry from an alley, and a depth of not less than 25 feet if there is rear entry from an alley. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot less than 6,000 square feet, or equivalent thereof, per dwelling unit. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall not be less than 60 feet at the required front and rear building setback lines. The minimum width at the front property line shall be 40 feet, or a minimum of 50 feet if there is a driveway in the front. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling unit shall be 1,500 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 50 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-12. - "R-5" Single-Family Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling units. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(5)  Farms, nurseries or truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises, and provided further that no poultry or livestock other than household pets shall not be located closer to any property line than allowed by city's animal control ordinances. 
(6)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(7)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(11)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(12)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(13)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(14)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a required depth of not less than 25 feet, except where entrance to the automobile parking area is provided from an alley in the rear of the house in which case the minimum front yard shall be 20 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required 25-foot front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than 6-½ feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet if there is no rear entry from an alley, and a depth of not less than 25 feet if there is rear entry from an alley. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot less than 5,000 square feet, or equivalent thereof, per dwelling unit. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall not be less than 50 feet at the required front and rear building setback lines. The minimum width at the front property line shall be 40 feet, or a minimum of 50 feet if there is a driveway in the front. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling unit shall be 1,450 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 50 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-13. - "DU" Duplex Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Duplex. 
(2)  Single-family attached dwellings, provided that no more than two dwelling units are attached, and provided that no dwelling unit is constructed above another dwelling unit. 
(3)  Single-family dwellings. 
(4)  Church worship facilities. 
(5)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(6)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(7)  Farms, nurseries or truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises, and provided further that no poultry or livestock other than household pets shall not be located closer to any property line than allowed by city's animal control ordinances. 
(8)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(9)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(10)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(11)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(12)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(13)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(14)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(15)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(16)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a minimum front yard of 25 feet for attached units and duplex units. Detached units shall have a minimum front yard of 20 feet, unless there is a front driveway, in which case the minimum front yard shall be 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard. For attached units and duplex units there shall be a minimum side yard of eight feet, except on the side where the units are attached. For detached units on individual lots, the minimum side yard shall be 6.5 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet if there is no rear entry from an alley, and a depth of not less than 25 feet if there is rear entry from an alley. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. Duplex units shall be constructed on lots with a minimum of 9,000 square feet. Attached units shall be constructed on lots with a minimum of 4,500 square feet. Detached units shall be constructed on lots with a minimum of 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum lot width for duplex units shall be 100 feet at the front and rear building setback lines and 80 feet at the front property line. The minimum width for all other lots shall be 50 feet at the front and rear building setback lines and 40 feet at the front property line. 
c.  Exception. Where a lot having less area or width than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the effective date of this chapter, the above regulations shall not prohibit erection of a dwelling thereon. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of each dwelling side in a duplex or attached units shall be 1,200 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. The minimum floor area for all detached units shall be 1,400 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 40 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-13.5. - "ETH" Estate Townhouse Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family detached or attached dwellings units, provided that no more than nine dwelling units are attached in one continuous row or group, and provided that no dwelling unit is constructed above another dwelling unit. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(5)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. Accessory building use includes a detached garage, storeroom, utility room, cabana or similar use. 
(7)  A carport shall be permitted if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(8)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(9)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(10)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than five feet. If the garage or carport entry is from the front and the entry side of the garage or carport faces the street, the garage or carport must be set back 20 feet. 
b.  Side yard. No side yard setback is required, except a five-foot setback is required adjacent to a side street. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard setback is required. If the garage or carport entry is from the alley and the entry side of the garage or carport faces the alley, the garage or carport must be set back a minimum of 20 feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 4,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The minimum width of the lot shall not be less than 20 feet at any point. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling shall be 2,000 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 80 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-14. - "TH" Townhouse Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family attached dwelling units, provided that no more than nine dwelling units are attached in one continuous row or group, and provided that no dwelling unit is constructed above another dwelling unit. 
(2)  Single-family detached dwelling units. 
(3)  Church worship facilities. 
(4)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(5)  Country clubs or golf courses, but not including miniature golf courses, driving ranges or similar forms of commercial amusement (indoor or outdoor). 
(6)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(7)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(8)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(10)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(11)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(12)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(13)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(14)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. Attached living units shall not exceed 45 feet or 3-½ stories in height. All other detached buildings, including detached living units, shall not exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height, except where otherwise regulated within this chapter. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a required depth of not less than 25 feet; except where entrance to the automobile parking area is provided from an alley in the rear of the house in which case the minimum front yard shall be 20 feet. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required 25 foot front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a continuous row or group of dwellings of not less than ten feet. Detached units shall have a side yard on each side of the lot of not less than 6-½ feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than 15 feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet if there is no rear entry from an alley, and a depth of not less than 25 feet if there is rear entry from an alley. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot less than 2,000 square feet, or equivalent thereof, per dwelling unit, except that detached units shall be constructed on lots which are a minimum of 5,000 square feet per lot. 
b.  Lot width. The width of a lot shall not be less than 20 feet at any point, except that lots for detached units shall have a lot width of not less than 50 feet at the front and rear building lines, and 40 feet at the front property line. 
c.  Lot depth. The depth of a lot shall not be less than 100 feet at any point. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling unit, attached or detached, shall be 1,450 square feet, exclusive of any garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 70 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-14.5. - "TH-2" Townhouse Two Residential District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family attached dwelling units, provided that no more than nine dwelling units are attached in one continuous row or group, and provided that no dwelling unit is constructed above another dwelling unit. 
(2)  Single-family detached dwelling units. 
(3)  Church worship facilities. 
(4)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(5)  Real estate sales offices during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(6)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(7)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(9)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(10)  A carport shall be permitted as an accessory building if it meets all requirements of a residential accessory building. 
(11)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(12)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(13)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. Attached living units shall not exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a required depth of not less than 17.5 feet, except that the garage shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet to be used for driveway and additional on-site parking. Where entrance to the garage is provided from an alley or easement in the rear, the minimum front yard shall be five feet. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of a continuous row or group of dwellings, or on each side of a detached dwelling, of not less than 6.5 feet. A side yard adjacent to a side street shall not be less than ten feet. No side yard for allowable nonresidential uses shall be less than 25 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a required depth of not less than five feet if there is no rear entry for parking from an alley or easement. Where the entrance to the garage is provided from an easement serving a row of attached dwelling units, the minimum rear setback shall be 17.5 feet. Where the entrance to the garage is provided from an alley, the minimum setback shall be 17.5 feet, except that the garage shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet to be used for driveway and additional on-site parking. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot less than 1,700 square feet per dwelling unit, except that detached units shall be constructed on lots which are a minimum of 5,000 square feet per lot. 
b.  Lot width. The width of a lot shall not be less than 20 feet at any point, except that lots for detached units shall have a lot width of not less than 50 feet at the front and rear building lines, and 40 feet at the front property line. 
c.  Lot depth. The depth of a lot shall not be less than 75 feet at any point. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any dwelling unit, attached or detached, shall be 1,200 square feet, exclusive of any garages, breezeways and porches. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 70 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-15. - "MF-1" Multifamily One District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Dormitories for students. 
(3)  Fraternity or sorority house. 
(4)  Nursing and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Day nurseries. 
(6)  Church worship facilities. 
(7)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(8)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(9)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(10)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses, and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein. 
(11)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(12)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(13)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or two stories in height except that a building may be erected to a height of 80 feet and eight stories if set back from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each two feet of additional height above 35 feet. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a required depth of not less than 25 feet. Furthermore, required parking shall not be allowed within the required front yard. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than 25 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 4,500 square feet. No building containing two or more dwelling units shall be constructed or any lot of less than 9,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than 50 feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than 50 feet. 
c.  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than 100 feet, except that a corner lot, having a minimum width of not less than 80 feet, may have an average depth of less than 100 feet, provided that the minimum depth is no less than 80 feet. 
d.  Exception. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the effective date of this chapter, the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. 
a.  The minimum floor area of each two-, three-, or four-family dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 800 square feet of livable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, entry hallways or incidental storage, for each family to be housed in said building. 
b.  Every other building or portion thereof hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged, shall contain an average of 800 square feet and a minimum of 650 feet square feet of liveable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, entry halls or incidental storage, for each family to be housed in said building. 
c.  The 800 square foot average shall apply to the total number of units to be constructed under the same building permit where five or more buildings are to be erected under the same building permit. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 40 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(5)  Density. In no case shall the density of units per platted acre exceed 20 units per acre. Drainage right-of-way which is dedicated to the city as a condition for development may be included in the total area for computing density. Otherwise, density shall be based on the size of the platted lot. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-16. - "MF-2" Multifamily Two District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Dormitories for students. 
(3)  Fraternity or sorority house. 
(4)  Nursing and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Day nurseries. 
(6)  Church worship facilities. 
(7)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(8)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(9)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(10)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses, and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein. 
(11)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(12)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(13)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 45 feet or three stories in height, except that a building may be erected to a height of 80 feet and eight stories if set back from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each two feet of additional height above 45 feet. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a required depth of not less than 25 feet. Furthermore, required parking shall not be allowed within the required front yard. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than 25 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 4,500 square feet. No building containing two or more dwelling units shall be constructed on any lot of less than 9,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than 50 feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than 50 feet. 
c.  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than 100 feet, except that a corner lot, having a minimum width of not less than 80 feet, may have an average depth of less than 100 feet provided that the minimum depth is not less than 80 feet. 
d.  Exception. Where a lot having less area, width and/or depth than herein required existed in separate ownership upon the effective date of this chapter the above regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a one-family dwelling thereon. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. 
a.  The minimum floor area of each two-, three-, or four-family dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 750 square feet of liveable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, entry halls or incidental storage, for each family to be housed in said building. 
b.  Every other building or portion thereof hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged shall contain an average of 750 square feet and a minimum of 500 square feet of livable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, entry halls or incidental storage for each family to be housed in said building. 
c.  The 750 square feet average shall apply to the total number of units to be constructed under the same building permit where five or more buildings are to be erected under the same building permit. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall more than 50 percent of the total lot area be covered by the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings. 
(5)  Density. In no case shall the density of units per platted acre exceed 24 units per acre. Drainage right-of-way which is dedicated to the city as a condition for development may be included in the total area for computing density. Otherwise, density shall be based on the size of the platted lot. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-16.5. - "MF-3" Multifamily Three District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Multifamily dwellings. 
(2)  Dormitories for students. 
(3)  Fraternity or sorority house. 
(4)  Nursing and convalescent homes. 
(5)  Day nurseries. 
(6)  Church worship facilities. 
(7)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(8)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school. 
(9)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(10)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses, and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein. 
(11)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(12)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(13)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 45 feet or three stories in height, except that a building may be erected to a height of 80 feet and eight stories if set back from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each two feet of additional height above 45 feet. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a required depth of not less than 25 feet along any street which has a right-of-way width of 120 feet or more. The required front yard shall have a required depth of not less than five feet on all other streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than five feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 4,500 square feet. No building containing two or more dwelling units shall be constructed on any lot of less than 9,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The width of the lot shall not be less than 50 feet at the front street building line, nor shall its average width be less than 50 feet. 
c.  Lot depth. The average depth of the lot shall not be less than 100 feet, except that a corner lot, having a minimum width of not less than 80 feet, may have an average depth of less than 100 feet, provided that the minimum depth is not less than 80 feet. 
(3)  Minimum dwelling size. 
a.  The minimum floor area of each two-, three-, or four-family dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 750 square feet of livable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, entry halls or incidental storage, for each family to be housed in said building. 
b.  Every other building or portion thereof hereafter erected, reconstructed, altered or enlarged shall contain an average of 750 square feet and a minimum of 500 square feet of livable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, entry halls or incidental storage for each family to be housed in said building. 
c.  The 750 square feet average shall apply to the total number of units to be constructed under the same building permit where five or more buildings are to be erected under the same building permit. 
(4)  Lot coverage. In no case shall the combined area of the main buildings and accessory buildings cover more than 50 percent of the total lot area. 
(5)  Density. In no case shall the density of units per platted acre exceed 24 units per acre. Drainage right-of-way that is dedicated to the city as a condition for development may be included in the total area for computing density. Otherwise, density shall be based on the size of the platted lot. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-17. - "MHP" Mobile Home Park District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  A mobile home park. 
(2)  Such uses as are normally accessory to a mobile home park, including office and/or maintenance buildings for management and maintenance of the mobile home park only, recreation buildings and swimming pools, private clubs, laundry facilities and storage facilities for use of the residents of the mobile home park, and open recreation areas. 
(3)  Church worship facilities. 
(4)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(5)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(6)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(7)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(8)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Location of mobile homes outside of mobile home parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain any mobile home in any place in the city other than in a licensed mobile home park or mobile home subdivision except for the following: 
(1)  Mobile homes may be kept in a properly zoned mobile home sales lot, including use of a mobile home as a sales office. 
(2)  A mobile home may be used as a temporary construction office. 
(3)  A single "camper trailer" type mobile home or recreational vehicle (used solely for private recreational purposes) may be stored as an accessory use for residential uses. 
(4)  A mobile home may be used as office and living quarters for security personnel on commercial or industrial developments only after approval of the city council. Approvals which are in force on or before June 20, 1994 shall be deemed to be approved indefinitely. All approvals are for an indefinite time period unless otherwise directed by the city council. 
(c)  Compliance with other ordinances. Except as provided herein, all mobile home parks must also meet the requirements of the City Code regulating mobile homes and mobile home parks. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-18. - "MHS" Mobile Home Subdivision District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A mobile home subdivision shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family mobile home or pre-manufactured home in a subdivision as shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning and zoning commission and filed for record, designed specifically for and restricted to mobile home development. 
(2)  Church worship facilities. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(6)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(7)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(8)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Location of mobile home subdivision. 
(1)  Mobile home subdivision district will be granted only as an amendment to the zoning ordinance. The granting of each mobile home subdivision district will be on the merits of each individual request for amendment. 
(2)  The location of a mobile home subdivision district shall be in general conformance with the general plan of the city, shall be located adjacent to a thoroughfare and adjacent to a multifamily district, commercial district or industrial district. 
(c)  Height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(d)  Area. The minimum site area which may be developed or used for a mobile home subdivision is eight acres. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot of not less than ten feet. This shall apply to any mobile home unit, canopy, carport or appurtenance. There shall be a side yard of 20 feet on a side adjacent to a side street. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than ten feet. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No mobile home unit or pre-manufactured home shall be placed on any lot less than 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Lot width. The width of a lot shall not be less than 50 feet. 
c.  Lot depth. The depth of a lot shall not be less than 100 feet. 
(e)  Special regulations. 
(1)  The mobile home subdivision shall meet all city requirements as set forth in the city's general development ordinance and shall conform to all other regulations contained in the city building code, gas code, plumbing code, electrical code, mechanical code and any other applicable city ordinances. 
(2)  All mobile homes shall conform to the state standards for mobile home anchorage, tie downs and blocking. 
(3)  All underground utilities shall be provided. 
(4)  All mobile homes shall be skirted and all skirting shall be constructed of mortared brick. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-19. - "OD" Office District regulations. 
(a)  Use. 
(1)  Professional and administrative offices where only services are provided, no chattels or goods are offered for sale, and no outside storage is provided on the premises. This includes, but is not limited to, doctors, dentists, attorneys, architects, engineers, insurance, real estate, banks and similar offices. 
(2)  Business or commercial schools and institutions of education. 
(3)  Clinics, medical and dental. 
(4)  Veterinarian or animal clinic, provided the use is operated within an enclosed structure and is not on a lot abutting a single-family zoned lot. 
(5)  Day nurseries. 
(6)  The incidental retail sale of food, beverages and other convenience items or services is permitted to the occupants, employees and guests, as long as these items are not advertised nor offered for sale to the general public. 
(7)  Church worship facilities. 
(8)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(9)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(10)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, dust noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
(11)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(12)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(13)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Building and coverage regulations. 
(1)  Building regulations. The minimum floor area in "OD" Office District shall be 1,000 square feet. 
(2)  Coverage regulations. In no case shall any building or building complex cover more than 35 percent of the site area. 
(c)  Height. The maximum height for buildings shall be 50 feet. In no event, however, shall the portion of a building located within 150 feet of any property zoned for residential purposes exceed the height allowed in that residential zoning district. 
(d)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. 
1.  There shall be a minimum front yard having a depth of not less than 40 feet adjacent to any street with a right-of-way of 100 feet or more. 
2.  There shall be a minimum front yard having a depth of not less than 30 feet adjacent to any street with a right-of-way less than 100 feet. 
3.  Lots having double frontage, running through from one street to another, shall provide the required setback from both streets. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet on each side of the lot or tract on which any single building or building complex is constructed. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except, that a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the residential district also backs up to the rear street. The required rear yard shall be waived when a screening device is installed in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. The building itself can serve as a portion of the screening device when that portion of the building exterior is constructed of the same materials as the screening device. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-20. - "MD" Medical District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Day nursery or day care center. 
(2)  Nursing home or convalescent home. 
(3)  Assisted living or independent living units, limited to persons age 55 and above and including programs such as on-site meals, on-site doctor visits, medication management, organized fitness programs, housekeeping services, laundry services, craft and game programs, transportation to doctors and shopping, beauty and barber services, on-site entertainment and similar activities for senior citizens. 
(4)  Institution for care of alcoholic, narcotic, or psychiatric patients. 
(5)  Clinic: medical, dental or optical. 
(6)  Laboratory: medical, dental or optical. 
(7)  Laboratory: scientific research or testing. 
(8)  Retail sales and services for medical appliances. 
(9)  Florist. 
(10)  Drug store or pharmacy. 
(11)  Optical sales and service. 
(12)  Offices: medical, dental or optical. 
(13)  Hospital. 
(14)  Church worship facilities. 
(15)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(16)  Uses similar to the above-mentioned permitted uses, provided activities conducted observe the requirements of all city ordinances. 
(17)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(18)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
(19)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(20)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(21)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(22)  Chapter 748 Operation (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. The maximum height for the main buildings shall not exceed 100 feet. In no event, however, shall the portion of a building located within 150 feet of any property zoned for residential purposes exceed the height allowed in that residential zoning district. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district "MD", except that automobile parking will be permitted in such yards if separated by at least 25 feet from any residential district. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of ten feet on each side of the lot or tract on which any single building or building complex is constructed. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except, that a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the residential district also backs up to the rear street. The required rear yard shall be waived when a screening device is installed in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. The building itself can serve as a portion of the screening device when that portion of the building exterior is constructed of the same materials as the screening device. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4230-12-2015 , § 2, 12-7-15)  
Sec. 17-21. - "LC" Local Commercial District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for indoor, neighborhood office, retail, and services which are primarily retail in nature, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district "OD" as regulated in said district. 
(2)  Grocery stores. 
(3)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(4)  Book, card, gift and stationary stores. 
(5)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(6)  Gasoline service stations (SUP required). 
(7)  Minor automobile services including tune-up and repair services, tire stores and car washes, providing there is no overnight outside storage of vehicles (not including transmission or body shops) (SUP required). 
(8)  Restaurants. 
(9)  Florists. 
(10)  Video rental stores, movie theaters and other indoor amusements. 
(11)  Church worship facilities. 
(12)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(13)  Other retail, office and service uses of a similar nature, provided that the business establishment supplies the everyday needs of the immediate neighborhood and is subject to the following conditions: 
a.  There is no outside display and storage of merchandise or vehicles, except for the incidental and occasional sale of merchandise outside the building for periods not to exceed 30 days (i.e., Christmas tree sales and sidewalk sales, etc.). 
b.  That required yards not be used for display, sale or storage of merchandise, or for the storage of vehicles, equipment, containers or waste material. 
c.  That such use not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration, or similar nuisance. 
(14)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(15)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
(16)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(17)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(18)  Beverage container recycling collection facility (SUP required). 
(19)  Kiosks, including water and ice sales (SUP required). 
(20)  Private stadium/arena/sports field (SUP required). 
(21)  Communication towers (SUP required). 
(22)  Plant nursery (retail sales) (indoor). 
(23)  Plant nursery (retail sales) (with outdoor display or storage) (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 45 feet or three stories in height, except that a building may be erected to a height of 80 feet and eight stories if set back from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each two feet of additional height above 45 feet. In no event, however, shall the portion of a building located within 150 feet of any property zoned for residential purposes exceed the height allowed in that residential zoning district. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district "LC", except that automobile parking will be permitted in such yards if separated by at least 25 feet from any residential district. 
b.  Side yard. A side yard of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. The required side yard shall be waived when a screening device is installed in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. The building itself can serve as a portion of the screening device when that portion of the building exterior is constructed of the same materials as the screening device. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in any required side yard or in any side street yard adjoining a residential district. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required, except that a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the residential district also backs up to the rear street. The required rear yard shall be waived when a screening device is installed in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. The building itself can serve as a portion of the screening device when that portion of the building exterior is constructed of the same materials as the screening device. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-22. - "GB" General Business District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for office, retail and service uses which are primarily retail in nature including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district "LC" as regulated in said district. 
(2)  Auto, boat, motorcycle, recreational vehicle or mobile home display, sales (outdoor) and/or repair (SUP required). 
(3)  Bakeries. 
(4)  Building material sales with outside storage or display, including lumber yards (SUP required). 
(5)  Business or commercial schools. 
(6)  Clinic, medical and dental, and professional offices. 
(7)  Carpentry, painting, plumbing or tinsmithing shop fully enclosed within a building. 
(8)  Cleaning, laundry and dyeing plants fully enclosed within a building. 
(9)  Creamery, ice cream manufacturing and dairy operations fully enclosed within a building. 
(10)  Farm implement display and sales room (outdoor) (SUP required). 
(11)  Hotels, motels and inns. 
(12)  Mortuaries with or without crematoriums (SUP required). 
(13)  Office buildings. 
(14)  Pet shops, retail, fully enclosed within a building. 
(15)  Printing, engraving and newspaper plants, fully enclosed within a building. 
(16)  Radio or television broadcasting station or studio with broadcasting towers (SUP required). 
(17)  Retail stores, fully enclosed within a building. 
(18)  Veterinarian or animal hospital with outdoor kennel or exercise runs (SUP required). 
(19)  Bowling alley and other commercial amusement (indoor) uses, fully enclosed within a building. 
(20)  Church worship facilities. 
(21)  Uses similar to the above-mentioned permitted uses, provided activities conducted wholly inside a building and observe the requirements of all city ordinances. 
(22)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(23)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. Open storage shall be considered an accessory use but no more than ten percent of the platted lot may be used for outside storage, including access and maneuvering areas for moving the stored items. 
(24)  Dwelling units of 850 square foot minimum size when located over a retail, restaurant or similar use on the first floor (SUP required). 
(25)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(27)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(28)  Commercial amusement, outdoor (SUP required). 
(29)  Drive-in theater (SUP required). 
(30)  Flea market, outdoor (SUP required). 
(31)  Helipad, helistop or landing strip (SUP required). 
(32)  Kennels with outdoor runs (SUP required). 
(33)  Nightclub, bar (SUP required). 
(34)  Brewery, distillery or winery. 
(35)  Hotels, motels and inns with rooms containing a cooktop or oven (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed in height the width of the street on which it faces plus the depth of the front yard. On a lot adjoining a residential district, no building shall exceed 45 feet in height, except that this height may be increased up to the maximum of 12 stories or 180 feet at the rate of two feet of additional height for each one foot of additional setback from required yard lines. In no event, however, shall the portion of a building located within 150 feet of any property zoned for residential purposes exceed the height allowed in that residential zoning district. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in district "GB", except that automobile parking (including automobile dealer display parking) will be permitted in such yards if separated by at least 25 feet from any residential district. 
b.  Side yard. A side yard of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. The required side yard shall be waived when a screening device is installed in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. The building itself can serve as a portion of the screening device when that portion of the building exterior is constructed of the same materials as the screening device. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in any required side yard or in any side street yard adjoining a residential district. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required, except that a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the residential district also backs up to the rear street. The required rear yard shall be waived when a screening device is installed in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. The building itself can serve as a portion of the screening device when that portion of the building exterior is constructed of the same materials as the screening device. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(d)  Outside storage regulations. In all zoning districts where outside storage yards are allowed, such storage yards shall be screened from view in accordance with the standards outlined in the city's general development ordinance. This provision applies to all outside storage which began after the original date of passage of this provision (April 4, 1994). Any variance request involving the requirements or standards relating to such required screening devices shall be considered by the city council in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. Areas which are used for infrequent and temporary storage for a period of 30 days or less per year shall not be deemed as storage yards. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4230-12-2015 , § 3, 12-7-15)  
Sec. 17-22.5. - "GB-2" General Business #2 District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises may be used for any use permitted in district "GB" as regulated by said district. 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed in height the width of the street on which it faces plus the depth of the front yard. On a lot adjoining a residential zoning district, no building shall exceed 45 feet in height, except that this height may be increased up to the maximum of 12 stories or 180 feet at the rate of two feet of additional height for each one foot of additional setback from required yard lines. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. No front yard is required. 
b.  Side yard. No side yard is required. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-22.6 - "OTC" Old Town Center Business District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for office, retail and service uses which are primarily retail in nature including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Retail establishments including, but not limited to: bakeries; book, card, gift and stationary stores; building material sales; clothing; florists; grocery stores; and pet shops or others of a similar nature and subject to the following condition: 
a.  Temporary, portable outside display of merchandise is allowed on a daily basis but is limited to the area directly adjacent to the building occupied by the business and no more than five feet from the building. A clear aisle shall be maintained for pedestrian access. Otherwise, no outside display or storage is permitted. 
(2)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(3)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(4)  Business or commercial schools. (See Main Street corridor subarea for additional SUP requirements.) 
(5)  Church worship facilities. 
(6)  Clinic, medical and dental, and related professional offices. (See Main Street corridor subarea for additional SUP requirements.) 
(7)  Communication towers, accessory to the primary use, shall be located on a building and may extend a maximum of 15 feet above the building, but must be screened from view. 
(8)  Day nurseries. (See Main Street corridor subarea for additional SUP requirements.) 
(9)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(10)  Hotels, motels and inns. 
(11)  Professional offices. (See Main Street corridor subarea for additional SUP requirements.) 
(12)  Restaurants. 
(13)  Video rental stores and movie theaters. 
(14)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. Dwelling units of 850 square foot minimum size shall be allowed as an accessory use to retail businesses. 
(15)  Non-accessory dwelling units of 650 square foot minimum size when located over a retail, restaurant or similar use on the first floor. 
(16)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(17)  Uses similar to the above-mentioned permitted uses; provided activities conducted observe the requirements of all city ordinances. 
(18)  Bed and breakfast establishments (SUP required). 
(19)  Bar (SUP required). 
(20)  Hotels, motels and inns with rooms containing a cooktop or oven (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed a maximum height of 75 feet excluding parapet walls except as outlined in the Plaza Subdistrict. Parapet walls shall have a maximum height of eight feet. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. The front facades of buildings shall be set at the front property line. However, a portion of the façade may be set back further in order to create a special entry court or restaurant seating. 
b.  Side yard. The façade of a building located on a lot that adjoins a side street shall be located at the property line. 
(d)  Plaza Subdistrict. 
(1)  Boundaries. The Plaza Subdistrict shall be comprised of the properties with frontage on West Main Street between North Mill Street and North Charles Street; properties fronting the south side of West Church Street between North Mill Street and North Charles Street; and properties fronting the west side of North Mill Street between West Main Street and West Church Street. 
(2)  Height requirements. The unique character of this subdistrict requires the following height requirements in addition to all requirements for the underlying district as outlined herein. Where there is a conflict, these provisions shall control. 
a.  Buildings within the subdistrict shall not exceed a maximum height of three stories or 45 feet, excluding parapet walls, which shall have a maximum height of eight feet. 
(3)  Main Street corridor subarea. 
a.  Boundaries. The Main Street corridor subarea shall be comprised of the properties with frontage on West Main Street between North Mill Street and North Charles Street. 
b.  Use requirements. The unique character of this subarea requires the following specific requirements in addition to the height requirements of the Plaza Subdistrict and all requirements for the underlying district as outlined herein. Where there is a conflict, these provisions shall control. 
1.  SUP required. A special use permit shall be required for the following uses on the first floor of a building within the subarea: 
i.  Business or commercial schools; 
ii.  Clinic, medical and dental, and related professional offices; 
iii.  Day nurseries; or 
iv.  Professional offices. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4230-12-2015 , § 4, 12-7-15; 0139-19-ORD , § 2, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 17-22.6.1. - "OTMU1" Old Town Mixed-Use 1 District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Single-family attached dwellings, provided that no more than nine dwelling units are attached in one continuous row or group, and provided that no dwelling unit is constructed above another dwelling unit. 
(3)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings. Projects shall be a minimum of two acres in area on a single platted lot. A minimum of 20 units must be built in the first phase of construction. 
(5)  Church worship facilities. 
(6)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(7)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to the above uses and located on the same lot therewith, not involving the conduct of a retail business except as provided herein and for home occupations as defined by this chapter. 
(9)  A detached private garage with or without storeroom and/or utility room shall be permitted as an accessory building, provide that such garage shall be located not less than 60 feet from the front lot line, nor less than five feet from any side or rear lot line and in the case of corner lots not less than the distance required for residences from side streets. A garage or servants' quarters constructed as an integral part of the main building shall be subject to the regulations affecting the main building. 
(10)  A carport shall be permitted, provided that such carport is not located in a required front or side yard, not less than five feet from the rear property line, and fully open on the entrance side. 
(11)  Bed and breakfast (SUP required). 
(12)  Professional and administrative offices where only services are provided, no goods are offered for sale, no drive-thru's are allowed and no outside storage is provided on the premises. 
(13)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(14)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Single-family detached and two-family dwelling requirements. 
(1)  Maximum height. No building shall exceed 35 feet or 2-½ stories in height. 
(2)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any single-family dwelling shall be 1,700 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(3)  Front yard. No front setback is required. 
(4)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five feet. 
(5)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet. 
(c)  Single-family attached, multifamily and institutional building requirements. 
(1)  Maximum height. No building shall exceed exceed 45 feet in height or 3-½ stories in height. 
(2)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any single-family attached dwelling shall be 1,450 square feet. The minimum floor area of any multifamily dwelling shall be 650 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(3)  Front yard. No front setback is required. 
(4)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five feet. 
(5)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 6.5 feet except if a residential garage directly adjoins a rear alley, then the rear yard may be four feet. 
(d)  Size of lot. 
(1)  Lot area. No detached single-family dwelling or nonresidential building shall be constructed on any lot of less than 7,500 square feet. Attached single-family dwellings shall be constructed on lots with a minimum as illustrated on the adopted concept plan submitted with initial zoning change request. Multifamily dwelling projects shall be constructed on lots of a minimum of two acres in size. 
(2)  [Reserved.] 
(e)  Other setbacks. 
(1)  The Old Town Mixed-Use 1 District shall not be subject to the following setback provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter: 
a.  "On a corner lot, the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any required front yard on the same side of such street between intersecting streets". 
b.  "...no accessory building shall be...closer than five feet to any rear or side lot line, and, in the case of corner lots, not less than the distance required for buildings from side streets". 
c.  "In any residential or MF District where 25 percent or more of the frontage upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings having front yards of greater depth than is required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with a front yard of less than the least depth of any such existing front yards." 
(2)  There shall be a minimum ten-foot setback on the driveway side of a lot when there is not sufficient maneuvering space on-site to allow vehicles to exit the lot without backing into the street. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-22.7. - "OTMU2" Old Town Mixed-Use 2 District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Single-family attached dwellings, provided that no more than nine dwelling units are attached in one continuous row or group, and provided that no dwelling unit is constructed above another dwelling unit. 
(3)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings. Projects shall be a minimum of one acre in land area. More than one lot may be utilized to meet the one-acre requirement as long as the lots are contiguous or directly across street rights-of-way. A minimum of 20 units must be built in the first phase of construction. 
(5)  Retail establishments, including but not limited to: bakeries; book, card, gift and stationary stores; building material sales; clothing; florists; grocery stores; and pet shops or others of a similar nature and subject to the following condition: 
a.  Temporary, portable outside display of merchandise is allowed on a daily basis but is limited to the area directly adjacent to the building occupied by the business and no more than five feet from the building. A clear aisle shall be maintained for pedestrian access. Otherwise, no outside display or storage is permitted. 
(6)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(7)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(8)  Business or commercial schools. 
(9)  Church worship facilities. 
(10)  Clinic, medical and dental, and related professional offices. 
(11)  Communication towers (SUP required). Towers, antennas and communication dishes located on a building may be extend a maximum of 15 feet above the building, but must be screened from view. 
(12)  Day nurseries. 
(13)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(14)  Gasoline service stations, excluding major motor or transmission repair services (SUP required). 
(15)  Hotels, motels and inns. 
(16)  Mortuaries (SUP required). 
(17)  Professional offices. 
(18)  Restaurants. 
(19)  Veterinarian or animal clinic provided that no kennel or exercise runway shall be located outside the building. 
(20)  Video rental stores and movie theaters. 
(21)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. Dwelling units of 850 square foot minimum size shall be allowed as an accessory use to retail businesses. 
(22)  Non-accessory dwelling units of 650 square foot minimum size when located over a retail, restaurant or similar use on the first floor. 
(23)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(24)  Bed and breakfast (SUP required). 
(25)  Uses similar to the above-mentioned permitted uses; provided activities conducted observe the requirements of all city ordinances. 
(26)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(27)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(28)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(29)  Brewery, distillery or winery. 
(30)  Bar (SUP required). 
(31)  Hotels, motels and inns with rooms containing a cooktop or oven (SUP required). 
(b)  Single-family detached and two-family requirements. 
(1)  Maximum height. No building shall exceed 45 feet or 3-½ stories in height. 
(2)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any single-family dwelling shall be 1,700 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(3)  Front yard. No front setback is required. 
(4)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five feet. 
(5)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 20 feet. If a residential garage directly adjoins a rear alley, then the rear yard may be four feet. 
(c)  Single-family attached requirements. 
(1)  Maximum height. No building shall exceed 75 feet in height. 
(2)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any single-family attached dwelling shall be 1,200 square feet. 
(3)  Front yard. No front setback is required. 
(4)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five feet. 
(5)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 6.5 feet except if a residential garage directly adjoins a rear alley, then the rear yard may be four feet. 
(d)  Multifamily requirements. 
(1)  Maximum height. No building shall exceed 75 feet in height excluding parapet walls. Parapet walls shall have a maximum height of eight feet. 
(2)  Minimum dwelling size. The minimum floor area of any multifamily dwelling shall be 650 square feet, exclusive of garages, breezeways and porches. 
(3)  Front yard. No front setback is required. 
(4)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than five feet. 
(5)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 6.5 feet except if a residential garage directly adjoins a rear alley, then the rear yard may be zero feet. 
(e)  Commercial and institutional building requirements. 
(1)  Maximum height. No building shall exceed 75 feet in height excluding parapet walls. Parapet walls shall have a maximum height of eight feet. 
(2)  Front yard. No front setback is required. 
(3)  Side yard. No side yard is required. 
(4)  Rear yard. A rear yard of not less than ten feet in depth shall be provided. 
(f)  Other setbacks. 
(1)  The Old Town Mixed-Use 2 District shall not be subject to the following provisions contained elsewhere in this chapter: 
a.  "On a corner lot, the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any required front yard on the same side of such street between intersecting streets". 
b.  "...no accessory building shall be...closer than five feet to any rear or side lot line, and, in the case of corner lots, not less than the distance required for buildings from side streets". 
c.  "In any residential or MF District where 25 percent or more of the frontage upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings having front yards of greater depth than is required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with a front yard of less than the least depth of any such existing front yards." 
(2)  There shall be a minimum ten-foot setback on the driveway side of a lot when there is not sufficient maneuvering space on-site to allow vehicles to exit the lot without backing onto a street identified as a thoroughfare on the thoroughfare plan. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4230-12-2015 , § 5, 12-7-15)  
Sec. 17-22.8.1. - "MU-SC" Mixed-Use - Shopping Center District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building, premises or development shall be used only for office, retail, restaurant and service uses, or a mix of those uses, which are primarily retail or residential in nature, including multifamily dwellings (for sale or for rent units) and single-family attached dwelling units (townhouses). 
Uses may include those listed in the office district zoning classification, as well as: 
(1)  Department stores and similar retail stores. 
(2)  Professional service offices, such as doctors, medical and dental clinics, attorneys, architects, engineers, real estate, insurance, veterinarian clinics with no outside runs and other professional offices. 
(3)  Corporate and administrative offices. 
(4)  Restaurants, including those with outdoor seating areas. 
(5)  Multifamily dwellings (for sale or for rent units) and single-family attached dwelling units (townhouses). 
(6)  Grocery stores. 
(7)  Hotels. 
(8)  Video rental stores, movie theaters and other indoor amusements. 
(9)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(10)  Book, card, gift and stationary stores. 
(11)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(12)  Florists. 
(13)  Day nurseries. 
(14)  Church worship facilities. 
(15)  Schools, private, with full curriculum accredited by the State of Texas equivalent to that of a public elementary, middle or high school. 
(16)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(17)  Other retail, office and service uses of a similar nature subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The incidental display or sale of merchandise placed on private sidewalks in front of the store selling the merchandise shall be allowed during store operating hours. Uses involving overnight outside display of merchandise shall be prohibited except for seasonal sales for periods not to exceed 30 consecutive days and a maximum 60 days per year (i.e., Christmas tree sales and sidewalk sales). 
b.  Outside storage or display is prohibited, except as noted in subsection (a)(17)a., above. 
c.  Platted front and side yards shall not be used for storage of merchandise, equipment, or waste containers, except as noted in subsection (a)(17)a., above. 
d.  The use not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
e.  Only residential uses shall be allowed in multifamily dwelling units and townhouse units except commercial uses qualifying as a home occupation. 
(18)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises. Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(19)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
(20)  Bed and breakfast (SUP required). 
(21)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(22)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(23)  Brewery, distillery or winery. 
(24)  Hotels, motels and inns with rooms containing a cooktop or oven (SUP required). 
(b)  Mix of uses required. No building permit for multifamily dwellings or townhouses may be issued unless there is also a building permit issued for a minimum of 450 square feet of building space for retail or office uses for every dwelling unit within any development, or such space already exists and will remain within the shopping center or development. Commercial and residential uses may be combined within a building or may be located in separate buildings. Parking lots and parking buildings will not count toward the required commercial space. 
(c)  Height. No building shall exceed 60 feet in height, except that a building may be erected to a height of more than 60 feet if set back from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each two feet of additional height above 35 feet. In no event, however, shall the portion of a building located within 150 feet of any property zoned for single-family residential use exceed the height allowed in that residential zoning district. 
(d)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. 
b.  Side yard. A side yard of not less than 15 feet shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street, otherwise no side yard setback is required. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear setback is required except that a rear setback of not less than 25 feet shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across the street from a residential district. 
(e)  Multifamily use. 
(1)  Minimum dwelling size. The floor area of any multifamily dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 500 square feet of livable floor space, but units within any single building must contain an average of 650 square feet of livable floor space, excluding garages, porches, breezeways, common entry halls or common storage. 
(f)  Single-family attached (townhouse) use. 
(1)  Minimum dwelling size. The floor area of each townhouse unit shall contain a minimum of 1,200 square feet of livable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, common entry halls or common storage. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No townhouse shall be constructed on any lot less than 1,700 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  Lot width. The width of a lot shall not be less than 20 feet at any point. 
c.  Lot depth. The depth of a lot shall not be less than 75 feet at any point. 
(g)  Concept plan required. 
(1)  At the time of submitting a request for a change in zoning to mixed-use shopping center, the applicant shall include a concept plan for the proposed development. The concept plan is a comprehensive narrative, complete with illustrations, outlining the proposed development in detail. The concept plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed zoning district in a graphic manner and as may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development. 
(2)  As part of the zoning ordinance adoption process, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend and the city council shall approve the concept plan, which shall be attached to and included as part of the ordinance. 
(3)  The concept plan shall include, and is not limited to the following: 
a.  Thoroughfares and access; 
b.  Preliminary lot layout; 
c.  Size, type and location of buildings and building sites, including: 
1.  Building size; 
2.  Height of buildings; and 
3.  Number of stories of buildings. 
d.  Density; 
e.  Total number of dwelling units; 
f.  Total square feet of nonresidential uses; 
g.  Screening; 
h.  Concept landscape plan; 
i.  Lighting plan; 
j.  Building elevations in color (one set); 
k.  Exterior finish material and architectural character; 
l.  Total square feet of open space; 
m.  Amenities; 
n.  Phasing plan; 
o.  Project scheduling; 
p.  Items not consistent with the city's general development ordinance; 
q.  Requested variances; 
r.  Traffic study (if needed); 
s.  Physical features of the site. 
(4)  The plat and engineering site plan shall be substantially consistent with the concept plan approved with the zoning request. 
a.  A new zone change request with an amended concept plan will be required for any changes to the concept plan which impact the following: 
1.  The height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures; 
2.  The percentage of a lot that may be occupied; 
3.  The size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; 
4.  Population density; or 
5.  The location and use of buildings, other structures, and land for business, industrial, residential, or other purposes. 
b.  Changes to the concept plan that do not impact the conditions listed in subsection (g)(4)a., above, may be approved by the planning and zoning commission with an amended concept plan and narrative submittal explaining the conditions for change, with an option to appeal the denial to the city council for a final resolution. Such appeal must be filed within 15 days after the final decision has been rendered by the planning and zoning commission, by filing with the director of planning or his designee a notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The city council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4230-12-2015 , § 6, 12-7-15; 0058-18-ORD , § 2(Exh. B), 9-10-18)  
Sec. 17-22.8.2. - "MU" Mixed-Use District regulations. 
(a)  Use. The MU District is intended to provide a planning, regulatory, and management framework for the design, development and operation of mixed-use centers which promote social interaction, community identity, and efficient use of land and resources. The MU District should also support and encourage a variety of transportation options, including transit, bicycles and walking. 
Uses may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Department stores and similar retail stores. 
(2)  Professional service offices, such as doctors, attorneys, architects, engineers, real estate, insurance and veterinarian clinics with no outside runs. 
(3)  Restaurants, including those with outdoor seating areas. 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings (for sale or for rent units), single-family attached dwelling units (townhouses), and single-family detached dwelling units. 
(5)  Grocery stores. 
(6)  Video rental stores, movie theaters and other indoor amusements. 
(7)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(8)  Book, card, gift and stationary stores. 
(9)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(10)  Florists. 
(11)  Day nurseries. 
(12)  Hotels. 
(13)  Automobile parking structures. 
(14)  Church worship facilities. 
(15)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(16)  Other retail, office and service uses of a similar nature, provided that the business supplies the everyday needs of the immediate neighborhood and is subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The incidental display or sale of merchandise placed on private sidewalks in front of the store selling the merchandise shall be allowed during store operating hours. Uses involving overnight outside display of merchandise shall be prohibited except for seasonal sales for periods not to exceed 30 consecutive days and a maximum 60 days per year (i.e., Christmas tree sales and sidewalk sales). 
b.  Outside storage is prohibited. 
c.  Platted front and side yards shall not be used for storage of merchandise, equipment, or waste containers, except as noted in subsection (a)(16)a., above. 
d.  The use not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
e.  Only residential uses shall be allowed in multifamily dwelling units, single-family detached dwelling units and townhouse units except commercial uses qualifying as a home occupation. 
(17)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises. Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(18)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
(19)  Bed and breakfast (SUP required). 
(20)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(21)  Brewery, distillery or winery. 
(22)  Hotels, motels and inns with rooms containing a cooktop or oven (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 80 feet in height, except that a building may be erected to a height of more than 80 feet if set back from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each two feet of additional height above 80 feet. 
(c)  Area; size of yards. There shall be no minimum front, side, or rear setback, and no setback shall exceed 25 feet. The setbacks shall be based on site context, area development patterns and recommendations contained with any city-adopted, long-range plans for the area containing the subject site. 
(d)  Multifamily use. 
(1)  Minimum dwelling size. The floor area of any multifamily dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 500 square feet of livable floor space, but units within any single building must contain an average of 650 square feet of livable floor space, excluding garages, porches, breezeways, common entry halls or common storage. 
(e)  Single-family attached (townhouse) use. 
(1)  Minimum dwelling size. The floor area of each townhouse unit shall contain a minimum of 1,200 square feet of livable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, common entry halls or common storage. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No townhouse shall be constructed on any lot less than 1,700 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  Lot width. The width of a lot shall not be less than 20 feet at any point. 
c.  Lot depth. The depth of a lot shall not be less than 75 feet at any point. 
(f)  Single-family detached use. 
(1)  Minimum dwelling size. The floor area of each detached single-family unit shall contain a minimum of 1,600 square feet of livable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, or breezeways. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No single-family detached dwelling shall be constructed on any lot less than 4,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  Lot width. The width of a lot shall not be less than 25 feet at any point. 
c.  Lot depth. The depth of a lot shall not be less than 60 feet at any point. 
(g)  Concept plan required. 
(1)  At the time of submitting a request for a change in zoning to mixed-use, the applicant shall include a concept plan for the proposed development. The concept plan is a comprehensive narrative, complete with illustrations, outlining the proposed development in detail. The concept plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed zoning district in a graphic manner and as may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development. 
(2)  As part of the zoning ordinance adoption process, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend and the city council shall approve the concept plan, which shall be attached to and included as part of the ordinance. 
(3)  The concept plan shall include, and is not limited to the following: 
a.  Thoroughfares and access; 
b.  Preliminary lot layout; 
c.  Size, type and location of buildings, including: 
1.  Building size; 
2.  Height of buildings; and 
3.  Number of stories of buildings. 
d.  Front, side, and rear yard setbacks; 
e.  Density; 
f.  Total number of dwelling units; 
g.  Total square feet of nonresidential uses; 
h.  Screening; 
i.  Concept landscape plan; 
j.  Lighting plan; 
k.  Building elevations in color (one set); 
l.  Exterior finish material and architectural character; 
m.  Total square feet of open space; 
n.  Amenities; 
o.  Phasing plan; 
p.  Project scheduling; 
q.  Items not consistent with the city's general development ordinance; 
r.  Requested variances; 
s.  Traffic study (if needed); and 
t.  Physical features of the site. 
(4)  The plat and engineering site plan shall be substantially consistent with the concept plan approved with the zoning request. 
a.  A new zone change request with an amended concept plan will be required for any changes to the concept plan which impact the following: 
1.  The height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures; 
2.  The percentage of a lot that may be occupied; 
3.  The size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; 
4.  Population density; or 
5.  The location and use of buildings, other structures, and land for business, industrial, residential, or other purposes. 
b.  Changes to the concept plan that do not impact the conditions listed in subsection a., above, may be approved by the planning and zoning commission with an amended concept plan and narrative submittal explaining the conditions for change, with an option to appeal the denial to the city council for a final resolution. Such appeal must be filed within 15 days after the final decision has been rendered by the planning and zoning commission, by filing with the director of planning or his designee a notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The city council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4230-12-2015 , § 7, 12-7-15; 0058-18-ORD , § 3(Exh. C), 9-10-18)  
Sec. 17-22.8.3. - "MU-90" Mixed-Use Ninety District regulations. 
(a)  Use. The MU-90 District is intended to provide a planning, regulatory, and management framework for the design, development and operation of urban mixed-use centers which promote social interaction, community identity and efficient use of land and resources. The MU-90 District should also support and encourage a variety of transportation options, including transit, bicycles and walking. The zoning district is applicable primarily to large undeveloped properties where higher density residential and commercial uses are appropriate. An application for MU-90 zoning must represent a site containing a minimum of 90 acres. 
Uses may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Department stores and similar retail stores. 
(2)  Professional service offices, such as doctors, attorneys, architects, engineers, real estate, insurance and veterinarian clinics with no outside runs. 
(3)  Restaurants, including those with outdoor seating areas. 
(4)  Multifamily dwellings (for sale or for rent units) and single-family attached dwelling units (townhouses). 
(5)  Grocery stores. 
(6)  Video rental stores, movie theaters and other indoor amusements. 
(7)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(8)  Book, card, gift and stationary stores. 
(9)  Dry cleaning and laundry services. 
(10)  Florists. 
(11)  Day nurseries. 
(12)  Hotels. 
(13)  Automobile parking structures. 
(14)  Church worship facilities. 
(15)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(16)  Other retail, office and service uses of a similar nature, provided that the business supplies the everyday needs of the immediate neighborhood and is subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The incidental display or sale of merchandise placed on private sidewalks in front of the store selling the merchandise shall be allowed during store operating hours. Uses involving overnight outside display of merchandise shall be prohibited except for seasonal sales for periods not to exceed 30 consecutive days and a maximum aggregate of 60 days per year (i.e., Christmas tree sales and sidewalk sales). 
b.  Outside storage is prohibited. 
c.  Platted front and side yards shall not be used for storage of merchandise, equipment, or waste containers, except as noted in subsection (a)(16)a., above. 
d.  The use not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
e.  Only residential uses shall be allowed in multifamily dwelling units and townhouse units except commercial uses qualifying as a home occupation. 
(17)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises. Such buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(18)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. 
(19)  Bed and breakfast (SUP required). 
(20)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(21)  Brewery, distillery or winery. 
(22)  Hotels, motels and inns with rooms containing a cooktop or oven (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. There shall be no maximum height restriction except as required by the building and fire codes. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of five feet except that a setback of not less than 25 feet shall be provided adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
b.  Side yard. A side yard of not less than five feet shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street, except that a setback of not less than 25 feet shall be provided adjacent to a state or federal highway, otherwise no side yard setback is required. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear setback is required except that a setback of not less than 25 feet shall be provided adjacent to a state or federal highway. 
(d)  Multifamily use. 
(1)  Minimum dwelling size. The floor area of any multifamily dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of 500 square feet of livable floor space, but units within any single building must contain an average of 650 square feet of livable floor space, excluding garages, porches, breezeways, common entry halls or common storage. 
(e)  Single-family attached (townhouse) use. 
(1)  Minimum dwelling size. The floor area of each townhouse unit shall contain a minimum of 1,200 square feet of livable floor space, exclusive of garages, porches, breezeways, common entry halls or common storage. 
(2)  Size of lot. 
a.  Lot area. No townhouse shall be constructed on any lot less than 1,700 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b.  Lot width. The width of a lot shall not be less than 20 feet at any point. 
c.  Lot depth. The depth of a lot shall not be less than 75 feet at any point. 
(f)  Concept plan required. 
(1)  At the time of submitting a request for a change in zoning to mixed-use ninety, the applicant shall include a concept plan for the proposed development. The concept plan is a comprehensive narrative, complete with illustrations, outlining the proposed development in detail. The concept plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed zoning district in a graphic manner and as may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development. 
(2)  As part of the zoning ordinance adoption process, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend and the city council shall approve the concept plan, which shall be attached to and included as part of the ordinance. 
(3)  The concept plan shall include, and is not limited to the following: 
a.  Thoroughfares and access; 
b.  Preliminary lot layout; 
c.  Size, type and location of buildings, including: 
1.  Building size; 
2.  Height of buildings; and 
3.  Number of stories of buildings; 
d.  Density; 
e.  Total number of dwelling units; 
f.  Total square feet of nonresidential uses; 
g.  Screening; 
h.  Concept landscape plan; 
i.  Lighting plan; 
j.  Building elevations in color (one set); 
k.  Exterior finish material and architectural character; 
l.  Total square feet of open space; 
m.  Amenities; 
n.  Phasing plan; 
o.  Project scheduling; 
p.  Items not consistent with the city's general development ordinance; 
q.  Requested variances; 
r.  Traffic study (if needed); 
s.  Physical features of the site. 
(4)  The plat and engineering site plan shall be substantially consistent with the concept plan approved with the zoning request. 
a.  A new zone change request with an amended concept plan will be required for any changes to the concept plan which impact the following: 
1.  The height, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures; 
2.  The percentage of a lot that may be occupied; 
3.  The size of yards, courts, and other open spaces; 
4.  Population density; or 
5.  The location and use of buildings, other structures, and land for business, industrial, residential, or other purposes. 
b.  Changes to the concept plan that do not impact the conditions listed in subsection a., above, may be approved by the planning and zoning commission with an amended concept plan and narrative submittal explaining the conditions for change, with an option to appeal the denial to the city council for a final resolution. Such appeal must be filed within 15 days after the final decision has been rendered by the planning and zoning commission, by filing with the director of planning or his designee a notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The city council shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4230-12-2015 , § 8, 12-7-15; 0058-18-ORD , § 4(Exh. D), 9-10-18)  
Sec. 17-23. - "LI" Light Industrial District regulations. 
(a)  Use. Buildings and premises may be used for retail, wholesale, office and service uses and campus-style light manufacturing and industrial uses, provided there is no dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or other atmospheric influence beyond the boundaries of the property on which such use is located, and which produces no noise exceeding in intensity at the boundary of the property the average intensity of noise of street traffic at that point, and no more than ten percent of the total lot is used for outside storage, and further provided that such use does not create fire or explosive hazards on adjacent property. 
(1)  Any use permitted in Districts "LC" and "GB" as regulated in said districts. 
(2)  Apparel and other products assembled from finished textiles. 
(3)  Bottling works. 
(4)  Warehouse distribution facilities. 
(5)  Airport/heliport (SUP required). 
(6)  Auto repair shops including body shops (SUP required). 
(7)  Church worship facilities. 
(8)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(9)  Cemetery, mausoleum, crematorium and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(10)  Cosmetic manufacturer. 
(11)  Drugs and pharmaceutical products manufacturing. 
(12)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(13)  Electronic products manufacturing. 
(14)  Fur good manufacture, but not including tanning or dyeing (SUP required). 
(15)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(16)  Glass products, from previously manufactured glass. 
(17)  Heavy equipment - outdoor rental/sales/display/service (SUP required). 
(18)  Household appliance products assembly and manufacture from prefabricated parts. 
(19)  Industrial and manufacturing plants including the processing or assembling of parts for production of finished equipment. 
(20)  Musical instruments assembly and manufacture. 
(21)  Paint, shellac and varnish manufacture (SUP required). 
(22)  Plastic products manufacture, but not including the processing of raw materials. 
(23)  Racing facilities (SUP required). 
(24)  Recreational vehicle (RV) park (private) (SUP required). 
(25)  Self-storage/mini-warehouse facility (SUP required). 
(26)  Shooting range (indoor or outdoor) (SUP required). 
(27)  Sporting and athletic equipment manufacture. 
(28)  Testing and research laboratories. 
(29)  Auction yard (vehicle) (SUP required). 
(30)  Communication towers (SUP required). 
(31)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(32)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, smoke, noise, vibration or similar nuisance. Open storage shall be considered an accessory use but no more than ten percent of the platted lot may be used for outside storage, including access and maneuvering areas for moving the stored items. 
(33)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(34)  Other uses similar to the above-listed uses are allowed by special use permit (SUP) only, except that the following uses are specifically prohibited: 
a.  Acetylene gas manufacture or storage. 
b.  Acid manufacture. 
c.  Alcohol manufacture. 
d.  Ammonia, bleaching powder or chlorine manufacture. 
e.  Arsenal. 
f.  Asphalt manufacture or refining. 
g.  Blast furnace. 
h.  Bag cleaning, unless clearly accessory to the manufacture of bags. 
i.  Boiler works. 
j.  Brick, tile, pottery or terra cotta manufacture other than the manufacture of handcraft or concrete products. 
k.  Reserved. 
l.  Celluloid manufacture or treatment. 
m.  Cement, lime, gypsum or Plaster of Paris manufacture. 
n.  Central mixing plant for cement. 
o.  Coke ovens. 
p.  Cotton gins. 
q.  Cottonseed oil manufacture. 
r.  Creosote manufacture or treatment. 
s.  Disinfectants manufacture. 
t.  Distillation of bones, coal or wood. 
u.  Dyestuff manufacture. 
v.  Exterminator and insect poison manufacture. 
w.  Emery cloth and sandpaper manufacture. 
x.  Explosives or fireworks manufacture or storage. 
y.  Fat rendering. 
z.  Fertilizer manufacture. 
aa.  Fish smoking and curing. 
bb.  Forge plant. 
cc.  Garbage, offal or dead animal reduction or dumping. 
dd.  Gas manufacture or storage, for heating or illuminating purposes. 
ee.  Glue, size or gelatine manufacture. 
ff.  Hatchery. 
gg.  Iron, steel, brass or copper foundry or fabrication plant. 
hh.  Junk, iron or rag storage or baling. 
ii.  Match manufacture. 
jj.  Lampblack manufacture. 
kk.  Oilcloth or linoleum manufacture. 
ll.  Oiled rubber goods manufacture. 
mm.  Ore reduction. 
nn.  Oil or turpentine manufacture. 
oo.  Paper and pulp manufacture. 
pp.  Petroleum or its products, refining or wholesale storage of. 
qq.  Pickle manufacturing. 
rr.  Planing mills. 
ss.  Potash works. 
tt.  Pyroxline manufacture. 
uu.  Rock crusher. 
vv.  Rolling mill. 
ww.  Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment, but not the making of articles out of rubber. 
xx.  Sauerkraut manufacture. 
yy.  Salt works. 
zz.  Shoe polish manufacture. 
aaa.  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores. 
bbb.  Soap manufacture other than liquid soap. 
ccc.  Soda and compound manufacture. 
ddd.  Stock yard or slaughter of animals or fowls. 
eee.  Stone mill or quarry. 
fff.  Storage yard. 
ggg.  Stove polish manufacture. 
hhh.  Tallow grease or lard manufacture or refining from or of animal fat. 
iii.  Tanning, curing or storage of raw hides or skins. 
jjj.  Tar distillation or manufacture. 
kkk.  Tar roofing or water-proofing manufacture. 
lll.  Tobacco (chewing) manufacture or treatment. 
mmm.  Vinegar manufacture. 
nnn.  Wool pulling or scouring. 
ooo.  Yeast plant. 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed in height the width of the street right-of-way on which it faces, plus the depth of the front yard. In no event, however, shall the portion of a building located within 150 feet of any property zoned for residential purposes exceed the height allowed in that residential zoning district. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in District "LI", except that automobile parking (including automobile dealer display parking) will be permitted in such yards if separated by at least 25 feet from any residential district. 
b.  Side yard. A side yard of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. The required side yard shall be waived when a screening device is installed in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. The building itself can serve as a portion of the screening device when that portion of the building exterior is constructed of the same materials as the screening device. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in any required side yard or in any side street yard adjoining a residential district. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than 50 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the residential district also backs up to the rear street. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in District "LI" within 25 feet of the rear property line. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(d)  Outside storage regulations. In all zoning districts where outside storage yards are allowed, such storage yards shall be screened from view in accordance with the standards outlined in the city's general development ordinance. This provision applies to all outside storage which began after the original date of passage of this provision (April 4, 1994). Any variance request involving the requirements or standards relating to such required screening devices shall be considered by the city council in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. Areas which are used for infrequent and temporary storage for a period of 30 days or less per year shall not be deemed as "storage yards". 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-24. - "WH" Warehouse District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Bakery or bottling works, if fully enclosed in a building. 
(2)  Wholesale establishments, if fully enclosed in a building. 
(3)  Storage warehouses with open storage yards (SUP required). 
(4)  Contractor's yard (SUP required). 
(5)  Manufacturing uses - outside storage is limited to ten percent of the lot for storage of equipment, materials or products. 
(6)  Truck parking lot (SUP required). 
(7)  Offices. 
(8)  Laboratory. 
(9)  Auto repair shops, including body shops (SUP required). 
(10)  Church worship facilities. 
(11)  Travel trailer/boat/RV storage (outdoor) (SUP required). 
(12)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(13)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(14)  Cemetery, mausoleum, crematorium and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(15)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(16)  Communication towers (SUP required). 
(17)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(18)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisances. Open storage shall be considered an accessory use but no more than ten percent of the platted lot may be used for outside storage, including access and maneuvering areas for moving the stored items. Any use requiring more than ten percent outside storage shall require a special use permit (SUP). 
(19)  Motor freight terminal (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed in height the width of the street on which it faces, plus the depth of the front yard. On a lot adjoining a residential district, no building shall exceed 45 feet in height, except that this height may be increased up to the maximum of 12 stories, or 180 feet, at the rate of two feet of additional height for each one foot of additional setback from required yard lines. In no event, however, shall any building exceed two stories when any portion of the building is located within 150 feet of any property zoned for residential purposes. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in District "WH", except that automobile parking (including automobile dealer display parking) will be permitted in such yards if separated by at least 25 feet from any residential district. 
b.  Side yard. A side yard of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. The required side yard shall be waived when a screening device is installed in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. The building itself can serve as a portion of the screening device when that portion of the building exterior is constructed of the same materials as the screening device. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in any required side yard or in any side street yard adjoining a residential district. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than 50 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the residential district also backs up to the rear street. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required rear yards in District "WH" within 25 feet of the rear property line. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(d)  Outside storage regulations. In all zoning districts where outside storage yards are allowed, such storage yards shall be screened from view in accordance with the standards outlined in the city's general development ordinance. This provision applies to all outside storage which began after the original date of passage of this provision (April 4, 1994). Any variance request involving the requirements or standards relating to such required screening devices shall be considered by the city council in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. Areas which are used for infrequent and temporary storage for a period of 30 days or less per year shall not be deemed as storage yards. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-25. - "HI" Heavy Industrial District regulations. 
(a)  Use. Buildings and premises may be used for retail, office and service uses as well as manufacturing and industrial uses. Such uses which produce dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare or other atmospheric influence beyond the boundaries of the property on which such use is located, and which produce noise exceeding in intensity at the boundary of the property the average intensity of noise of street traffic at that point, and which may create fire or explosive hazards are subject to conformance with all applicable local, state and federal regulations. Uses which fail to comply with such regulations may be required to cease operation. Allowable uses include: 
(1)  Any use permitted in district "LI" and "WH" as regulated in said districts. 
(2)  Wrecker service storage yards, auto salvage yards and junk yards, but only on condition that the storage is wholly within an enclosed building or surrounded by a structural screening wall of concrete or reinforced masonry. Such wall shall be a minimum of eight feet in height (SUP required). 
(3)  Storage yards and contractor's yards (SUP required). 
(4)  Church worship facilities. 
(5)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(6)  The following uses are permitted only when all portions of the operation or use are located a minimum of 200 feet from any residentially zoned property, and with a specific use permit (SUP required): 
a.  Acid manufacturing. 
b.  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacturing. 
c.  Glue manufacturing involving distilling of bones or other organic matter. 
d.  Explosives manufacturing and storage. 
e.  Magnesium manufacturing or processing. 
f.  Fat rendering. 
g.  Paper and pulp manufacturing. 
h.  Refining of or bulk tank storage of petroleum or its products. 
i.  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores or other metals. 
j.  Stockyards, slaughter or processing of animals. 
k.  Permanent batch plant (concrete). 
(7)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses, provided that such not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration or similar nuisances. Open storage shall be considered an accessory use but no more than ten percent of the platted lot may be used for outside storage, including access and maneuvering areas for moving the stored items. Any use requiring more than ten percent outside storage shall require a special use permit (SUP). 
(9)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(10)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(11)  Recycling facility (SUP required). 
(12)  Uses specifically prohibited in zoning district "LI" (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed in height the width of the street on which it faces, plus the depth of the front yard. In no event, however, shall any building exceed two stories when any portion of the building is located within 150 feet of any property zoned for residential purposes. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required front yards in District "HI", except that automobile parking (including automobile dealer display parking) will be permitted in such yards if separated by at least 25 feet from any residential district. 
b.  Side yard. No side yard is required except that a side yard or a side street yard of not less than 50 feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining or across the street from any zoning district except heavy industrial. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required side yards or side street yards within 25 feet of the property line. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than 50 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential, "LC" or "GB" District. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in required side yards in District "HI" within 25 feet of the property line. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(d)  Outside storage regulations. In all zoning districts where outside storage yards are allowed, such storage yards shall be screened from view in accordance with the standards outlined in the city's general development ordinance. This provision applies to all outside storage which began after the original date of passage of this provision (April 4, 1994). Any variance request involving the requirements or standards relating to such required screening devices shall be considered by the city council in accordance with the city's general development ordinance. Areas which are used for infrequent and temporary storage for a period of 30 days or less per year shall not be deemed as storage yards. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4409-08-2017 , § 1, 8-21-17)  
Sec. 17-26. - "PD" Planned Development District. 
(a)  General purpose and description. The Planned Development District is a district which accommodates planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units such as industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing including, attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed, or operated as integral land use units either by a single owner or a combination of owners. A Planned Development (PD) District may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization not permitted by other zoning districts in this chapter. While greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions, which would not otherwise allow the development to occur, procedures are established herein to ensure against misuse of increased flexibility. 
(b)  Permitted uses. An application for a PD District shall specify the base district(s), the use or the combination of uses proposed. Uses which may be permitted in a PD must be specified if not permitted in the base district. In the case of residential PD Districts for single-family or duplex categories, the proposed lot area shall be no smaller than the lot sizes allowed in the base zoning district except for minor reductions in a small percentage of the lots in order to provide improved design. In selecting a base zoning district, the uses allowed in the base district must be similar or compatible with those allowed in the PD. PD designations shall not be attached to special use permit (SUP) requirements. Special use permits allowed in a base zoning district are allowed in a PD only if specifically identified at the time of PD approval. 
(c)  Planned development requirements. 
(1)  Development requirements for each separate PD District shall be set forth in the amending ordinance granting the PD District and shall include, but may not be limited to: uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building elevations, building material coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting, hours of operation, project phasing or scheduling, management associations, and other requirements as the city council and planning and zoning commission may deem appropriate. 
(2)  In the PD District, uses shall conform to the standards and regulations of the base zoning district to which it is most similar. The base zoning district shall be stated in the granting ordinance. All applications to the city shall list all requested deviations from the standard requirements set forth throughout this chapter (applications without this list will be considered incomplete) specifically any deviation not requested is deemed to comply with this chapter even if shown graphically on a site plan. The Planned Development District shall conform to all other sections of this chapter unless specifically excluded in the granting ordinance. 
(3)  The ordinance granting a PD District shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD granted therein. A specific list is required of modifications in each district or districts and general statement citing the reason for the PD request. 
(d)  In establishing a Planned Development District in accordance with this section, the city council shall approve and file as part of the amending ordinance appropriate plans and standards for each Planned Development District. To facilitate understanding of the request during the review and public hearing process, the planning and zoning commission and city council shall require a concept plan. All PD applications shall have a written proposal explaining all aspects of the requested PD including any deviations from this chapter. The concept plan shall be submitted by the applicant at the time of the PD request. The plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed Planned Development District in a graphic manner and as may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals and standards for development. The city may prepare application form(s), which further describe and explain the following requirements: 
(1)  Residential concept plan. A concept plan for residential land use shall show the following: 
a.  General use; 
b.  Thoroughfares; 
c.  Preliminary lot arrangements; 
d.  Size, type and location of buildings and building sites; 
e.  Access; 
f.  Density; 
g.  Building height; 
h.  Fire lanes; 
i.  Screening; 
j.  Landscaped areas; 
k.  Project scheduling and phasing; 
l.  Any other pertinent development data. 
(2)  Nonresidential concept plan. A concept plan for uses other than residential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner to adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. Data which may be submitted by the applicant, or required by the city staff, planning and zoning commission, or city council, may include, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Types of use(s); 
b.  Topography and boundary of PD area; 
c.  Physical features of the site; 
d.  Existing streets, alleys and easements; 
e.  Location of future public facilities; 
f.  Building height and location 
g.  Parking areas and ratios; 
h.  Fire lanes; 
i.  Project scheduling and phasing; 
j.  Landscape plans; 
k.  Screening; 
l.  Building elevations; 
m.  Any other information to adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which is to be used in drafting the required engineering site plan. 
(e)  Approval process and procedure. The procedure for establishing a Planned Development District shall follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in section 17-37. This procedure is further expanded as follows for approval of concept plans: 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission shall recommend and the city council shall approve a concept plan in public hearings. One public hearing at the planning and zoning commission and one at the city council for the PD request is adequate when: 
a.  Information on the concept plan and attached application is sufficient to determine the appropriate use of the land and the required engineering site plan and/or preliminary/final plat will not deviate substantially from it; or 
b.  The applicant submits adequate data with the request for the Planned Development District to fulfill the requirement for an engineering site plan and/or preliminary/final plat. 
(2)  The amending ordinance establishing the Planned Development District shall not be approved until the concept plan is approved. 
(3)  An engineering site plan shall be submitted for approval within one year from the date of approval of the concept plan for all or some portion of the concept plan. If an engineering site plan is not submitted within one year, the concept plan is subject to review by the planning and zoning commission and city council. If some portion of the project is not started within two years, the planning and zoning commission and city council may review the original concept plan to ensure its continued validity. If the city determines the concept plan is not valid, a new concept plan must be approved prior to submittal of an engineering site plan for the PD District. Although a new concept plan may be required to be approved, this does not affect the validity of the PD in terms of uses, density, and other development standards permitted in the PD. 
(4)  When a PD District is being considered, a written report from the director of economic development and planning or his/her designated representative, discussing the impact on planning, engineering, water utilities, electric, sanitation, building inspection, tax, police, fire, and traffic, and written comments from the applicable public agencies shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission prior to the commission making any recommendations to the city council. 
(f)  All Planned Development Districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter in its original form, or by subsequent amendments thereto, shall be referenced on the zoning district map, and a list of such Planned Development Districts together with the category of uses permitted therein, shall be maintained as part of this chapter. 
(g)  Planned unit development ordinances continued. Prior to adoption of this chapter, the city council has established various Planned Unit Development Districts, all of which are to be continued in full force and effect. The ordinances or parts of ordinances approved prior to this chapter shall be carried forth in full force and effect as are the conditions, restrictions, regulations and requirements which apply to the respective Planned Unit Development Districts shown on the zoning map at the date of adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; 0196-20-ORD , § 1, 3-2-20)  
Sec. 17-27. - "PK" Parking District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or area shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Parking, commercial or private lot (not to include parking for trucks) intended for use behind, across the street from, or adjacent and incidental to "MF", "LC", "OD", "MD", "GB", "WH", "LI", and "HI", where the provision of off-street parking is essential to protection of existing development and conducive to most appropriate use of land. 
(2)  Parking structures. 
(3)  Buildings accessory to the primary parking uses. 
(4)  Church worship facilities. 
(5)  Buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(6)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(b)  Height. The maximum height shall be four standard stories, but shall not exceed 50 feet in height; provided that, any building or portion of a building may be erected above said limit if set back from all street lines and required yard lines one foot for each one foot of its height above such limit. In no event, however, shall any building exceed two standard stories when located within 150 feet of any property zoned for residential purposes. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a required depth of not less than 25 feet. Furthermore, required parking shall not be allowed within the required front yard. 
b.  Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of the lot having a width of not less than 25 feet. 
c.  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than 25 feet. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-28. - "PU" Public Use District regulations. 
(a)  Use. A building or area shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Public schools. 
(2)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(3)  Community centers. 
(4)  Public golf courses. 
(5)  Civic centers and municipal offices. 
(6)  Fire stations. 
(7)  Libraries. 
(8)  Municipal service centers. 
(9)  Public utility facilities. 
(10)  Church worship facilities. 
(11)  Other buildings and uses owned or operated by public governmental agencies. 
(12)  Other publicly owned uses similar to the above, providing all meet the requirements of this and all other city ordinances. 
(13)  Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. 
(14)  Private utility plants or sub-stations (including alternative energy) (SUP required). 
(15)  Gas and oil drilling accessory uses (SUP required). 
(16)  Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum and accessory uses (SUP required). 
(b)  Height. No building shall exceed 45 feet or three stories in height, except that a building may be erected to a height of 80 feet and eight stories if set back from all required yard lines a distance of one foot for each two feet of additional height above 45 feet. 
(c)  Area. 
(1)  Size of yards. 
a.  Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of 25 feet. No parking, storage or similar use shall be allowed in the required front yards in District "PU", except that automobile parking will be permitted in such yards if separated by at least 25 feet from any residential district. 
b.  Side yard. No side yard is required, except that a side yard of not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a side street. A side yard of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on the side of a lot adjoining a residential district. 
c.  Rear yard. No rear yard is required except that a rear yard of not less than 25 feet in depth shall be provided upon that portion of a lot abutting or across a rear street from a residential district, except that such yard requirement shall not apply where the property in the residential district also backs up to the rear street. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-29. - "SU" Specific Use District regulations. 
(a)  Use. This district is for the purpose of the uses specifically listed and other unusual uses which are limited in number and which are clearly not allowed in any other zoning district. Zoning shall not be allowed under this district as a way of circumventing the standard provisions of this or any other ordinance of the city. Allowable uses shall include: 
(1)  Criminal or penal institutions. 
(2)  Landfill operations and accessory uses. 
(3)  Mining activities and storage, including sand and gravel mining and stone quarries. 
(b)  All requests for specific use zoning shall be accompanied by an engineering site plan as outlined in the city's general development ordinance. Variances from the regulations in the city's general development ordinance may be granted at the discretion of the city council. 
(c)  Any proposed enlargement, structural modification or other significant change to any site which had been granted specific use zoning shall require approval of the city council following a public hearing. Such public hearing shall be conducted after a recommendation is received from the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall consider the request for an amendment after conducting a public hearing in accordance with requirements necessary for any proposed zone change. 
(d)  The zoning board of adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse or modify any decision, determination or ruling with respect to the granting, extension, revocation, modification or any other action taken relating to the granting of any specific use zoning. 
(e)  Building setbacks and heights shall be consistent with other structures in the immediate area, as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-29.5 - "SUP" special use permit. 
(a)  Purpose. The special use permit (SUP) provides a means for evaluating land uses identified in this chapter to ensure compatibility with adjacent properties. The intent of the special use permit process is to allow consideration of certain uses that would typically be incompatible or intensely dominate the area in which they are located, but may become compatible with the provision of certain conditions and restrictions. 
(b)  Application submittal and approval process. 
(1)  Application for an SUP shall be processed like an application for rezoning. An application shall not be complete and shall not be scheduled for a public hearing unless the following are submitted along with the application: 
a.  A scaled development plan depicting the items listed in subsection 17-29.5(b)(2); 
b.  A metes and bounds description of the property boundary; 
c.  A narrative explaining how the property and use(s) will function; 
d.  Colored elevations of the building and other structures including dimensions and building materials; 
e.  A landscaping plan, meeting the requirements of section 6-124 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances; 
f.  A tree survey and mitigation plan if required by section 6-125 of the Lewisville Code of Ordinances; 
g.  Detailed elevations and descriptions of proposed signage; 
h.  An exhibit illustrating any requested variances; and 
i.  Any other information, drawings, operating data or expert evaluations that city staff determines are necessary to evaluate the compatibility criteria for the proposed use and development. 
(2)  The development plan submitted along with an SUP application must include the following: 
a.  The layout of the site; 
b.  A north arrow; 
c.  A title block including project name, addition, lot, block, acreage, and zoning classification of the subject property; 
d.  Name, address and phone number for applicant, developer, owner, builder, engineer and/or surveyor; 
e.  Building location, property lines and setbacks; 
f.  Summary tables listing building square footage, required parking, and required landscaping; 
g.  Locations of utility easements, if applicable; 
h.  Zoning and ownership of adjacent properties; 
i.  Easements, deed restrictions, or encumbrances that impact the property; 
j.  Median openings, traffic islands, turning lanes, traffic signals, and acceleration and deceleration lanes; 
k.  Streets, alleys and easements adjacent to the site; 
l.  Driveways and sidewalks; 
m.  Parking configuration, including maneuvering lanes and loading areas; 
n.  Location and details of dumpsters and screening devices; and 
o.  Location of all proposed signage. 
(3)  An application for an SUP shall be considered to be an amendment to the zoning ordinance, and shall comply with all provisions of section 17-37 of this Code, except that in no instance shall the provisions of section 17-37 be construed to negate or remove any requirements of this section for an SUP application. 
(4)  Variances from the regulations of the city's general development ordinance may be granted at the discretion of the city council as part of the SUP approval. The granting of an SUP has no effect on uses permitted by right and does not waive the regulations of the underlying zoning district. 
(5)  The planning and zoning commission or the city council may require additional information or drawings, operating data or expert evaluation or testimony concerning the location and characteristics of any building or uses proposed. 
(6)  Completion of a development plan for the SUP does not waive the requirement to provide an engineering site plan in accordance with the general development ordinance. 
(c)  Compatibility criteria for approval. The planning and zoning commission shall not recommend approval of, and the city council shall not grant an SUP for a use except upon a finding that the use will: 
(1)  Complement or be compatible with the surrounding uses and community facilities and any adopted comprehensive plans or small area plans; 
(2)  Contribute to, enhance or promote the welfare of the area of request and adjacent properties; 
(3)  Not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare; and 
(4)  Conform in all other respects to all zoning regulations and standards. 
(d)  SUP conditions. The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may adopt reasonable conditions upon the granting of an SUP consistent with the purpose and compatibility criteria stated in this section. The development plan, however, shall always be attached to and made a condition of the SUP. The other documents submitted with the SUP application may also be made conditions of the SUP. 
(e)  Amendments, enlargement, modifications or structural alterations. 
(1)  Except for minor amendments, all amendments, enlargements, modifications or structural alterations or changes to the development plan shall require the approval of a new SUP. The city manager or his designee may authorize minor amendments to the development plan that otherwise comply with the SUP ordinance and the underlying zoning and do not: 
a.  Alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent property; 
b.  Increase the maximum density or height shown on the original development plan; 
c.  Decrease the number of off-street parking spaces shown on the original development plan; and/or 
d.  Reduce setbacks at the boundary of the site as specified by a building or setback line shown on the original development plan. 
(2)  For purposes of this subsection, "original development plan" means the earliest approved development plan that is still in effect, and does not mean a later amended development plan. For example, if a development plan was approved with the specific use permit and then amended through the minor amendment process, the original development plan would be the development plan approved with the specific use permit, not the development plan as amended through the minor amendment process. If, however, the development plan approved with the specific use permit was replaced through the zoning process, then the replacement development plan becomes the original development plan. The purpose of this definition is to prevent the use of several sequential minor amendments to circumvent the zoning amendment process. 
(3)  Although the city manager or his designee has the authority to grant minor amendments to the development plan, they are not obligated to do so. The city manager or his designee shall always maintain the discretion to require city council approval if he feels that it is within the public's interest that city council consider the amendment, enlargement, modifications or structural changes at a public hearing. 
(f)  Compliance mandatory with written requirements. 
(1)  No special use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner and grantee shall be willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements attached to the development plan drawings and approved by the city council. 
(2)  Unless otherwise expressly stated in an ordinance granting a special use permit, a special use permit shall be transferable from one owner or occupant of the subject property to a new owner or occupant of the subject property; provided that, upon transfer, all regulations and conditions of the SUP shall remain in effect and shall be applicable to the new owner or occupant of the property. 
(g)  Timing. All development plans submitted for review will be on the city's active list for a period of 90 days from the date of each submittal. After the 90-day period, a project will be considered abandoned and removed from the file. A building permit shall be applied for and secured within 180 days from the time of approval of the special use permit, provided that the city may allow a one-time extension of the SUP for another 180 days. A SUP shall expire six months after its approval or extension date if no building permits have been issued for the site or if a building permit has been issued but has subsequently lapsed. Work must be completed and operations commenced within 18 months of approval. 
(h)  Zoning map. When the city council authorizes granting of a special use permit the official zoning district map shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditions and limited uses, said amendment to indicate the appropriate zoning district for the approved use, and suffixed by an "SUP" designation. A log of all special use permits shall be kept by the city. 
(i)  Rescind and terminate a special use permit. City council may rescind and terminate an SUP after a public hearing if any of the following occur: 
(1)  That one or more of the conditions imposed by the SUP has not been met or has been violated. 
(2)  The SUP was obtained through fraud or deception. 
(3)  Ad valorem taxes on the property are delinquent by six months or more. 
(4)  Disconnection or discontinuance of water and/or electrical services to the property. 
(5)  Abandonment of the structure, lease space, lot or tract of land for 180 days or more. (For the purpose of this section, "abandon" shall mean to surrender occupancy by vacating or ceasing to operate or inhabit such property.) 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4374-05-2017(Z) , § 1, 5-1-17; 0139-19-ORD , § 3, 8-19-19)  
Sec. 17-30. - Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Definitions: The definition of all words and terms used in this section shall be the same as set forth in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any alcoholic beverage in any residential section of the city. This prohibition includes areas zoned R-18, R-12, R-9, R-7.5, R-6, R-5, TE, DU, ETH, TH, TH-2, MF-1, MF-2, MF-3, MHP, MHS and OTMU-1. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages in a retail establishment with a permit for the off-premises consumption of beer and wine shall be prohibited within 300 feet of a church, public or private school or public hospital. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages in a restaurant with a food and beverage certificate shall be prohibited within 300 feet of a church, public school or public hospital. 
(e)  Subsection (c) does not apply to the holder of a license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, and this is located within 300 feet of a private school. 
(f)  The measurement of distances between a church, public or private school, or public hospital and a place of business shall be calculated in accordance with V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 
(g)  Variances to the distance requirements set forth in this section may be allowed by the city council upon justification in accordance with V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33. 
(h)  All other matters regarding alcoholic beverages not mentioned herein or elsewhere in the City Code shall conform to the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-31. - Location regulations for sexually-oriented businesses. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the location of sexually-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to preserve the quality, property values, integrity and character of the city's neighborhoods, and other businesses, and protect the citizens of the city from objectionable effects of sexually-oriented businesses. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose, nor the intent of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent, nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Church shall mean: 
(1)  A structure used primarily for the purpose of engaging in religious worship or promoting the spiritual development or well-being of individuals; and 
(2)  A structure used by an organization operated in a way that does not result in accrual of distributable profits, realization of private gain resulting from payment or compensation in excess of a reasonable allowance for salary or other compensation for services rendered, or realization of any other form of public gain; and 
(3)  A structure used by an organization whose Charter, bylaws or other regulations adopted by the organization to govern its affairs: 
a.  Pledges its assets for use in performing the organization's religious functions; and 
b.  Directs that on discontinuance of the organization by dissolution or otherwise, the assets are to be transferred to the State of Texas or to a charitable, educational, religious or other similar organization that is qualified as a charitable organization under Section 501(c)(3), Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
(4)  Use of a structure for occasional or secular purposes other than religious worship does not result in loss of the status as a church if the primary use of the structure is for religious worship and all income from the other use is devoted exclusively to the maintenance and development of the structure as a place of religious worship. 
(5)  For the purpose of this section, "religious worship" shall mean individual or group ceremony or meditation, education or fellowship, the purpose of which is to manifest or develop reverence, homage, and commitment in behalf of a religious faith. 
Civic facility shall mean any place or facility owned, controlled or operated by any school district, municipality, county, state or federal government which is open for use by the general public. Civic facilities shall include amphitheaters, auditoriums, cemeteries, libraries, museums, post offices, public offices and administrative buildings, public plazas and open space, recreational centers and facilities, stadiums, arenas, convention or civic centers; but excluding storage and maintenance facilities, facilities for public utilities, including substations, treatment, generation, or pump facilities, policy or fire stations, or landfills or disposal facilities. 
Establishment shall mean and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business whether or not a sexually-oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually-oriented business. 
Hospital shall mean an institution or place where sick or injured in-patients are given medical or surgical care, either at public (charity) or private expense. 
Nudity or a state of nudity shall mean: 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to completely and opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or part of a female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Person shall mean an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Public park shall mean any park, playground, greenbelt, nature trail, recreational facility, or wildlife conservation and management area, located within the city and owned, controlled or operated by any school district, municipality, county, state or federal government, which is open for use by the general public. 
School shall mean a facility or place under public, private, or denominational sponsorship having a curriculum equivalent to a public elementary or secondary school, including elementary, middle or junior high, and senior high schools, but excluding trade or commercial schools. 
Semi-nude shall mean a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexually-oriented business shall mean any commercial establishment open to the public which: 
(1)  Displays, distributes, issues, gives, provides, lends, delivers, transfers, transmits, circulates, disseminates, presents, exhibits, advertises, sells, rents or leases a substantial or significant portion (20 percent or more); or 
(2)  Utilizes a substantial or significant portion (20 percent or more) of its display areas, including, but not limited to, floor, shelf, rack, table, stand or case for; or 
(3)  Exhibits for substantial or significant portion (20 percent or more) of the total presentation time, material regulated by the V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 43.21 and/or 43.24; or 
(4)  Any commercial establishment open to the public which involves employees or customers who engage in conduct which is distinguished or characterized by "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein. 
Sexually-oriented businesses shall mean and include, but are not limited to any of the following businesses: 
(1)  Adult bookstore: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion (20 percent or more) of its stock and trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or "specified anatomical areas", or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material, or instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities". 
(2)  Adult theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein. 
(3)  Adult cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or a similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
a.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; or 
b.  Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
c.  Motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depicting or the description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area". 
(4)  Sexual encounter center: A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
a.  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
b.  Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. 
(5)  Nude modeling studio: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form consideration. 
Specified anatomical area shall mean less than completely and opaquely covered: 
(1)  Human genitals, pubic region; or 
(2)  Buttock; or 
(3)  Breast below the point immediately below the top of areola; or 
(4)  Human genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall mean activities defined as: 
(1)  Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or breast. 
Transfer of ownership or control of an adult entertainment establishment shall mean and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to locate or operate a sexually-oriented business, as defined herein, within the city: 
a.  Within 1,000 feet of the district boundary line of any residential zoning district; 
b.  Within 1,000 feet of any other sexually-oriented business; 
c.  Within 1,000 feet of the property line of any church, hospital, public park, school or civic facility, day care center, day nursery or kindergarten legally operating under the zoning laws of the city; 
d.  Within 1,000 feet of the property line of a lot devoted to residential use. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where sexually-oriented business is located to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, hospital, school, civic facility, day care center, day nursery, kindergarten, lot devoted to residential use, or to the nearest boundary of a district restricted to residential use by the zoning ordinance of the city, or to the nearest boundary of a public park. 
(d)  Compliance with other ordinances. Sexually-oriented businesses shall be subject to, and comply with, the rules and provisions of the building code, fire code, and any other applicable code or ordinance of the city. Where conflict exists between the prescriptions established in this chapter and the requirements of the building code, fire code, or other applicable code or ordinance of the city, then the more restrictive requirement shall apply. 
(e)  Exterior signs. Exterior signs located on the building or premises of a sexually-oriented business shall conform to the requirements of the sign ordinance of the city. Such exterior sign shall not advertise, either graphically or verbally, either by explicit or literal expression, connotation, or implied reference, any specified sexual activity or specified anatomical area, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-32. - Height and area exceptions and modifications. 
(a)  Height. 
(1)  The height regulations prescribed herein shall not apply to church spires, belfries and monuments, or public water and fire towers, ornamental spires, chimneys, flag poles, necessary mechanical appurtenances, or any communication or emergency siren tower owned by a local, state or federal governmental entity. 
(2)  No structure may be erected to a height in excess of that permitted by the regulations of such airfield zoning ordinance as may exist at the time and whose regulations apply to the area in which the structure is being erected. 
(3)  All monopoles and lattice towers above 25 feet in height shall be placed with a minimum 3:1 distance to height ratio from the nearest single-family or two-family zoned lot or tract. No towers, antennas or communication dishes of any size may be placed within any front yard or side street setback required under this chapter. 
(4)  Towers and monopoles placed on the ground whose total height, including antenna, does not exceed 25 feet above ground level shall be allowed in all zoning classifications and shall be exempt from distance to height ratios contained in this chapter. Such towers shall be allowed as an accessory use in agriculture-open space and all residential districts, office district and medical district, and as a stand-alone use in other districts. 
(5)  An antenna with a total height not exceeding 15 feet may be placed on a building or rooftop in all zoning classifications and shall be exempt from distance to height ratios contained in this chapter. Antennas placed on buildings shall be allowed as an accessory use in agriculture-open space and all residential districts, office district and medical district, and as a stand-alone use in other districts. 
(6)  Telecommunications antennas may be placed within church spires, belfries and monuments as an accessory use when integrated into the design in a discreet manner so as to not be perceived as an antenna and may be placed on electric transmission towers as an accessory use. 
(7)  Outside storage of materials, where allowed in this chapter, shall be limited to a maximum height of 25 feet. 
(b)  Front yards. 
(1)  Where 25 percent or more of the frontage upon the same side of a street between two intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings with front yards of less depth than required by this chapter, or where the configuration of the ground is such that conformity with the front yard provisions of this chapter would work a hardship, the board of adjustment may permit modifications of the front yard requirements. 
(2)  In any residential or "MF" District where 25 percent or more of the frontage upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied or partially occupied by a building or buildings having front yards of greater depth than is required by this chapter, no other lot upon the same side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with a front yard of less than the least depth of any such existing front yards, unless by permission of the board of adjustment. 
(3)  In a residential district no fence, structure, or planting higher than 3-½ feet above the established street grades, nor any tree with foliage extending below ten feet above the established street grades, shall be maintained within 20 feet of any street intersection. 
(4)  Open and unenclosed terraces or porches and eave and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet; provided, however, that no supporting structure for such extensions may be located within the required front yard. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline filling station may extend beyond the building line but shall never be closer to the property line than 12 feet. The building line of a gasoline filling station shall mean the actual wall of the building and shall not be interpreted as being the curb of a walk or driveway or as the front of a canopy of the columns supporting same. 
(5)  Where an official line has been established for future widening or opening of a street upon which a lot abuts, then the width of a front or side yard shall be measured from such official line of the right-of-way. 
(c)  Side yards. 
(1)  On a corner lot the width of the yard along the side street shall not be less than any required front yard on the same side of such street between intersecting streets; provided, however, that the buildable width of a lot of record shall not be reduced to less than 30 feet. 
(2)  No accessory building shall project beyond a required yard line along any street. 
(3)  For the purpose of side yard regulations, an attached dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
(4)  Where a lot of record at the time of the effective date of this chapter is less than 50 feet in width, the required side yard may be reduced to provide a minimum buildable width of 30 feet; provided, however, that no side yard shall be less than five feet. 
(5)  The area required in a yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices or other ornamental features. 
(6)  A roof overhang, or an open fire escape of an outside stairway may project not more than three feet into a required side yard, but no closer than three feet to a property line. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-32.5. - Residential storage buildings. 
(a)  Residential accessory building shall mean an accessory building to a residential use. Residential accessory buildings include, but are not limited to, residential storage buildings, detached garages, carports, utility rooms or accessory dwelling units. 
Residential accessory buildings existing upon the effective date of this chapter, although such buildings do not conform to the provisions hereof, may be continued in accordance with the nonconformity regulations of this chapter. 
(b)  The regulations in this section apply to the following zoning districts and as otherwise specifically provided by this chapter: AO, TE, R-18, R-12, R-9, R-7.5, R-6, R-5, DU, ETH, TH, TH-2, OTMU1 (single-family attached or detached), OTMU2 (single-family attached or detached), MU-30 (single-family attached), MU-90 (single-family attached) and MU-SC (single-family attached). 
(c)  Requirements. 
(1)  Size and number of buildings allowed. 
a.  Lots 7,500 square feet or smaller: One building not to exceed 250 square feet. 
b.  Lots from 7,501 to less than 18,000 square feet: Two buildings with an aggregate total not to exceed 500 square feet. 
c.  Lots 18,000 square feet or larger: Two buildings with an aggregate total not to exceed 800 square feet. 
d.  Lots with a minimum size of 12,000 square feet may apply for a special use permit (SUP) for any one building or aggregate total of two buildings larger than 500 square feet. 
(2)  Easements. An accessory building is prohibited in any easement. 
(3)  Additional requirements. 
Residential Accessory Building Size 	Permit
Required 	Front Setback 	Side, Rear, Main Bldg. Setbacks 	Maximum
Height* 	Exterior
Finish
Materials 
= 120 s.f. 	No 	Per Zoning District 	None 	10' 	Any listed material with a painted or manufactured surface 
> 120 s.f. 	Yes 	Per Zoning District 	5' 	12' 	Compatible with primary structure or masonry 
				* Height is measured from the finished grade to the peak of the roof 	
 
(4)  Accessory dwelling unit. 
a.  Accessory dwelling units, as defined in this chapter, require a special use permit (SUP) and are only permitted on lots with a minimum area of 18,000 square feet. 
b.  Accessory dwelling units may not be leased or sold separately from the primary residence. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-33. - Nonconformity. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish provisions for the continuation and potential alteration of nonconforming uses and structures. It is, however, the declared intent of this section that nonconforming uses and structures eventually be eliminated and be required to comply with the regulations of the zoning ordinance and general development ordinance, having due regard for the property rights of the persons affected, the public welfare, and the character of the surrounding area. 
(b)  Grandfathering of a certain use. A residential dwelling unit with a floor area than fails to meet the minimum floor area required for its zoning district, but which was in conformance with the regulations in effect when it was first established, will be grandfathered rather than given nonconforming status. As such, these residential dwelling units will be allowed to continue as if it were conforming. 
(c)  Burden of proof. The burden of establishing nonconforming rights shall be borne by the owner or proponent of such nonconformity. 
(d)  Abandonment of nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use on a particular parcel of land shall cease operations for a period of more than three months, then such nonconforming use shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned. Unless the board of adjustment reinstates the nonconforming rights, all future uses on the premises must be in full conformance with the zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Reinstatement of nonconforming use rights. An owner and/or operator of a nonconforming use that has been permanently abandoned may request that the nonconforming rights to the use be reinstated. To do so, they must file a written request for reinstatement of nonconforming rights with the city's planning department within ten business days of the city's determination that the use had been abandoned. The director and/or their designee, upon receiving the written request for reinstatement, shall schedule a hearing before the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment may reinstate nonconforming use rights only if the board finds that the owner and/or operator did not intend to abandon the nonconforming use. The board can consider any evidence that may support or refute the intent to abandon the nonconforming use. 
(f)  Expansions of nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use within a building shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the building, but may be extended throughout such portions of the building as is arranged or designed for such use. A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the land became a nonconforming use. 
(g)  Remodeling a conforming structure that houses a nonconforming use. A person may renovate, remodel, or repair a conforming structure housing a nonconforming use if the work does not enlarge the nonconforming use and the renovation, remodel, or repair is in compliance with all laws and regulations. A site plan approval process will be required for any such renovation, remodeling, repair or enlargement. But with any renovation, remodel, and/or repair, the number of dwelling units or rooms in a nonconforming residential use shall not be increased so as to exceed the number of dwelling units or rooms existing at the time said use became nonconforming. 
(h)  Changing from a nonconforming use. Nonconforming use rights are lost when a nonconforming use changes to a conforming use. Once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to a nonconforming use of any kind. A nonconforming use may not be changed to any other nonconforming use. 
(i)  Nonconforming structures. 
(1)  Rebuilding nonconforming structures. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, the elements, or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinance and general development ordinance. In the case of partial destruction by fire or other causes not exceeding 50 percent of its value, the building official shall issue a permit for reconstruction. If destruction is greater than 50 percent of its value, the board of adjustment may grant a permit for repair or replacement after a public hearing if they find the following: 
a.  The rebuilding of the nonconforming structure would not adversely impact surrounding properties; 
b.  The structure was not destroyed by the intentional act of the owner or the owner's agent; and 
c.  Allowing the rebuilding of the nonconforming structure is consistent with the intent of this section. 
(2)  Intentional act of owner or owner's agent. The right to rebuild a nonconforming structure ceases if the structure is destroyed by the intentional act of the owner or the owner's agent. 
(3)  Reuse of abandoned or vacant nonconforming structure/premises. If the use of a nonconforming structure or premises is discontinued for a period of more than one year, the building, structure and premises shall become conforming to the provisions of the general development ordinance before it can be re-occupied. 
(4)  Repairing/remodeling a nonconforming structure. Nonconforming structures shall be maintained in a state of neat appearance and in full compliance with all applicable building codes, including but not limited to the International Property Maintenance Code. A person may renovate, remodel, repair or enlarge a nonconforming structure if the new addition and/or changes meet all code requirements and the new addition and/or changes do not cause the structure to become more nonconforming as to the zoning and general development ordinance regulations. A site plan approval process will be required for any such renovation, remodeling, repair or enlargement. The right to renovate, remodel, repair or enlarge may be affected if the nonconforming structure houses a nonconforming use, in which case all restrictions on repairing, remodeling, repair and enlarging the nonconforming use will also apply. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-34. - Enforcement and application. 
(a)  Administrative official. 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official. 
(2)  The building official or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(3)  Whenever any construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the building official may order the work stopped by notice, in writing, served on the owner or contractor doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building official to proceed with the work. 
(b)  Requirements for building permit. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by accurate plot plans, submitted in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
(1)  The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
(2)  The exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory buildings then-existing. 
(3)  The lines within which the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered. 
(4)  The existing and intended use of each building or part of building. 
(5)  The number of families or dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate. 
(6)  Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Existing permits and private agreements. This chapter is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
(1)  Any permits issued before the effective date of this chapter. 
(2)  Any easement, covenant or any other private agreement. 
(d)  Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under existing ordinances. By the passage of this chapter no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or affected by the adoption of this chapter; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending be proceeded within all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed. 
(e)  Completion of authorized buildings. Nothing in these regulations, nor in any amendments hereto which change district boundaries shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building which shall be completed in its entirety within two years from the date of the passage of this chapter, provided such building was authorized by building permit before the passage of this chapter and further provided construction shall have been started within 90 days from the passage of this chapter. Commitments with reference to construction of public utility building necessary for proposed expansion of the city made prior to the passage of this chapter shall be observed. 
(f)  Newly annexed areas. 
(1)  Zoning annexed areas. All territory annexed to the city hereafter shall be temporarily classified as District "AO" Agricultural-Open Space, only until permanently zoned by the city council. The planning commission shall, within 60 days after annexation of any territory, recommend to the city council a plan for permanent zoning in the area. The procedure to be followed for adoption shall be the same as is provided by law for the adoption of original zoning regulations. 
(2)  Unplatted property. The planning commission shall not approve any plat or any subdivision within city limits until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been permanently zoned by the city council, except that a plat or subdivision in conformance with the recommended zoning may be approved by the planning commission concurrently with the recommendation for zoning and sent together to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-35. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Organization and procedure. 
(1)  Membership. 
a.  The board shall consist of five members and two alternates, each to be appointed or reappointed by the city council. 
b.  Members of the board shall serve for two-year terms of office with appointments beginning July 1. 
c.  Members shall be appointed by places number 1 through 5, with alternates 1 and 2. Places 1, 3, 5 and alternate 1 shall be appointed in odd-numbered years, and places 2, 4, and alternate 2 shall be appointed in even-numbered years so that board memberships will be staggered. 
d.  Each member of the board shall be removable for just cause by city council upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
e.  Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
f.  The board shall elect its own chairman, who shall serve for a period of one year or until his successor is elected. 
(2)  Meetings. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. 
(3)  Hearings. 
a.  The hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public; however, the board may go into executive session at any time in accordance with the law. 
b.  The board shall hear the intervention of any owner of property adjacent to, in the rear of, or across the street from, a lot as to which the granting of any building permit is pending, and shall also hear any other parties in interest. 
c.  All hearings are to be heard by at least four members of the board. 
(4)  Rules and regulations. 
a.  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
b.  The board shall act by resolution in which four members must concur. 
c.  The board shall adopt from time to time such additional rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of the ordinance, and shall furnish a copy of the same to the building official, all of which rules and regulations shall operate uniformly in all cases. All of its resolutions and orders shall be in accordance therewith. 
(b)  Powers and duties of board. 
(1)  Subpoena witnesses, etc. The board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and require the production of documents, under such regulations as it may establish. 
(2)  Appeals based on error. The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement of chapters 6 or 17 of the Lewisville City Code. 
(3)  Special exceptions. The board shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter upon which the board is required to pass as follows or elsewhere in this chapter: 
a.  Permit the reconstruction of a nonconforming structure in accordance with subsection 17-33(i) of this chapter. 
b.  To reinstate nonconforming use rights in accordance with subsection 17-33(e) of this chapter. 
(4)  Variances. The board shall have the power to authorize variances from the terms of this chapter if it will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice done. For purposes of considering a variance, the term "special conditions" shall mean the existence of a restricted area, shape, topography, or other physical feature that is peculiar to the subject parcel of land and which is not applicable to other parcels of land in the same zoning district. A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this chapter to other parcels of land in the district. No variance may authorize a use other than those permitted in the district for which the variance is sought. 
(c)  Appeals. 
(1)  Procedure. 
a.  Appeals to the board of adjustment can be made by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department or board of the municipality affected by the final decision of building official in the enforcement of chapter 6 or chapter 17 of the Lewisville City Code. Such appeal must be filed within 15 days after the final decision has been rendered, by filing with the building official and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
b.  No appeal may be taken with regard to any platted lot until after approval of the final plat by the city council. 
(2)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building official shall certify to the board of adjustment that by reason of facts in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of equity, after notice to the office from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(3)  Notice of hearing on appeal. 
a.  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and shall mail notices of such hearing to the appellant and to the owners of property lying within 200 feet or less street frontage of any point of the lot or portion thereof on which a variation is desired, and to all other persons deemed by the board to be affected thereby, such owners and persons being determined according to the current tax rolls of the city. 
b.  Depositing of such written notice in the mail shall be deemed sufficient compliance therewith. 
(4)  Decision by board. 
a.  The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
b.  The board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirements, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end, shall have the powers of the officer or department from whom the appeal is taken. 
c.  Any persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board, or any taxpayer or any officer, department or board of the municipality may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the board of adjustment and not thereafter. The board's decision shall be deemed filed in the office of the board of adjustment on the first business day following the date on which action was taken by the board. 
(5)  Fees. Each appeal or request for hearing before the board of adjustment shall be accompanied by payment of a nonrefundable fee. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15)  
Sec. 17-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— 0059-18-ORD , § I, adopted Sept. 10, 2018, deleted § 17-36 entitled "Certificates of occupancy," which derived from Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2015. See § 4-36 of this Code for similar provisions.  
Sec. 17-37. - Amendments. 
(a)  Authority. Under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211, the city council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the boundaries of the districts or the regulations herein established. 
(b)  Submission to planning commission. Before taking any action on any proposed amendment, supplement, or change in the ordinance, the city council shall submit the proposed revision to the planning and zoning commission for its review, recommendation and report. The planning and zoning commission shall comply with all applicable statutes with regard to provision of notice and public hearings. For a special use permit, the recommendation from the planning and zoning commission to the city council shall include any recommended conditions. 
(c)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement, or change to the ordinance. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the first date of publication. 
(d)  In case of protest. If the planning and zoning commission recommends that the change be denied or in case of a written protest against such change signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the lots or land included in the proposed change, or of those lots or land immediately adjoining the same and extending 200 feet therefrom, such change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the councilmembers. 
(e)  Limitation on resubmission of petition. No amendment, supplement, change or repeal of any section of this article which has been rejected by the city council shall be again considered by the city council on an appeal or petition by an appellant or application before the expiration of one year from the date of the original rejection by the city council. 
(f)  Application. Whenever any person desires that any amendment or change be made in the zoning and "use district" map, as to any property in the city, there shall be presented an application requesting such change or amendment, and clearly describing the property and its boundaries as to which change or amendment is desired, duly signed by the owner, or owners of the real estate included with the boundaries of the tract as described in the application. Each and every petition as provided shall be filed with the city manager or his appointed representative prior to being presented to the planning and zoning commission, and the same shall be accompanied by a filing fee, which sum shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(g)  Zoning change signs. The applicant shall place a zoning change sign(s), as required by the city on the site. The applicant shall be responsible for such sign(s) remaining visible on the site as required. The cost of the zoning change sign(s) shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15; Ord. No. 4374-05-2017(Z) , § 2, 5-1-17)  
Sec. 17-38. - Compliance with the regulations. 
Except as herein specifically provided: 
(1)  No land shall be used except for a purpose permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered, nor shall any building be used, except for a use permitted in the district in which such building is located. 
(3)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is located. 
(4)  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
(5)  The minimum yards and open areas, including lot area per dwelling unit, required by this chapter for each and every building existing at the time of passage of this chapter or for any building hereafter erected, shall not be encroached upon or considered as part of the yard or open space required for any other building, nor shall any lot area be reduced below the requirements of this chapter for the district in which such lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 4206-09-2015(Z) , § 1, 9-14-15) 
APPENDIX 
MAP AMENDMENTS 
The ordinances listed in the table below amend the zoning map of the city. 
Ordinance
Number 	Date Adopted 	Acreage of
Property 	Zoning From 	Zoning To 
2018-5-95(Z) 	 5-1-95 	61.558 acres 	LI & HI 	PU 
2027-7-95(Z) 	 7-3-95 	5.218 acres 	LC 	GB 
2031-8-95(Z) 	 8-7-95 	2.936 acres 	LC 	MD 
2034-8-95(Z) 	 8-7-95 	1,100 sq. ft. 	PUD/LC 	SU 
2059-10-95(Z) 	10-2-95 	1.6209 acres 	AO & LI 	LI 
2064-11-95(Z) 	11- 6-95 	0.560 acres 	LC 	DU 
2083-2-96(Z) 	 2- 5-96 	61.549 acres 	MF-1 & GB 	MF-1 
2084-2-96(Z) 	 2- 5-96 	12.140 acres 	GB & MF-1 	GB 
2085-2-96(Z) 	 2- 5-96 	5.113 acres 	TH 	MF-1 
2086-2-96(Z) 	 2- 5-96 	0.3038 acres 	OD 	MD 
2104-5-96(Z) 	 5- 6-96 	1.925 acres 	LI 	SU/TELECOM 
2108-6-96(Z) 	 6- 3-96 	1.0 acre 	AO 	WH 
2109-6-96(Z) 	 6- 3-96 	0.648 acres 	R-7.5 	OD 
2120-7-96(Z) 	 7-15-96 	1400 sq. ft. 	GB 	SU/MONOPO 
2121-7-96(Z) 	 7-15-96 	7.3921 acres 	MF-1 	R-5 
		4.1632 acres 	PU 	R-5 
		10.8510 acres 	AO 	R-5 
2139-9-96(Z) 	 9- 9-96 	8.305 acres 	LC 	MD 
2140-9-96(Z) 	 9- 9-96 	1.314 acres 	GB 	LI 
		10.000 acres 	AO 	LI 
2141-9-96(Z) 	 9- 9-96 	2.049 acres 	AO 	R-18 
2164-10-96(Z) 	10-21-96 	3.591 acres 	LI 	WH 
2167-11-96(Z) 	11- 4-96 	41.094 acres 	LI 	MF-1 
2173-12-96(Z) 	12- 2-96 	1.7244 acres 	R-7.5 	LI 
2174-12-96(Z) 	12- 2-96 	7.202 acres 	AO 	LI 
2175-12-96(Z) 	12- 2-96 	0.193 acre 	LI 	TH 
2184-1-97(Z) 	 1- 6-97 	16.4285 acres 	AO, GB, & LI 	GB 
2185-1-97(Z) 	 1- 6-97 	2.238 acres 	LC 	GB 
2189-2-97(Z) 	 2- 3-97 	3.009 acres 	AO 	LI 
2196-3-97(Z) 	 3-17-97 	18.1270 acres 	GB 	LI 
2214-5-97(Z) 	 5- 5-97 	0.717 acres 	R-7.5 	GB 
2220-6-97(Z) 	 6- 2-97 	12.539 acres 	R-7.5 	R-5 
2221-6-97(Z) 	 6- 2-97 	5.852 acres 	R-7.5 	R-6 
2225-6-97(Z) 	 6-16-97 	9.9 acres 	MF-1 	MF-2 
2226-6-97(Z) 	 6-16-97 	1.7 acres 	MF-1 	PU 
2231-7-97(Z) 	 7- 7-97 	0.258 acres 	AO 	LI 
2232-7-97(Z) 	 7- 7-97 	1.628 acres 	AO 	R-12 
2233-7-97(Z) 	 7- 7-97 	1.773 acres 	GB 	LI 
2239-7-97(Z) 	 7- 7-97 	4.098 acres 	R-7.5 	MF-1 
2242-8-97(Z) 	 8- 4-97 	3.685 acres 	MF-2 	MD 
2243-8-97(Z) 	 8- 4-97 	8.121 acres 	AO 	LI 
2272-11-97(Z) 	11- 3-97 	3.7051 acres 	AO 	LC 
2281-12-97(Z) 	12- 1-97 	1.8394 acres 	R-6 	LC 
2297-1-98(Z) 	 1- 5-98 	10.7 acres 	HI (with 
restrictions) 	LC 
2298-1-98(Z) 	 1- 5-98 	155.5 acres 	AO, R-9, LI, HI (with restrictions), & SU 	OD 
2299-1-98(Z) 	 1- 5-98 	11.9 acres 	AO, R-9, & SU 	R-9 
2300-1-98(Z) 	 1- 5-98 	12.6 acres 	AO, R-9, LI, & SU 	TH 
2301-1-98(Z) 	 1- 5-98 	5.6 acres 	AO, R-9, & SU 	MF-1 
2302-1-98(Z) 	 1- 5-98 	17.8 acres 	R-9 	MHP 
2303-1-98(Z) 	 1- 5-98 	21.5 acres 	LI 	LI 
2304-1-98(Z) 	 1- 5-98 	0.5623 acres 	LI 	TH 
2309-2-98(Z) 	 2- 2-98 	21.169 acres 	R-9 	R-18 
2310-2-98(Z) 	 2- 2-98 	16.061 acres 	GB 	MD 
2313-2-98(Z) 	 2- 2-98 	40.98 acres 	R-6 & LI 	R-6 
2314-2-98(Z) 	 2- 2-98 	45.20 acres 	AO, R-6, GB, & LI 	R-5 
2315-2-98(Z) 	 2- 2-98 	19.91 acres 	AO, GB, & LI 	LC 
2316-2-98(Z) 	 2- 2-98 	27.94 acres 	AO & LI 	MF-2 
2321-3-98(Z) 	 3- 2-98 	11.68 acres 	OD, MD, & GB 	MD 
2328-4-98(Z) 	 4- 6-98 	1.325 acres 	R-7.5 	OD 
2329-4-98(Z) 	 4- 6-98 	3.619 acres 	AO & GB 	GB 
2339-6-98(Z) 	 6- 1-98 	0.237 acres 	LI 	R-7.5 
2342-6-98(Z) 	 6- 1-98 	1.68 acres 	AO 	LI 
2378-9-98(Z) 	 9-14-98 	0.484 acres 	R-7.5 	OD 
2379-9-98(Z) 	 9-14-98 	1.5 acres 	AO 	LI 
2380-9-98(Z) 	 9-14-98 	0.48 acres 	GB 	LI 
2389-11-98(Z) 	11- 2-98 	7.13 acres 	R-6 	TH 
2390-11-98(Z) 	11- 2-98 	10.11 acres 	AO 	R-18 
2400-12-98(Z) 	12- 7-98 	34.89 acres 	AO 	LI 
2401-12-98(Z) 	12- 7-98 	11.83 acres 	AO 	WH 
2408-01-1999(Z) 	 1- 4-99 	1.93 acres 	LC 	MD 
2409-01-1999(Z) 	 1- 4-99 	5.00 acres 	LI 	WH 
2410-2-1999(Z) 	 2- 1-99 	8.31 	AO, GB, & HI 	GB 
2411-2-1999(Z) 	 2- 1-99 	34.60 	GB & HI 	WH 
2412-2-1999(Z) 	 2- 1-99 	10.50 	MF-2 	LI 
2413-2-1999(Z) 	 2- 1-99 	10.50 	LI 	MF-2 
2419-2-1999(Z) 	 2-15-99 	10.53 acres 	MF-2 	LI 
2425-4-1999(Z) 	 4- 5-99 	0.19 acres 	LI 	TH 
2426-4-1999(Z) 	 4- 5-99 	0.61 acres 	LI & PU 	LI 
2427-4-1999(Z) 	 4- 5-99 	2.96 acres 	AO 	LI 
2439-5-1999(Z) 	 5- 4-99 	3.59 acres 	AO 	WH 
2440-5-1999(Z) 	 5- 4-99 	0.30 acres 	MD 	LC 
2443-5-1999(Z) 	 5-17-99 	71.67 acres 	AO 	R-7.5 
2458-7-1999 	 7- 8-99 		Creating a new district 	MF-3 
2460-7-1999(Z) 	 7- 8-99 	190.72 acres 	AO 	MF-3 
2461-7-1999(Z) 	 7- 8-99 	188.31 acres 	AO 	LI 
2468-8-1999(Z) 	 8- 9-99 	3.59 acres 	AO 	WH 
2469-8-1999(Z) 	 8- 8-99 	14.22 acres 	LI & GB 	LI 
2470-8-1999(Z) 	 8- 8-99 	10.95 acres 	AO & GB 	LI 
2471-8-1999(Z) 	 8- 8-99 	1.84 acres 	GB 	AO 
2479-8-1999(Z) 	 8-30-99 	3.20 acres 	AO 	LC 
2480-8-1999(Z) 	 8-30-99 	1.80 acres 	AO 	R-9 
2481-8-1999(Z) 	 8-30-99 	12.02 acres 	MF-2 	TH 
2519-12-1999(Z) 	12- 6-99 	1.62 acres 	AO 	PU 
2539-2-2000(Z) 	 2- 7-00 	4.98 acres 	AO 	LI 
2558-4-2000(Z) 	 4- 3-00 	.31 acres 	R-7.2 & GB 	OD 
2566-5-2000(Z) 	 5- 1-00 	.97 	AO 	LI 
2600-9-2000 	 9-11-00 	1.57 	AO 	LI 
2607-10-2000(Z) 	10- 2-00 	41.9 	AO 	LI 
2627-12-2000(Z) 	12-11-00 	3.64 	GB 	LI 
2628-12-2000(Z) 	12-11-00 	0.276 	AO 	LI 
2648-2-2001(Z) 	 2- 5-01 	20.05 	PUD/Single family attached and PUD/Office retail 	R-5 
2651-3-2001(Z) 	 3- 5-01 	13.91 	R-7.5 and PK 	MD 
2661-3-2001(Z) 	 3-19-01 	.05 	R-7.5 	DU 
2665-4-2001(Z) 	 4- 2-01 	4.97 	PUD/Office 	LC 
2666-4-2001(Z) 	 4- 2-01 	.15 	OD 	R-5 
2694-7-2001(Z) 	 7- 2-01 	21.1 	MF-2 	LI 
2695-7-2001(Z) 	 7- 2-01 	49.36 	HI 	SU 
2701-8-2001(Z) 	 9-10-01 	8.81 	SF 	R.5 
2701-8-2001(Z) 	 9-10-01 	9.6 	R.5 	
2702-8-2001(Z) 	 8- 6-01 	35.23 	AO 	LI 
2709-8-2001(Z) 	 8-27-01 	79.77 	LI 	GB 
2710-8-2001(Z) 	 8-27-01 	148.69 	LI 	MF-2 
2736-11-2001(Z) 	11- 5-01 	3.91 	PU/GB 	PU 
2763-01-2002(Z)* 	 1- 7-02 	47.81 	SU 	SU* 
* Changed from allows three radio towers not to exceed 399 feet in height to four towers not to exceed 399 feet in height. 
2799-05-2002(Z)        5-06-02        	1.15 	AO 	WH 
2799-05-2002(Z)        5-06-02        	4.78 	LI 	WH 
2807-06-2002(Z) 	 6- 3-02 	.92 	AO 	LI 
2808-06-2002(Z) 	 6- 3-02 	14.55 	MF-2 	LI 
2809-06-2002(Z) 	 6- 3-02 	14.55 	LI 	MF-2 
2821-07-2002(Z) 	 7- 1-02 	1.39 	R-7.5/GB 	MD 
2822-07-2002(Z) 	 7- 1-02 	5.22 	GB 	MD 
2836-08-2002(Z) 	 8-26-02 	.97 	R-7.5 	LC 
2837-08-2002(Z) 	 8-26-02 	31.74 	MF-2 	LI 
2838-08-2002(Z) 	 8-26-02 	31.11 	LI 	MF-2 
2956-08-2003(Z) 	 8-25-03 	13.15 	LI 	OTMU2 
2957-08-2003(Z) 	 8-25-03 	.26 	OD 	OTMU2 
2958-08-2003(Z) 	 8-25-03 	.824 	AO 	LC 
2959-08-2003(Z) 	 8-25-03 	.0368 	- 	- 
2960-08-2003(Z) 	 8-25-03 	.85 	OD/MD 	OTMU2 
2975-09-2003(Z) 	 9-15-03 	39.43 	LI 	R-9 
2976-09-2003(Z) 	 9-15-03 	77.12 	Li 	R-5 
2979-09-2003(Z) 	 9-15-03 	3.72 	AO 	R-18 
2981-10-2003(Z) 	10- 6-03 	.38 	OD 	OTMU2 
2982-10-2003(Z) 	10- 6-03 	22.83 	AO 	LI 
2993-11-2003(Z) 	11- 3-03 	.3 	OD 	OTMU2 
2994-11-2003(Z) 	11- 3-03 	.38 	LI 	OTMU2 
3001-12-2003(Z) 	12- 1-03 	.55 	MF-2 	TH-2 
3002-12-2003(Z) 	12- 1-03 	.41 	LI 	OTMU2 
3003-12-2003(Z) 	12- 1-03 	.41 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3029-02-2004(Z) 	 2-16-04 	.60 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3030-02-2004(Z) 	 2-16-04 	11.20 	LI 	TH 
3036-04-2004(Z) 	 4- 5-04 	.91 	AO 	GB 
3037-04-2004(Z) 	 4- 5-04 	100.34 	AO 	LI 
3038-04-2004(Z) 	 4- 5-04 	13.00 	MF-2 	TH-2 
3039-04-2004(Z) 	 4- 5-04 	19.81 	MF-2 	TH-2 
3040-04-2004(Z) 	 4- 5-04 	.99 	OD & R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3048-05-2004(Z) 	 5- 3-04 	337.27 	HI 	SU-Landfill 
3050-05-2004(Z) 	 5- 3-04 	.97 	AO 	LI 
3051-05-2004(Z) 	 5- 3-04 	1.88 	MF-2 	GB 
3052-05-2004(Z) 	 5- 3-04 	1.00 	AO 	LI 
3053-05-2004(Z) 	 5- 3-04 	.15 	LI 	OTMU2 
3054-05-2004(Z) 	 5- 3-04 	.15 	LI 	OTMU2 
3055-05-2004(Z) 	 5- 3-04 	.25 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3056-05-2004(Z) 	 5- 3-04 	.22 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3062-05-2004(Z) 	 5-17-04 	15.16 	GB 	TH 
3063-05-2004(Z) 	 5-17-04 	3.04 	HI 	LI 
3064-05-2004(Z) 	 5-14-04 	38.40 	AO/LI/HI 	SU-Six AM broadcast/transmission towers 
3065-05-2004(Z) 	 5-17-04 	.17 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3078-06-2004(Z) 	 6-21-04 	.83 	AO 	LI 
3079-06-2004(Z) 	 6-21-04 	4.87 	AO 	R-9 
3084-07-2004(Z) 	 7-12-04 	.46 	R-7.5/AO 	OTMU1 
3093-08-2004(Z) 	 8- 2-04 	.14 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3094-08-2004(Z) 	 8- 2-04 	1.9 	MF-1 	OTMU2 
3095-08-2004(Z) 	 8- 2-04 	4.35 	R-7.5 	PU 
3096-08-2004(Z) 	 8- 2-04 	11.94 	R-7.5 	PU 
3097-08-2004(Z) 	 8- 2-04 	9.14 	MD/LC 	MF-2 
3109-09-2004(Z) 	 9-13-04 	5.49 	R-5 	LC 
3110-09-2004(Z) 	 9-13-04 	.25 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3111-09-2004(Z) 	 9-13-04 	.13 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3112-09-2004(Z) 	 9-13-04 	.33 	OD 	OTMU2 
3113-09-2004(Z) 	 9-13-04 	.44 	OD 	OTMU2 
3114-09-2004(Z) 	 9-13-04 	.21 	OD 	OTMU2 
3131-10-2004(Z) 	10- 4-2004 	374.42 	LI/MF-2 	SU/Mining 
3132-10-2004(Z) 	10- 4-2004 	1.28 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3135-11-2004(Z) 	11- 1-2004 	5.49 	R-5 	LC 
3136-11-2004(Z) 	11- 1-2004 	0.08 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3137-11-2004(Z) 	11- 1-2004 	0.37 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3140-11-2004(Z) 	11-15-2004 	23.16 	LI 	TH 
3141-11-2004(Z) 	11-15-2004 	12.09 	LI 	GB 
3143-12-2004(Z) 	12- 6-2004 	0.59 	OD 	OTMU2 
3155-01-2005(Z) 	 1- 5-2005 	1.89 	R-7.5 	LC 
3156-01-2005(Z) 	 1- 5-2005 	0.27 	OD 	OTMU2 
3157-01-2005(Z) 	 1- 5-2005 	0.35 	SU/DAYCARE 	OTMU2 
3165-02-2005(Z) 	 2- 7-2005 	0.25 	LI 	OTMU2 
3179-03-2005(Z) 	 3- 7-2005 	2.572 	LI 	LC 
3180-03-2005(Z) 	 3- 7-2005 	9.464 	LI 	ETH 
3181-03-2005(Z) 	 3- 7-2005 	2.19 	AO 	OTMU1 
3182-03-2005(Z) 	 3- 7-2005 	11.71 	GB 	MF-2 
3183-03-2005(Z) 	 3- 7-2005 	27.99 	MF-2/GB 	ETH 
3184-03-2005(Z) 	 3- 7-2005 	1.29 	GB 	GB 
3213-07-2005(Z) 	 7-11-2005 	0.87 	AO 	LI 
3214-07-2005(Z) 	 7-11-2005 	1.40 	AO 	LC 
3215-07-2005(Z) 	 7-11-2005 	0.93 	MD 	OD 
3228-08-2005(Z) 	 8- 1-2005 	0.66 	AO 	R-7.5 
3229-08-2005(Z) 	 8- 1-2005 	0.25 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3230-08-2005(Z) 	 8- 1-2005 	1.90 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3231-08-2005(Z) 	 8- 1-2005 	0.22 	DU 	OTMU2 
3232-08-2005(Z) 	 8- 1-2005 	0.50 	OD 	OTMU2 
3236-08-2005(Z) 	 8-15-2005 	10.93 	GB 	TH-2 
3241-09-2005(Z) 	 9-12-2005 	0.45 	LI 	OTMU2 
3242-09-2005(Z) 	 9-12-2005 	0.91 	AO 	LI 
3243-09-2005(Z) 	 9-12-2005 	15.90 	AO/LI 	TH2 
3255-10-2005(Z) 	10- 3-2005 	0.11 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3256-10-2005(Z) 	10- 3-2005 	0.70 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3257-10-2005(Z) 	10- 3-2005 	1.40 	AO 	LC 
3271-11-2005(Z) 	11- 7-2005 	0.30 	LI 	OTMU2 
3272-11-2005(Z) 	11- 7-2005 	0.34 	LC 	OTMU2 
3284-12-2005(Z) 	12- 5-2005 	0.20 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3285-12-2005(Z) 	12- 5-2005 	0.25 	LI 	OTMU2 
3286-12-2005(Z) 	12- 5-2005 	0.40 	LI 	OTMU2 
3291-12-2005(Z) 	12- 9-2005 	2.66 	MF-1 	GB 
3294-01-2006(Z) 	 1- 9-2006 	0.26 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3295-01-2006(Z) 	 1- 9-2006 	0.41 	OD 	OTMU2 
3296-01-2006(Z) 	 1- 9-2006 	14.81 	AO 	LI 
3301-01-2006(Z) 	 1-23-2006 	2.77 	LI 	MD 
3307-02-2006(Z) 	 2- 6-2006 	1.09 	GB 	MF2 
3308-02-2006(Z) 	 2- 6-2006 	1.09 	MF2 	GB 
3312-02-2006(Z) 	 2-20-2006 	82.8 	MF-2/AO 	PU 
3318-03-2006(Z) 	 3- 6-2006 	10.19 	PU 	LI 
3319-03-2006(Z) 	 3- 6-2006 	0.37 	GB 	OTMU2 
3341-06-2006(Z) 	 6- 5-2006 	0.17 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3354-07-2006(Z) 	 7-10-2006 	0.87 	GB 	OTMU2 
3355-07-2006(Z) 	 7-10-2006 	0.73 	GB 	OTC 
3361-08-2006(Z) 	 8- 7-2006 	0.45 	MD & OD 	OTMU2 
3367-09-2006(Z) 	 9-11-2006 	6.16 	LI 	TH2 
3368-09-2006(Z) 	 9-11-2006 	2.46 	LI 	GB 
3369-09-2006(Z) 	 9-11-2006 	8.34 	LI 	TH2 
3379-10-2006(Z) 	10- 2-2006 	28.04 	AO 	TH2 
3384-11-2006(Z) 	11- 6-2006 	3.37 	AO 	LI 
3385-11-2006(Z) 	11- 6-2006 	0.21 	LI 	OTMU2 
3386-11-2006(Z) 	11- 6-2006 	0.74 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3398-12-2006(Z) 	12-18-2006 	2.78 	MF-2 	MD 
3406-02-2007(Z) 	 2- 5-2007 	0.13 	LI 	OTMU2 
3407-02-2007(Z) 	 2- 5-2007 	2.5 	AO 	LI 
3418-03-2007(Z) 	 3- 5-2007 	6.58 	GB 	MF-2 
3428-04-2007(Z) 	 4- 2-2007 	1.7 	LI 	PU 
3429-04-2007(Z) 	 4- 2-2007 	3.0 	LI 	PU 
3430-04-2007(Z) 	 4- 2-2007 	8.44 	MF2 	LI 
3452-06-2007(Z) 	 6- 4-2007 	0.313 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3459-06-2007(Z) 	 6-18-2007 	0.199 	OD 	OTMU2 
3460-06-2007(Z) 	 6-18-2007 	1.151 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3464-07-2007(Z) 	 7- 2-2007 	1.0 	AO 	LI 
3465-07-2007(Z) 	 7- 2-2007 	119.52 	AO/LI 	LI 
3470-08-2007(Z) 	 8- 6-2007 	1.02 	R-18 	R-12 
3471-08-2007(Z) 	 8- 6-2007 	76.49 	HI,LI & AO 	HI, LI & WH 
3480-09-2007(Z) 	 9-10-2007 	4.19 	AO 	LI 
3481-09-2007(Z) 	 9-10-2007 	3.3 	LI 	LC 
3502-10-2007(Z) 	10-15-2007 	0.25 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3503-10-2007(Z) 	10-15-2007 	0.55 	OD 	OTMU2 
3504-10-2007(Z) 	10-15-2007 	0.2 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3505-10-2007(Z) 	10-15-2007 	0.226 	OD 	OTMU2 
3506-11-2007(Z) 	11- 5-2007 	0.24 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3507-11-2007(Z) 	11- 5-2007 	286 	LI/MF-2 	PU 
3510-11-2007(Z) 	11-19-2007 	0.28 	GB 	OTC 
3524-01-2008(Z) 	 1- 7-2008 	0.79 	LI 	OTMU2 
3525-01-2008(Z) 	 1- 7-2008 	0.19 	GB 	MF2 
3526-01-2008(Z) 	 1- 7-2008 	0.19 	MF2 	GB 
3530-01-2008(Z) 	 1-28-2008 	1.94 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3534-02-2008(Z) 	 2- 4-2008 	2.75 	LC/DU 	MD 
3546-03-2008(Z) 	 3- 3-2008 	2.0 	GB 	LI 
3547-03-2008(Z) 	 3- 3-2008 	2.82 	AO 	LI 
3555-04-2008(Z) 	 4- 7-2008 	0.09 	GB 	OTC 
3556-04-2008(Z) 	 4- 7-2008 	0.239 	LC 	OTMU2 
3557-04-2008(Z) 	 4- 7-2008 	1.058 	MF-1 	OTMU2 
3562-05-2008(Z) 	 5- 5-2008 	1.59 	AO 	LI 
3565-05-2008(Z) 	 5-19-2008 	2.257 	OD/OTMU2 	PU 
3566-05-2008(Z) 	 5-19-2008 	0.31 	LI 	OTMU2 
3567-05-2008(Z) 	 5-19-2008 	0.15 	GB 	OTC 
3573-06-2008(Z) 	 6- 2-2008 	90.08 	LI 	MU90 
3582-07-2008(Z) 	 7- 7-2008 	6.06 	GB 	PU 
3590-08-2008(Z) 	 8- 4-2008 	0.56 	LC 	GB 
3591-08-2008(Z) 	 8- 4-2008 	1.91 	PU 	LI 
3596-09-2008(Z) 	 9- 8-2008 	4.0 	LI 	MD 
3610-10-2008(Z) 	10- 6-2008 	0.21 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3621-11-2008(Z) 	10-20-2008 	6.31 	GB 	LI 
3622-11-2008(Z) 	10-20-2008 	4.46 	MF-2 	LC 
3634-12-2008(Z) 	12-15-2008 	0.189 	GB 	LI 
3642-01-2009(Z) 	 1-26-2009 	0.2261 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3645-02-2009(Z) 	 2- 2-2009 	13.46 	AO 	PU 
3666-04-2009(Z) 
 4- 6-2009 	9.265 	MF-1 	PU 
3672-05-2009(Z) 
 5- 4-2009 	9.084 	HI 	PU 
3676-05-2009(Z) 
 5-18-2009 	4.91 	AO 	PU 
3679-06-2009(Z) 
 6- 1-2009 	350.77 	AO 	SU-LANDFILL 
3683-06-2009(Z) 
 6-15-2009 	80.58 	R-5 & R-6 	PU 
3698-08-2009(Z) 
 8- 3-2009 	3.65 	TH-2 	MD 
3698-08-2009(Z) 
 8- 3-2009 	2.50 	TH-2 	OD 
3713-10-2009(Z) 
10- 5-2009 	0.38 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3714-10-2009(Z) 
10- 5-2009 	2.55 	GB/AO 	PU 
3733-01-2010(Z) 
 1- 4-2010 	3.7 	AO 	LI 
3736-01-2010(Z) 
 1-25-2010 	0.17 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3737-01-2010(Z) 
 1-25-2010 	0.24 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
3740-02-2010(Z) 
 2- 1-2010 	4.40 	AO 	LI 
3743-02-2010(Z) 
 2-15-2010 	2.78 	GB 	MD 
3760-04-2010(Z) 
 4-19-2010 	0.27 	LI 	OTMU2 
3767-05-2010(Z) 
 5-17-2010 	337.268 	SU Landfill 	SU Landfill 
3776-06-2010(Z) 
 6- 7-2010 	77.98 	AO/LI 	PU 
3777-06-2010(Z) 
 6- 7-2010 	2.44 	AO 	LI 
3808-10-2010(Z) 
10- 4-2010 	1.84 	GB/LI 	LI 
3811-11-2010(Z) 
11- 1-2010 	1.99 	AO 	LI 
3812-11-2010(Z) 
11- 1-2010 	12.074 	LI 	WH 
3814-11-2010(Z) 
11-15-2010 	0.437 	OD 	OTMU2 
3820-12-2010(Z) 
12- 6-2010 	0.296 	AO 	R-7.5 
3821-12-2010(Z) 
12- 6-2010 	0.648/0.339 	OD 	OTMU2 
3830-01-2011(Z) 
 1- 3-2011 	1.25 	LC 	OTMU2 
3831-01-2011(Z) 
 1- 3-2011 	5.461 	OD 	SU 
3834-02-2011(Z) 
 2- 7-2011 	2.031 	AO 	LC 
3846-04-2011(Z) 
 4- 4-2011 	1.612 	AO 	R-18 
3847-04-2011(Z) 
 4- 4-2011 	0.274 	R-7.5 	OD 
3854-05-2011(Z) 
 5- 2-2011 	4.09 	LC 	PU 
3855-05-2011(Z) 
 5- 2-2011 	10.4139 	MF-2 	GB 
3905-11-2011(Z) 
11-21-2011 	1.029 	LI 	WH 
3914-12-2011(Z) 
12-19-2011 	4.7 	LC 	GB 
3917-01-2012(Z) 
 1- 9-2012 	3.42 	AO 	LI 
3919-02-2012(Z) 	 2- 6-2012 	0.431 	GB 	LI 
3928-03-2012(Z) 	 3- 5-2012 	29.054 	AO 	LI 
3930-04-2012(Z) 	 4-16-2012 	1.147 	LI 	SU 
3931-04-2012(Z) 	 4-16-2012 	8.09 	AO 	PU 
3934-05-2012(Z) 	 5- 7-2012 	0.38 	AO 	LI 
3941-06-2012(Z) 	 6- 4-2012 	5.426 	LI 	OTMU2 
3952-08-2012(Z) 
 8- 6-2012 	9.54 	GB 	TH2 
3956-08-2012(Z) 
 8-20-2012 	0.15 	LI 	OTMU1 
3968-11-2012(Z) 
11-19-2012 	21.3 	LI 	ETH 
3969-11-2012(Z) 
11-19-2012 	0.180 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
3973-12-2012(Z) 
12-17-2012 	0.11 	OTMU2 	R-5 
3978-01-2013(Z) 
 1-28-2013 	10.99 	TH-2 	ETH 
3983-03-2013(Z) 
 3-18-2013 	13.81 	GB 	ETH 
3988-04-2013(Z) 
 4-15-2013 	60.81 	GB 	GB/ETH 
3995-05-2013(Z) 
 5-20-2013 	0.177 	LI 	OTMU2 
4000-06-2013(Z) 
 6- 3-2013 	1.202 	AO 	LI 
4001-06-2013(Z) 
 6-17-2013 	1.767 	R-7.5/OD 	PU 
4002-06-2013(Z) 
 6-17-2013 	0.87 	OTMU2 	PU 
4011-08-2013(Z) 
 8- 5-2013 	3.535 	GB 	TH 
4016-09-2013(Z) 
 9-16-2013 	0.33 	GB/R-7.5 	OD 
4022-10-2013(Z) 
10- 7-2013 	7.057 	AO 	LI 
4056-04-2014(Z) 
 4- 7-2014 	26.325 	LI 	PUD1 
4063-05-2014(Z) 
 5- 5-2014 	0.329 	GB 	OTC 
4064-05-2014(Z) 
 5- 5-2014 	0.166 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
4070-05-2014(Z) 
 5-19-2014 	0.1151 	LI 	OTMU2 
4071-05-2014(Z) 
 5-19-2014 	4.089 	GB 	OTMU2 
4082-06-2014(Z) 
 6- 2-2014 	1.061 	AO 	LI 
4083-06-2014(Z) 
 6- 2-2014 	0.117 	AO 	LC 
4091-07-2014(Z) 
 7- 7-2014 	30.071 	LI 	ETH 
4102-08-2014(Z) 
 8-18-2014 	0.879 	SU/OTMU2 	OTMU2 
4128-10-2014(Z) 
11-20-2014 	0.354 	LI 	PU 
		34.916 	LI/GB 	PUD2 
4129-10-2014(Z) 
10-20-2014 	0.484 	OD 	OTMU2 
4130-11-2014(Z) 
11- 3-2014 	1.378 	AO 	PU 
		154.719 	AO 	PUD3 
4131-11-2014(Z) 
11- 3-2014 	4.302 	LI 	LC 
4134-11-2014(Z) 
11-17-2014 	1.35 	LC 	MD 
4145-01-2015(Z) 
 1- 5-2015 	1.900 	PU 	OTMU2 
4149-01-2015(Z) 
 1- 5-2015 	0.55 	DU 	OTMU2 
4153-02-2015(Z) 
 2- 2-2015 	0.959 	AO 	LI 
4154-02-2015(Z) 
 2- 2-2015 	0.30 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
4159-03-2015(Z) 
 3- 2-2015 	19.055 	AO 	LI 
4163-03-2015(Z) 
 3-16-2015 	0.231 	LC 	OTMU2 
4164-03-2015(Z) 
 3-16-2015 	0.45 	GB 	R-7.5 
4165-03-2015(Z) 
 3-16-2015 	12.03 	AO 	WH 
4172-04-2015(Z) 
 4-20-2015 	18.041 	AO 	LI 
4189-07-2015(Z) 
 7-20-15 	7.317 	MF-2 	MD 
4190-07-2015(Z) 
 7-20-15 	0.0723 	MF-2 	TH-2 
4213-10-2015(Z) 
10- 5-15 	1.247 	GB 	PU 
4214-10-2015(Z) 
10- 5-15 	1.216 	GB and OTC 	OTC 
4225-11-2015(Z) 
11-16-15 	90.588 	LI 	PD-MU 
4226-11-2015(Z) 
11-16-15 	10.79 	GB 	MU 
4234-12-2015(Z) 
12-21-15 	90.08 	LI 	MU-90 
4235-12-2015(Z) 
12-21-15 	143 	LI and AO 	MU-90 
4241-01-2016(Z) 
 1-25-16 	14.31 	LC 	MD 
4244-02-2016(Z) 
 2-15-16 	0.1515 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
4245-02-2016(Z) 
 2-15-16 	0.75 	GB 	OTC 
4248-03-2016(Z) 
 3- 7-16 	0.28 	HI 	AO 
4249-03-2016(Z) 
 3- 7-16 	0.28 	AO 	HI 
4250-03-2016(Z) 
 3- 7-16 	0.3 	GB 	OTMU2 
4254-03-2016(Z) 
 3-21-16 	4.237 	SU-Mining 	SU-Landfill Accessory Use 
4255-04-2016(Z) 
 4- 4-16 	0.631 	MF-2 	LI 
4256-04-2016(Z) 
 4- 4-16 	4.362 	LC 	MD 
4257-04-2016(Z) 
 4- 4-16 	0.145 	GB 	OTMU2 
4258-04-2016(Z) 
 4-18-16 	0.556 	LI 	MD 
4264-05-2016(Z) 
 5- 2-16 	0.6323 	GB 	OTMU2 
4265-05-2016(Z) 
 5- 2-16 	0.264 	OTMU2 	PK 
4279-06-2016(Z) 
 6- 6-16 	10.055 	GB 	PD-TH2 
4287-06-2016(Z) 
 6-20-16 	15.665 	LI 	PD-R-5 
4288-06-2016(Z) 
 6-20-16 	0.3081 	AO 	R-7.5 
4293-07-2016(Z) 
 7-18-16 	1.373 	AO 	R-7.5 
4297-08-2016(Z) 
 8- 1-16 	5.082 	MF-1 	PD-MU 
4302-08-2016(Z) 
 8-15-16 	5.5 	LI and OTMU2 	OTMU2 
4308-09-2016(Z) 
 9-12-16 	0.209 	OD 	OTMU2 
4322-10-2016(Z) 
10-17-16 	0.450 	OD 	OTMU2 
4323-10-2016(Z) 
10-17-16 	0.2132 	LI 	OTMU2 
4324-10-2016(Z) 
10-17-16 	0.517 	LI 	OTMU2 
4325-10-2016(Z) 
10-17-16 	0.309 	OD 	R-7.5 
4326-10-2016(Z) 
10-17-16 	17.007 	LI 	WH 
4332-11-2016(Z) 
11- 7-16 	9.86 	LI 	SU-Landfill Accessory Use 
4335-11-2016(Z) 
11-21-16 	0.206 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
4337-11-2016(Z) 
11-21-16 	470 	AO, LI and SU-Landfill Accessory Use 	SU-Landfill Accessory Use 
4338-12-2016(Z) 
12- 5-16 	0.07 	GB 	OTC 
4339-12-2016(Z) 
12- 5-16 	0.47 	OD 	OTMU2 
4348-01-2017(Z) 
 1-23-17 	1.088 	GB 	OTC 
4353-02-2017(Z) 
 2- 6-17 	5.589 	WH and LI 	PD-OTMU2 
4359-03-2017(Z) 
 3- 6-17 	12.293 	LI 	PD-ETH 
4364-04-2017(Z) 
 4- 3-17 	18.940 	LI 	PD-MU 
4372-05-2017(Z) 
 5- 1-17 	10.123 	AO and LI 	PD-MU 
4373-05-2017(Z) 
 5- 1-17 	2.328 	LI 	PU 
4377-05-2017(Z) 
 5-15-17 	8.9 	PD-OTMU2 and LI 	PD-OTMU2 
4382-06-2017(Z) 
 6- 5-17 	9.86 	SU 	SU 
4383-06-2017(Z) 
 6- 5-17 	0.999 	AO 	R-7.5 
4384-06-2017(Z) 
 6- 5-17 	0.207 	GB 	OTC 
4386-06-2017(Z) 
 6-19-17 	0.553 	OD 	OTMU2 
4387-06-2017(Z) 
 6-19-17 	0.068 	GB 	OTC 
4388-07-2017(Z) 
 7- 3-17 	9.059 	TH 	PD-TH2 
4389-07-2017(Z) 
 7- 3-17 	8.325 	LC 	PD-R-5 
4408-08-2017(Z) 
 8-21-17 	0.867 	PU 	OTMU2 
4424-10-2017(Z) 
10- 2-17 	4.204 	R-5 	ETH 
4431-11-2017(Z) 
11- 6-17 	0.231 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
4432-11-2017(Z) 
11- 6-17 	0.076 	GB 	OTC 
4433-11-2017(Z) 
11- 6-17 	0.089 	GB 	OTC 
4438-11-2017(Z) 
11-20-17 	15.0 	HI 	SU-Landfill Accessory Uses 
4439-11-2017(Z) 
11-20-17 	6.762 	LI 	PD-ETH 
4440-11-2017(Z) 
11-20-17 	6.60 	LI 	PD-R-5 
4448-12-2017(Z) 
12- 4-17 	0.56 	MF-1 	GB 
0001-18-ZON 
 1- 8-18 	6.68 	LI 	WH 
0003-18-ZON 
 1- 8-18 	84.172 	AO 	LI 
0012-18-ZON 
 2-19-18 	17.130 	AO 	LI 
0013-18-ZON 
 2-19-18 	0.448 	OTMU2 	MD 
0036-18-ZON 
 6-18-18 	9.49 	TH-2 	PD-TH-2 
0037-18-ZON 
 6-18-18 	4.038 	R-7.5 	GB 
0056-18-ZON 
 9-10-18 	0.614 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
0057-18-ZON 
 9-10-18 	0.172 	LI 	OTMU2 
0062-18-ZON 
 9-17-18 	5.371 	GB 	PD-ETH 
0069-18-ZON 
10- 1-18 	2.026 	AO 	LI 
0070-18-ZON 
10- 1-18 	1.141 	R-7.5 	MU 
0073-18-ZON 
10-15-18 	3.695 	LI 	MU 
0085-18-ZON 
12- 3-18 	5.371 	PD-ETH 	PD-ETH 
0086-18-ZON 
12- 3-18 	0.304 	R-7.5 	OTMU-2 
0088-18-ZON 
12-17-18 	9.137 	AO 	LI 
0089-18-ZON 
12-17-18 	3.90 	GB 	MU 
0094-19-ZON 
 1- 7-19 	465.25 	SU 	SU 
0097-19-ZON 
 1-28-19 	0.50 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
0108-19-ZON 
 2-18-19 	0.303 	GB 	OTC 
0125-19-ZON 
 6-17-19 	0.478 	R-7.5 	OTMU1 
0128-19-ZON 
 7-15-19 	0.321 	MF-2 	MU 
0145-19-ZON 
 9- 9-19 	60+/- 	LI, GB, OTC, OTMU2, MF1, PK, PU and AO 	OTC, OTMU2, LI and PU 
0170-19-ZON 
11- 4-19 	10.123 	PD-MU 	PD-MU 
0183-19-ZON 
12-16-19 	126.858 	AO 	PU 
0193-20-ORD 
 2- 3-20 	0.667 	GB 	OTMU2 
0210-20-ZON 
 5- 4-20 	24.120 	PU 	PD-ETH 
0234-20-ZON 
 8- 3-20 	0.52 	R-7.5 	OTMU2 
  
Chapter 17.5 - IH-35E CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Appendix A. Corridor Character Principles 
Appendix B. Design Guidelines 
Appendix C. Illustrative Plans 
Appendix D. Framework Plans 
Appendix E. Process Flow Chart 
Appendix F. Core Sub-District Street Design Standards 
Appendix G. Approved Plant Material List 
Appendix H. IH-35E Corridor Overlay District Boundary 
 
Sec. 17.5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings. For any word, phrase, or term not defined in this chapter, the definitions in the zoning ordinance and land development regulations shall apply. If any definition in this chapter is in conflict with the zoning ordinance or land development regulations, then the definitions in this chapter shall prevail: 
Administrative modification shall mean a requested modification of up to ten percent of any numerical standard established in this chapter, unless a more specific threshold has been established for administrative modifications in this chapter, but shall not include any requested modification to any standards relating to development intensity (height and allowed square footage), density, or uses permitted. 
Alternative standards shall mean a requested modification of more than ten percent of any numerical standard established in this chapter, any modification of a non-numerical standard established in this chapter, or a concept plan which does not comply with appendix D (Framework Plans) but shall not include any requested modification to any standards relating to development intensity (height and allowed square footage), density, or uses permitted. 
Amenity zone shall mean that portion of the public right-of-way in which the property owner is responsible for the placement of sidewalks, trees, if required, and street furnishings in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
Architectural screens shall mean any permanent, semi-opaque screening device that is integrated with the architectural facade design of a building. Architectural screens may use a range of compatible materials including metal or plaster and may use opening patterns with geometric or irregular shapes. 
Art shall mean sculpture, water features, and murals, or paving designs of a unique and attention-getting character. 
Articulation shall mean features that provide architectural detail, differentiation, openings and characteristics. 
Awning shall mean a roof-like cover which may be fixed in place or retractable that is not a permanent integral element of the building to which is attached, projecting from the facade of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements. 
Block perimeter shall mean the sum total dimension of all sides of a block circumscribed by streets/private vehicular routes as measured along the property lines. 
Build-to zone shall mean an area of a specified depth, parallel to and touching a specified lot line or other setback line, within which the building's facade shall be placed. 
Building height shall mean the overall height of a building as measured from natural grade to the tallest projecting element on the building and/or parking structure. 
Canopy shall mean a roof-like structure that is an integral element of a building and extends horizontally more than one foot from the face of a building facade. 
Concept plan shall mean a narrative, complete with illustrations, outlining a proposed project in detail. The concept plan shall show the applicant's intent for the use of the land within the proposed zoning district in a graphic manner, and as may be required, supported by written documentation of proposals. Submittal requirements shall be the same as those outlined for concept plans in the zoning ordinance. 
Corridor District shall mean the IH-35E Corridor Overlay District, as created by this chapter. 
Development shall mean the subdivision of land and/or construction, reconstruction, expansion, structural alteration, conversion, or relocation of any buildings or structures; and any extensions of use of land. Development includes new development and redevelopment. Minor improvements to an existing property or structure, including routine maintenance, aesthetic enhancements, and landscaping enhancements shall be excluded from this definition. 
Driveways shall mean an opening along the curb line at which point vehicles may enter or leave the street/private vehicular route. 
Engineering site plan shall mean the development plans required by the LDR for one or more lots upon which is shown all information required by this chapter and the LDR, sealed by a state-licensed civil engineer. There are specific requirements for engineering site plans in the LDR. An architectural site plan shall not be substituted for an engineering site plan. 
Facade shall mean the portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending from grade to top of the parapet, wall, or eaves and the entire width of the building's elevation but excluding the roof. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction or in directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part of a single facade. Multiple buildings on the same lot will each be deemed to have separate facades. 
Facade rhythm shall mean the repetition of certain elements (windows, doors, columns, etc.) in regular manner along a building's elevation. 
Frontage Road (IH-35E Frontage Road) shall mean roads that run parallel to IH-35E that provide access to abutting landowners and distribute and collect traffic to and from the freeway interchange. 
Graphic representation shall mean any sketch, photograph, or similar representation. 
Ground floor shall mean that portion of a building from street-level finish floor elevation and extended 12-1/2 feet above the street-level finish floor elevation. 
Hardscape shall mean paving materials having architectural design features or patterns and laying flush on the ground level. 
Land development regulations or LDR shall mean the City of Lewisville Land Development Regulations, chapter 6 of the Code of Ordinances, as amended. Also referred to as the general development ordinance (GDO). 
Local street shall mean a street providing the primary means of access to properties which shall generally accommodate low traffic speeds and volumes. 
Masonry shall mean brick, stone, rock, stucco, plaster, cement, or concrete tilt wall installed in accordance with the city's adopted building code. It shall not include EIFS (exterior insulation and finish system), Hardi plank, or materials of similar characteristics. 
Mixed-use shall mean a tract of land, building, or structure which combines residential and nonresidential uses within a single site, building or structure. Mixed-use sites, buildings or structures may consist of two or more uses including but not limited to residential, office, retail, restaurant, civic or entertainment. 
New development shall mean the site preparation and construction of new facilities on property previously undeveloped. 
Open space shall mean an area of land set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use for recreational activities or other amenities, including parks, courtyards, plazas, patios, etc. Open space may be maintained by either the property owner or the city. 
Pad sites shall mean outparcels for individual commercial (usually drive through restaurants) buildings generally surrounded by its own parking and/or driveways within a larger project such as a shopping center. 
Parapet shall mean that portion of a building wall or facade that extends above the roof line of the buildings. 
Parking lot shall mean a paved surface with on-site parking spaces at grade level. 
Parking, off-street or on-site shall mean parking located completely within private property. 
Parking, on-street shall mean parking located completely or partially within a public right-of-way, private vehicular route or street. 
Parking structure shall mean a parking garage located above ground and/or underground consisting of one or more levels but excluding a parking lot. 
Pavers shall mean brick or other man-made masonry units including stamped concrete and asphalt pavers intended for surface paving specifically, though not exclusively, excluding split-faced block, or CMU (concrete masonry units) block. 
Primary entrance shall mean an entrance from a primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route, if a building has frontage along a primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route, or an entrance customarily providing entry to a main lobby, waiting room or foyer, if the building has another street frontage. 
Primary pedestrian streets shall mean those streets labeled as primary pedestrian streets in appendix D that are high quality pedestrian routes, that have a minimum sidewalk width of six feet, offer adequate buffers between moving vehicles and pedestrians, contain a higher level of pedestrian amenities, and link major destinations. 
Principal building shall mean a building, structure or other facility, or a combination thereof, which are designed for or occupied by a principal use. 
Private vehicular route shall mean a way for traffic which functions as a primary pedestrian street, and is situated within a privately owned and maintained cross or joint access easement. 
Public right-of-way (ROW) shall mean any public street, highway, roadway, alley or sidewalk dedicated to and maintained by any public entity. 
Redevelopment shall mean the demolition of all or a portion of existing facilities and the construction of new facilities on the property. 
Reflective glass shall mean glass having a reflectance of greater than ten percent. 
Secondary walkway shall mean a walkway immediately adjacent to a building that is set back from the street by a parking lot. Such a walkway may be parallel to the sidewalk. 
Shared parking shall mean parking that is utilized by buildings or tenants on two or more parcels. 
Sidewalk shall mean a paved surface intended for pedestrians provided immediately adjacent to streets/private vehicular routes, which are open to the public. 
Standards shall mean basic requirements for any development in this chapter. These are in addition to the specific requirements of the LDR. 
Street shall mean a way for traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, boulevard, alley, or however other designated. 
Street furnishings shall mean any elements useful for pedestrian convenience and comfort including but not limited to: pedestrian lights, benches, newspaper racks, trash receptacles, bollards, planters, tree grates, fences, railings, bicycle racks, mailboxes, fountains, kiosks and phones. 
Streetscape or streetscape zone shall mean all elements that are located outside of the travel zone of the street/private vehicular route and may include the amenity zone and sidewalks. 
Travel zone shall mean the portion of the street/private vehicular route dedicated to vehicular traffic, medians, bike lanes and on-street parking. 
TxDOT shall mean the Texas Department of Transportation. 
Utilities shall mean any utilities serving a building on private property or placed in public ROW or public easements. 
Walkway shall mean any pedestrian accommodation that provides internal connectivity within a site. 
Zoning ordinance shall mean chapter 17 of this Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 17.5-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose: This Corridor District is intended to implement the IH-35E Corridor Redevelopment Plan adopted in November 2014 by the Lewisville City Council. The purpose of the Corridor District is to guide new development and redevelopment along the IH-35E corridor by establishing enhanced standards that increase the quality of development and encourage sustainable design while still maintaining the health, safety and welfare of the public. The design regulations included in this Corridor District provide property owners and developers with a clear set of standards that will instruct site planning, architecture, landscaping, streetscapes, and other elements to create a consistent character of development throughout the Corridor District. 
(b)  Geographic limits: The geographic limits of the Corridor District are as shown in the Corridor District Map, attached hereto as Exhibit 1 in section 17.5-3, and as more specifically described in the IH-35E Corridor Overlay District boundary in appendix H. Within the limits of the Corridor District, there are four core sub-districts: Northern Gateway, Main Street, Central, and Southern Gateway, as shown in Exhibits 2—5 in section 17.5-3. All other areas within the Corridor District shall be part of the transition sub-district, as shown in Exhibit 1 in section 17.5-3. 
(c)  Purpose and intent statements: Purpose and intent statements are provided to set out high-level objectives. 
(d)  Standards: Standards are provided to set out quantifiable measures, designed as regulations, to achieve the stated intent and purpose. 
(e)  Graphic representation: All graphic representations within this chapter are illustrative of the described standard only and will not be used for regulation or enforcement of this chapter. The standard noted in text shall prevail over any graphic representation. 
(f)  Applicability: 
(1)  The regulations identified in this chapter shall apply to all properties within the Corridor District. 
(2)  Table 1 illustrates the extent to which different sections of this chapter apply to any proposed new development or redevelopment. 
(3)  The following appendices shall be informational and illustrate the vision for development in the Corridor District: 
a.  Appendix A: Corridor Character Principles; 
b.  Appendix B: Design Principles; 
c.  Appendix C: Core Sub-district Illustrative Plans. 
(4)  The following appendices shall be regulatory and all applications for development shall, as required by Table 1, meet the requirements in: 
a.  Appendix D: Core Sub-district Framework Plans; 
b.  Appendix F: Street Design Standards; 
c.  Appendix G: Planting List. 
(5)  Relationship to the zoning ordinance and land development regulations (LDR): 
a.  All provisions and requirements of the zoning ordinance and LDR apply to development within the Corridor District, except where those provisions and requirements conflict with this chapter, in which case this chapter shall control. 
b.  Standards, requirements and processes that are not addressed in this chapter shall be governed by the zoning ordinance and LDR. 
c.  All planned development district standards approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives shall supersede the standards in this chapter. 
d.  Nothing in this chapter shall change the underlying zoning designation of any property within the Corridor District. 
(6)  All development including the application of the standards contained in this chapter must comply with all applicable laws and regulations including, but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act and Texas Accessibility Standards. 
(g)  Process: Development within the Corridor District shall follow the processes required by the LDR and all other applicable ordinances to the extent they are not in conflict with the standards in this chapter and subject to the following (see appendix E, Process Flow Chart, for graphic representation): 
(1)  Applications. 
a.  Engineering site plans. 
1.  An engineering site plan must be submitted to staff for review for any development which is required to comply with the standards in this chapter, when required by Table 1. 
2.  Staff may approve engineering site plans where developments submitted conform to the requirements of this chapter and all applicable provisions of the LDR. 
b.  Concept plans. 
1.  A concept plan shall be submitted as required by the zoning ordinance. 
2.  For any site that includes an area five acres or greater or is part of a larger project such as an outparcel in a shopping center, a concept plan shall be submitted and approved by staff prior to any engineering site plan approvals. 
i.  This requirement shall not apply if a concept plan has been previously approved as required by a zoning district designation. 
ii.  All concept plans shall be in compliance with the framework plans, outlined in appendix D. 
iii.  A request for approval of a concept plan which does not comply with the framework plans in appendix D shall be considered an application for an alternative standard and shall be handled and reviewed as such. 
(2)  Administrative modifications. 
a.  A request for an administrative modification shall be submitted to staff at the time of submittal of the engineering site plan. Said request may be made on the face of the engineering site plan. 
b.  Administrative modification requests which involve development intensity (height and square footage permitted), density standards, or uses permitted in the Corridor District are considered zoning change requests and will be processed as such under the zoning ordinance. 
c.  Staff review. 
1.  Staff may approve an administrative modification that is being requested for one of the following reasons, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
i.  To accommodate a site specific condition, including but not limited to, topography, vegetation, easements, utilities, existing improvements in good repair; 
ii.  To provide pedestrian, bicycle, or transit improvements; or 
iii.  To accommodate a phased development of a site. 
2.  In no case shall any administrative modification allow: 
i.  An increase in overall allowed intensity, density, height or lot coverage; or 
ii.  A change in permitted uses or mix of uses. 
(3)  Alternative standards. 
a.  A complete application for any alternative standard shall be submitted, in writing, to staff at least four weeks prior to any overlay district board meeting. 
b.  The request shall state fully the grounds for the application and all facts relied upon by the applicant. All supporting exhibits, fees and documents must be included with the application. Incomplete applications will not be processed until all necessary documents are received by staff. 
c.  Alternative standards requests which involve development intensity (height and square footage permitted), density standards, or uses permitted in the Corridor District are considered zoning change requests and will be processed as such under the zoning ordinance. 
d.  Overlay district board review. 
1.  Standard of review. 
i.  When reviewing applications for alternative standards, if the overlay district board finds that hardship or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with the regulations in this chapter and/or the purpose of the regulations in this chapter may be served to a greater extent by alternative standards, it may approve or recommend exceptions to the Corridor District regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such exception shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the regulations in this chapter. 
ii.  The board may refer to the IH-35E Corridor Redevelopment Plan and the appendices hereto in determining the intent and purpose of the regulations in this chapter. Issues the overlay district board may consider in making their findings include, but are not limited to the following: 
A.  Whether strict compliance would impair the architectural design or creativity of the project; 
B.  Whether strict compliance would create an unnecessary hardship or a practical difficulty which is unique to the development and is not self-imposed; 
C.  Whether an alternative standard is necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding developed properties while still meeting the vision for the Corridor District; or 
D.  Whether the proposed development is an addition to an existing facility that does not meet the requirements of the Corridor District but meets the intent of this chapter. 
2.  Authority. 
i.  Final authority. 
A.  The overlay district board shall have the authority to make a final decision to approve or deny applications for alternative standards which are: 
I.  Modifications of more than ten percent but less than 25 percent of a numerical standard pertaining to landscaping or building materials and modifications of more than ten percent but less than 60 percent of any other numerical standard established in this chapter; or 
II.  Concept plans which do not comply with the framework plans outlined in appendix D. 
B.  An applicant wishing to appeal the board's decision shall submit a request to the director of planning in writing 30 days after receipt of notification of the board's decision. Otherwise, the decision is final and nonappealable. 
ii.  Recommendations to the city council. The overlay district board shall review and make a recommendation to the city council regarding: 
A.  Applications for alternative standards which are modifications of 25 percent or more of any numerical standard pertaining to landscaping or building materials and modifications of 60 percent or more of any other numerical standard established in this chapter; or 
B.  Applications for alternative standards which are modifications of non-numerical standards established in this chapter, except where otherwise noted in this chapter. 
e.  City council review. 
1.  When reviewing applications for alternative standards, the city council shall use the standards outlined in the above subsection 17.5-2(g)(3)d.1. 
2.  Authority. 
i.  Alternative standards: The city council shall receive recommendations from the overlay district board regarding and shall make a final decision to approve or deny: 
A.  Applications for alternative standards which are modifications of 25 percent or more of any numerical standard pertaining to landscaping or building materials and modifications of 60 percent or more of any other numerical standard established in this chapter; and 
B.  Applications for alternative standards which are modifications of non-numerical standards established in this chapter, except where otherwise noted in any section of this chapter. 
ii.  Appeals: The city council may hear and decide appeals of final decisions made by the overlay district board. 
(4)  Variances from the land development regulations. 
a.  A variance from the regulations of the LDR for a property within the Corridor District, including a variance requested on the face of a plat or engineering site plan, shall be submitted to staff at least four weeks prior to any overlay district board meeting. 
b.  The city council shall receive recommendations from the overlay district board regarding and shall make a final decision to approve or deny any variance requested from the requirements of the LDR for a property within the Corridor District. 
c.  When reviewing variance requests, the board and the city council shall use the standards outlined for reviewing variances in subsection 6-31(a) of the LDR. 
(5)  Fees. An administrative fee for processing alternative standards requests and variance requests are applicable for all requests in an amount as set forth in the city's fee ordinance (section 2-201). 
Table 1. Applicability Matrix 
Regulations ? 	Building and Envelope
Regulations 	Architectural Regulations 	Landscape Regulations 	Street and Streetscape
Regulations	  
Development
Application/Request 	Placement 	Orientation 	Blocks/Lots 	Height 	Driveways 	Ped-
Circulation 	Parking 	Articulation 	Facades 	Materials/Colors 	Awnings/Canopies 	Windows 	Parking Structures 	Tree/Plant Materials 	Hardscaping 	Open Space 	General 	New or Existing Streets 	Sidewalks 	Trails 	Street/Ped Lighting 	Street Furnishings 	Screening of Service
Areas and Utilities 
(a) New Development* 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 
(b) Change of use/expansion of existing use (with NO increase in building area) (new use shall comply with the underlying zoning district)** 							¦ 																
(c) Interior remodel with no change of use, no change in any Street facing Facade, no increase of any existing nonconformity and no increase of building area 																							
(d) Facade changes to existing buildings (regardless of value of improvements proposed) 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
 (1) Addition of non-air conditioned space such as patios, porches, arcades, canopies, and outdoor seating areas (shall be permitted so long as no existing nonconformity is increased)** 	¦ 	¦ 				¦ 	¦ 				¦ 												
 (2) Changes to any Street facing Facades (Standards in the specific section shall apply)** 								¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 		¦ 									¦ 
(e) Expansion of Building Area 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
 (1) 0% - 49% increase in building area regardless of value of improvements (Standards in applicable sections shall apply only to the expansions)* 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 		¦ 	¦ 		¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 
 (2) 50% or greater increase in building area BUT less than both: 
 a. 50% increase in value of improvements, and 
 b. Total proposed improvements valued at $100,000.00 
  (Standards in applicable sections shall apply only to the expansions)* 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 		¦ 	¦ 		¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 
 (3) 50% or greater increase of building area AND more than either: 
 a. 50% increase in value of improvements or 
 b. Any proposed improvements valued at $100,000.00 
   (Standards in applicable sections shall apply to the entire site, including retrofitting of the existing building and site).* 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 		¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 	¦ 
(f) Expansion of Parking Lot only (not in conjunction with a building or use expansion) 	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
 (1) Up to 10 additional spaces (shall not be placed in any area that increases any existing nonconformity)** 					¦ 		¦ 							¦ 									
 (2) 11 or more additional spaces (shall not be placed in a manner that increases any existing nonconformity)* 					¦ 	¦ 	¦ 							¦ 	¦ 								
 
* Engineering site plan shall be required. 
** Engineering site plan may be required based on the extent of proposed improvements. 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 17.5-3. - Corridor district map. 
Exhibit 1. Corridor District Map 
 
Exhibit 2. Northern Gateway Sub-District Map 
 
Exhibit 3. Main Street Sub-District Map 
 
Exhibit 4. Central Sub-District Map 
 
Exhibit 5. Southern Gateway Sub-District Map 
 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 17.5-4. - Core sub-district regulations. 
(a)  Purpose, intent and applicability: 
(1)  Purpose and intent: The vision for the core sub-districts is to create a series of vibrant, districts with a mix of uses at different strategic locations along the Corridor District by: 
a.  Focusing on creating a pedestrian-oriented, more walkable environment along identified primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route frontages (as illustrated in the framework plans, appendix D); 
b.  Creating memorable destinations that both capitalize on existing strengths while tying nodes of activity together; 
c.  Creating regional gateways which are enhanced with a range of uses including living, working, and green spaces; and 
d  Encouraging higher densities with a vibrant mix of uses that leverage expanded transportation options, allow higher land utilization, and provide a higher tax base. 
(2)  Applicability: The regulations in this section, as illustrated in Table 1, apply to any property within the core sub-districts as shown on Exhibits 1—5 in section 17.5-3. 
(b)  Building and envelope standards: These standards establish where the building should be placed on the property with respect to setbacks and build-to lines, the orientation of a building's facades, alignment of new streets/private vehicular routes and blocks, height of buildings, driveways and parking, and pedestrian accommodations on the site. 
(1)  Building placement: 
a.  Building fronts and sides shall be placed parallel to adjacent streets/private vehicular routes to the extent practical with the highest priority placed on the front facade of the building. 
b.  Build-to zones and building setbacks shall be measured from the property line and shall be provided in accordance with the requirements in Table 2 below. 
c.  The building frontage build-out shall be in accordance with the requirements in Table 2 below. The building frontage build-out is the length of the portion of the principal building and/or parking structure which shall be located within the required build-to zone, as a percentage of the total width of the lot line. 
d.  At intersections, buildings shall have a minimum of at least 25 feet of building frontage build-out along both streets. 
e.  Canopies, signs, awnings and balconies may encroach over walkways or over a build-to zone area as long as the vertical clearance is a minimum of nine feet. In no case shall an awning or canopy encroach over a driveway or fire lane. 
f.  Specific standard for administrative modification: For properties fronting the IH-35E Frontage Road and arterial roadways, an administrative modification may be requested to allow an 80-foot maximum build-to zone to allow for a single drive aisle with parking between street and principal building as long as the building placement otherwise meets the standard in subsection (b) above. 
 
 
Ground floor storefront is built to the property line, defining the Street edge. 
 
Table 2. Building Placement and Frontage Build-Out Standards 
  	Build-to Zones 	Building Frontage Build-Out (min.) 	Off-Street Parking Permitted Between Building and Street 
	Minimum (feet) 	Maximum (feet) 		
Front (by Street Type) 				
 Primary Pedestrian Street/Private Vehicular Route 	0 	10 	80% 	No 
 IH-35E Frontage Road 	10 	80* 	0%# 	Yes* 
 Arterial roadway 	10 	80* 	0%# 	Yes* 
 Collector or Local Street (2—4 Lanes) 	10 	80 	None Req'd 	Yes 
 Other or Alley 	10 	None 	None Req'd 	Yes 
Side (interior) 	0** 	None 		
Rear (non-alley) 	0** 	None 		
* Through Administrative Modification 
** There shall be no minimum setback unless the building is adjacent to single family residential uses that are outside the Corridor District, in which case the minimum setback shall be 20 feet. 
#  If the site only has only one Street frontage (IH-35E Frontage Road or arterial roadway), then the longer side of the building shall be placed parallel to the Street. 
 
 
Image showing Build-To Zones 
(2)  Building orientation: 
a.  Primary entrances: 
1.  All primary entrances to a building shall be oriented towards a primary pedestrian street/private vehicular routes. 
2.  If the building does not have frontage on a primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route, the primary entrances shall be oriented toward open space, parks, and other significant spaces, where available. A building may have a secondary entrance from a parking lot or other street. 
3.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested for buildings that do not have frontage on a primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route, open space, park, or other significant space. 
b.  Where a building is located along a primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route, the front of the building shall be oriented towards the primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route. 
c.  Off-street parking shall not be located between any building and any street/private vehicular route unless permitted per Table 2 above. 
 
 
Front Facades of buildings shall be oriented towards a Primary Pedestrian Street, parks, Open Space, and other significant spaces, where available. 
 
(3)  Blocks and lots: 
a.  All blocks shall provide service and parking access along an alley or service drive. 
b.  The maximum block perimeter shall be 1,600 feet unless the engineering site plan or concept plan follows the street network as established by the framework plans (appendix D). 
c.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to allow for a 20 percent increase to the maximum block perimeter requirement. 
d.  Block faces that are 600 feet in length or greater shall provide pedestrian access through the block at an approximate mid-block distance, in order to allow pedestrians to walk through the blocks to the opposite side without having to walk along the block perimeter. 
(4)  Building height: 
a.  The minimum building height of a building or parking structure shall be 20 feet. 
b.  Minimum interior ground floor height shall be 12 feet (clear). 
(5)  Driveways: 
a.  All vehicular entrances shall be located off of a local street or an alley. Driveways for service vehicles shall be via alleys or parking lots. If a property has no access to a local street or an alley, driveways may be permitted along other streets with the exception of primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular route. 
b.  Cross or joint access easements: 
1.  Cross or joint access easements shall be required for all developments unless grade and topography make such cross access unfeasible. 
2.  Cross or joint access easements shall be designated at the time of development in anticipation of future direct or indirect access. 
c.  Driveway access may be permitted along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes only if the property has no direct or indirect access (via a cross or joint access easement through an adjoining property) to any other street. Such a driveway access along a primary pedestrian street shall be a maximum of 24 feet wide with a 20-foot radius and be deemed temporary and shall be closed when alternative direct or indirect access is provided to the property. 
d.  For lots fronting the IH-35E Frontage Road and state highways, driveways shall adhere to the access management policy in the LDR. For all other lots, driveways shall comply with the LDR, except that all driveways shall be a maximum of 30 feet wide with a 20-foot radius. 
e.  Sharing and consolidation of driveways is encouraged in order to reduce the number of curb cuts to ensure smoother, more organized traffic movements and less disruption of pedestrian movement. 
f.  Except where otherwise required by the access management policy in the LDR, curb cuts (driveway openings) shall: 
1.  Be a minimum of 300 feet apart from any other curb cut or street/private vehicular route intersection; and 
2.  Not interrupt the paving material of the sidewalk with another material. Sidewalk paving shall be continuous across the driveway. 
g.  Driveway entrances into multi-building commercial properties along the IH-35E Frontage Road and all arterial roadways shall be enhanced with the addition of signs, accent paving, special landscaping and/or lighting. Design elements shall not be located within any required visibility easements or clear vision areas. 
 
Image showing acceptable Driveway locations 
(6)  Pedestrian circulation: 
a.  Sidewalks: 
1.  Sidewalks for separate and continuous pedestrian circulation shall be provided along all streets/private vehicular routes. 
b.  Walkways: 
1.  Walkways shall be no less than six feet in width. 
2.  Walkway connections shall be required: 
i.  Between any existing or future sidewalk, trails, parks or greenways and primary entrances of all buildings on the site; 
ii.  From building entrances to all on-site facilities, such as parking lots, bicycle facilities, and open space; 
iii.  Up to the property line in a manner which will allow walkway connections between adjoining properties and buildings; and 
iv.  To connect to any public transit stop that is adjacent to a site. 
3.  Walkways shall be distinguished from any driving surfaces through the use of colored pavements, bollards, grade changes, pavement markings or combination of treatments, especially when walkways cross or are adjacent to vehicular circulation areas. 
c.  Parking: 
1.  Parking lots and parking structures shall clearly mark walkways between parked vehicles and primary entrances through the use of clearly marked stop signs, wayfinding/directional signage, lighting, and other similar measures. 
2.  Parking stalls shall not overhang onto any walkway, sidewalk or landscape area and shall require wheel stops or an increase in the minimum walkway, sidewalk or landscape area of at least the depth of the overhang. 
(7)  Off-street parking: 
a.  Parking lots shall be located behind or along the side of buildings. In no case shall parking be permitted within the required build-to zone with the exception of properties with frontage along the IH-35E Frontage Road, as specifically permitted by this section. Parking lots may be located adjacent to existing single-family residential uses located outside of the Corridor District if they meet the following standards: 
1.  Parking is set back a minimum of ten feet from the single-family residential property line, and 
2.  A masonry, vegetation or combined screening device that is at least six feet in height shall be located at the property line along the single-family residential use. 
b.  On-site parking shall be provided in accordance with the following parking requirements: 
1.  Non-residential uses: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Residential uses: one and one-half spaces per residential unit. 
3.  Mixed-uses: use ratios above to calculate required spaces based on composition of the uses on the property. 
c.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to allow credit for available public parking or shared off-street parking on another lot within 1,000 feet of the subject property to apply towards on-site parking requirements. 
d.  Centralized parking locations throughout the core sub-districts that permit people to park at convenient locations with ample parking to access multiple uses are encouraged, but not required. 
e.  Shared parking lots shall be connected to businesses with paved and landscaped walkways per subsection 17.5-4(b)(6), above. 
f.  Shared parking agreements shall be submitted for review with the engineering site plan and recorded with Denton County. 
(8)  On-street parking is required within the core sub-districts along all primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes, and encouraged, but not required, on collector and local streets. 
(c)  Architectural standards: These standards apply to the exterior architectural treatments within the core sub-districts. External architectural treatments include building articulations, facade composition, exterior materials and colors, windows and doors, and awnings and canopies. These standards apply to commercial, mixed-use, and multifamily buildings in addition to special standards for parking structures. Buildings are the largest impact on the visual appeal of the core sub-districts and have the opportunity to set a high standard for the entire Corridor District. 
(1)  Building articulation and facades: 
a.  Building facades visible from any street/private vehicular route (except alleys) or open space shall provide horizontal and vertical articulation with a facade rhythm between 20 and 30 feet. The facade rhythm may be expressed by any of the following: 
1.  A change in a building's horizontal and/or vertical plane; 
2.  Stepping portions of facades in and out; 
3.  Utilizing balconies, columns or pilasters that are distinctively set out from the facade; or 
4.  Changing types or colors of materials in combination with other techniques. 
b.  Each building facade visible from any street/private vehicular route or public open space shall provide architectural variety and scale through the use of elements including, but not limited to at least three of the following: 
1.  Expression lines denoting the base, middle, and top of a building; 
2.  Repetition in patterns of window, door or other openings or architectural elements; 
3.  Change in color; 
4.  Change in texture; 
5.  Change in material module or pattern; or 
6.  Art or ornament constructed as part of the building. 
c.  A minimum of 25 percent of above-grade residential units adjacent to a street/private vehicular route or public open space shall have balconies that extend a minimum of five feet beyond the face of the facade. Balconies may extend over the sidewalk area provided they maintain a minimum of ten feet of clearance above the sidewalk and do not substantially interfere with tree growth. 
d.  All buildings with more than one street frontage shall treat all street-fronting facades with equal design attention. 
e.  All building facades along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes and facades immediately adjacent to a sidewalk at-grade shall have: 
1.  A minimum of 40 percent of the ground floor facade comprised of windows and doors, except that buildings with retail or restaurant uses on the ground floor shall have a minimum of 60 percent and a maximum of 80 percent of the ground floor facade comprised of windows; and 
2.  Entries covered with awnings, canopies, or inset behind the front facade a minimum of six feet. A door shall not be permitted to swing into a public right-of-way or minimum sidewalk area. 
3.  Upper floors of all facades facing primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes shall have windows for a minimum of 25 percent and maximum of 60 percent of the upper floor facade area. 
(2)  Building entrances: 
a.  Primary entrances for single-tenant building entries shall be emphasized with dramatic architectural elements such as horizontal and vertical articulations with canopies, tower elements, recessed entries, pilasters, changes in height or materials, enhanced lighting, etc. 
b.  Primary entrances for multi-tenant buildings shall be emphasized through such design devices as awnings, differentiation in material and/or color, and/or building signage. 
c.  A minimum of one entrance shall be required for every 60 feet of multi-tenant storefront along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes. 
d.  For mixed-use buildings with residential units, one or more separate building entrances from the sidewalk shall be used to provide access to the residential units. 
 
 
Ground floor commercial businesses are differentiated using vertical breaks and changes in building color and materials while maintaining an overall design theme. 
 
(3)  Facade materials and colors: 
a.  Facade materials: Each exterior wall (except window and door area) of a building or parking structure shall comply with the following material requirements: 
1.  Eighty percent or more of each exterior wall shall be comprised of brick or stone. The remainder of each exterior wall may be comprised of either three-step stucco (EIFS shall only be allowed at locations nine feet above grade), architectural metal, cladding or panels, or a combination thereof. 
2.  Accent materials may be comprised of pre-cast stone, metal, or other architectural materials. 
b.  Colors: At least two main colors, and no more than three colors, shall be used on each elevation. Eighty percent of each elevation must utilize natural and/or earth tone colors, and each elevation must have 20 percent of another type of color. Buildings shall not have colors that are fluorescent or bright (e.g., yellow, green, purple) visible from any public space or street/private vehicular route. This shall include service doors, down spouts, utility boxes, panels and other similar features integral to the principal building. 
 
 
Buildings materials as well as architectural details and finishes convey a sense of permanence. Quality materials shall be used to withstand the test of time regardless of architectural style. 
 
(4)  Awnings and canopies: 
a.  All non-residential uses adjacent to the sidewalk at-grade along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes shall have an awning or canopy which extends beyond the face of the building over the adjacent sidewalk for a minimum of 75 percent along the building's sidewalk frontage. 
b.  Awnings or canopies on any building shall be constructed of metal or canvas. Reflective materials for finishes are prohibited. 
c.  An awning or canopy shall be located as to provide shading for exterior windows and doors and shall cover the entire width of the window opening or group of windows over which it is installed. 
d.  Awnings and canopies may encroach over sidewalks up to 50 percent of the width of the sidewalk or five feet, whichever is greater. They shall maintain a minimum nine-foot vertical clearance as measured between the bottom of the awning/canopy and the finished grade of the sidewalk. In no case shall an awning or canopy encroach over the travel zone. 
 
 
Awnings should fit into the storefront's overall architecture and appearance. Awnings provide protection and cover from bright sunlight and inclement weather. 
 
(5)  Windows: 
a.  Window framing materials shall consist of anodized aluminum, vinyl or steel. 
b.  For required windows at the ground floor along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes, a minimum 60 percent visible light transmittance shall be required. 
1.  Specific standard and findings for administrative modification: For windows along street frontages other than primary pedestrian streets, a visible light transmittance less than 60 percent may be allowed with an administrative modification if a finding is made by staff that an administrative modification is necessary in order for the windows to satisfy building code requirements related to energy efficiency. 
c.  Mirrored glass is prohibited. 
d.  Reflective glass is prohibited on ground floors along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes. Excluding ground floors along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes, no more than 50 percent of any facade may be reflective glass. 
e.  Window screens are prohibited on non-residential ground floors. 
f.  Horizontal groupings of windows are not to exceed five per grouping, where groupings are separated by a mullion, column, or wall section a minimum of seven inches wide. 
g.  Windows shall be a minimum of 30 inches from building corners, unless separated by a corner mullion or column twice the width used in grouping. 
h.  For storefronts along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes, the following are prohibited: 
1.  Single pane glass windows; 
2.  Black glass, opaque glass, and other "false window" techniques; 
3.  Doors with no opacity; and 
4.  Windows which do not permit unobstructed views into the building. 
 
Windows should maximize visibility to the Street on the Ground Floor. Ensure that commercial Ground Floor uses provide clear unobstructed windows, free of reflective coatings. 
 
(6)  Parking structures: 
a.  Parking structures shall have a facade design with the same colors and materials as the building the parking structure services. If the parking structure serves multiple buildings, it shall have a facade design with the same colors and materials as surrounding buildings along the street front. Parking structures shall be located behind buildings to minimize their visibility from adjacent streets/private vehicular routes. 
b.  Parking structures shall not be located with ground floor frontage along any primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route. 
c.  Where a parking structure is located adjacent to a street which is not a primary pedestrian street: 
1.  Parking structure facades shall be designed with both vertical articulation such as changes in planes, columns, pilasters, etc. at least every 40 linear feet, and horizontal articulation aligning with horizontal elements along the block. 
2.  The parking structure shall be designed and screened in such a way that motor vehicles on all parking levels are hidden from view from all adjacent streets. Parking structure ramps shall not be visible from any street. Ramps shall not be located on the perimeter of the parking structure. Architectural screens shall be used to articulate the facade, hide parked vehicles, and shield the lighting inside the structure. 
  Parking Structures shall be located behind buildings to minimize their visibility from adjacent Streets.  	  Parking Structures shall have a Facade design similar to surrounding buildings along the Street front.  
 
(d)  Landscape standards: These standards apply to new trees and shrubs, hardscape and open space treatments, screening of service, parking and utilitarian uses, and parking lot landscaping within the core sub-districts. Landscaping can reduce the urban heat island effect, soften the built environment and contribute to pedestrian comfort in addition to increasing property values and rents. 
(1)  Trees and plant materials: 
a.  Plantings shall be balanced symmetrically across streets/private vehicular routes or driveways. 
b.  Trees and plant materials shall be selected by the landscape architect or designer designing the landscape plan from the approved plant material list in appendix G. No artificial trees, shrubs, ground covers, turf, or seasonal colors are permitted. 
1.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to use other species that are drought-tolerant and adaptive. 
c.  Irrigation systems shall be provided within the amenity zone and shall be installed and maintained by the developer or property owner per current parks and recreation department standards. 
d.  Canopy trees shall be: 
1.  Planted within the required amenity zone; 
2.  Planted along primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes at an average spacing of 30 feet on center, but in no case placed more than 40 feet apart on center; 
3.  Planted along all other streets (excluding alleys) at an average spacing of 40 feet on center; and 
4.  A minimum 2-1/2-inch caliper and at least ten feet in height with a single trunk at planting. 
e.  Tree preservation and landscape maintenance shall comply with the provisions in the LDR. 
f.  Parking lots with frontage on IH-35E shall provide a minimum ten-foot wide landscape area between the public ROW and parking lot. Canopy trees shall be placed at an average spacing of 40 feet, but in no case shall trees be placed greater than 50 feet apart. A solid evergreen shrubbery hedge with a minimum 24-inch height at the time of planting shall also be planted in a manner which will screen the view of parked vehicles from the street. 
1.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to allow any of the following (minimum height of 36 inches) as a parking lot screen: 
i.  Retaining wall; 
ii.  Berming; or 
iii.  A combination of retaining wall, berming, and/or evergreen screening hedge. 
g.  Parking Lots along all other street/private vehicular route frontages (except alleys) shall use one or both of the following screening methods: 
1.  A minimum five-foot wide landscape area between the sidewalk and parking lot, with a solid evergreen shrubbery hedge with a minimum height of 24 inches at the time of planting planted within the landscape area in a manner which will screen the view of parked vehicles from the roadway; or 
2.  A masonry (brick or stone) wall a minimum of 36 inches in height installed between the sidewalk and the parking lot, placed such that a minimum two-foot parking space overhang is provided on the parking lot side of the wall, and wheel stops are provided for the parking spaces. 
h.  All parking lots shall include the following landscaping elements: 
1.  Each row of parking shall be configured so that there is a minimum ten-foot wide landscape island with a minimum of 50 percent plant cover every eight parking spaces. A landscape island shall be required on the end of each row of parking. 
2.  Each parking lot shall include canopy trees at a ratio of one tree per eight parking spaces. 
(2)  Hardscaping: 
a.  All hardscaping materials shall be of earth tones or colors found on the facade of the principal building. 
b.  Walkway paving shall be comprised of the following materials or a combination thereof: 
1.  Concrete; 
2.  Pavers; or 
3.  Stamped concrete or asphalt. 
(3)  Open spaces: 
a.  Open spaces shall be provided on developments that incorporate five acres or more. 
1.  If the open space provided is not publicly accessible, the minimum set aside for open space shall be 15 percent of the development. The open space shall be centrally located and easily accessible to all individuals it is expected to serve. 
2.  If the open space provided is publicly accessible, the minimum set aside for the open space shall be eight percent of the development. The open space shall be highly visible from the public ROW and accessible to the general public. 
3.  If the proposed development is impacted by any open space as identified in the framework plan, then the location of the open space shall comply with the framework plan. 
4.  The engineering site plan or concept plan shall demonstrate how the open space requirement is being satisfied for an entire development being considered. For phased developments, a plan may be approved if at least 50 percent of the required open space is constructed within the first phase of the project, with the remaining required open space being provided for in subsequent phases. 
b.  Developments that incorporate less than five acres may, but are not required to, incorporate open spaces for the use of employees or the public. 
c.  Private open spaces may be fenced or otherwise controlled for secure access using wrought iron, masonry, or comparable decorative fencing, or vegetative screening. 
d.  Parking, driveway, or rear setback areas may not be used as publicly accessible open space, but publicly accessible open space may include front and side setback areas provided that they are integrated into the overall design of the project. Publicly accessible open space shall have street frontage for a minimum of 25 percent of the perimeter of the open space. 
e.  A combination of landscape and hardscape materials shall be used in the design of the open space. Open space shall be landscaped with trees, as well as turf, shrubs, or groundcover. All plant materials shall be permanently maintained and irrigated and shall be chosen from appendix G. 
1.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to use other species that are drought-tolerant and adaptive. 
f.  In order to achieve a comfortable human scale within open spaces and ensure sunlight and air circulation, the following minimum height to width ratios are required for open spaces required by this section: 
1.  Enclosed open space (i.e., open space that is enclosed on four sides, such as a courtyard), 2:1 ratio. The required open space shall have a width of at least one-half the height of the adjacent building facade (measured perpendicularly from the facade). This requirement shall apply to all sides of the required open space. 
2.  Open space that is open on one or more sides, 3:1 ratio. The required open space shall have a width of at least one-third the height of the adjacent building facade (measured perpendicularly from the facade). This requirement shall apply to all sides of the required open space. 
 
 
Open Spaces should encourage diverse opportunities for social activities, provide relief and relaxation, expand and reinforce the public realm, and facilitate livability. 
 
(e)  Street and streetscape standards: These standards provide for design of new and improved streets and private vehicular routes, as well as the treatment of areas between the curb and the private property line and street medians, if any, including the placement and installation of trees, sidewalk paving, street furnishings, lighting, and other amenities for pedestrians. 
(1)  General street standards: Streets/private vehicular routes shall be built or improved in accordance with this section, appendix F and the construction standards of the city. The city shall have the ultimate approval authority on streetscaping on streets and may establish standards by ordinance for different street types and conditions. Unless otherwise provided herein, all right-of-way dedication and construction for streets (existing and new) shall be in accordance with the LDR. 
(2)  Street design standards: Streets shall include a travel zone and a streetscape zone per appendix F. 
(3)  Private vehicular routes: Private vehicular routes shall be allowed within existing developed properties in lieu of required primary pedestrian streets designated on the framework plans in exhibit D where existing drives at those locations currently provide internal vehicular circulation. Private vehicular routes shall meet all standards for new streets and design requirements for primary pedestrian streets in Exhibit F. 
a.  Administrative modification: Private vehicular routes may be requested in all other locations in lieu of primary pedestrian streets designated on the framework plans in appendix D with a concept plan. 
(4)  Existing streets: The framework plan in appendix D depicts existing streets, and primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes within the Corridor District. At such time when properties adjacent to existing streets develop, and/or redevelop, the property owner shall, for the length of street frontage of the property, dedicate to the city sufficient public right-of-way (or equivalent) to accommodate the required street and streetscape improvements, in accordance with provisions in the LDR and any other applicable ordinances. Where the property does not include a private vehicular route or adjoin a primary pedestrian street, a minimum of one block face per existing block of the improved portion of the property shall be designated as a primary pedestrian street as dictated by existing conditions of surrounding property. 
a.  Specific standard for administrative modifications: The street design standards in appendix F may be adjusted through an administrative modification if staff finds that such an adjustment is necessary in order to fit existing and future utility locations, existing landscaping and development, or the International Fire Code as adopted by the city. 
b.  In addition to the requirements of the LDR, the applicant shall be responsible for improvements outside of the travel zone in the public right-of-way or private vehicular route or as per any approved agreement with the city. 
1.  Fee-in-lieu option: An applicant may opt to pay a proportional fee in lieu of the required streetscape improvements between the curb and the property line if the development is phased or the sidewalk improvements need to match the timing of a programmed city capital project affecting that street frontage. This fee will be proportional to the linear street frontage along the subject property. The fee shall be calculated based on construction cost estimates provided to the city for review. Payments shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit or site permit for the development. 
 
 
Illustrations delineating the Streetscape Zone elements and Optional Landscaping along Building Fronts 
 
(5)  New streets: 
a.  Any new street shall: 
1.  Meet the block perimeter maximums established in this section; 
2.  Continue any established street and block pattern on adjoining sites developed or redeveloped under this chapter; 
3.  Be designed in accordance with the street design standards in appendix F; and 
4.  Designate primary pedestrian streets in compliance with the framework plans in appendix D. 
b.  For any new street, the property owner shall construct the entire street section including travel lanes, on-street parking, amenity zone including irrigation system, and sidewalk improvements. Half streets may be provided where necessary to comply with the LDR. 
c.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all right-of-way dedication and construction for streets (existing and new) shall be in accordance with the LDR. 
(6)  Streetscape zone: 
a.  Primary pedestrian streets: The streetscape zone along new or existing primary pedestrian streets/private vehicular routes shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. Of this streetscape zone, a minimum of six feet shall be designated for a clear sidewalk and six feet for the amenity zone. 
b.  All other streets: The streetscape zone shall be a minimum of eight feet in width. Of this streetscape zone, a minimum of four feet shall be designated for a clear sidewalk and four feet for the amenity zone unless a greater width is specified in the LDR or the street design standards provided in appendix F. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be located adjacent to the amenity zone and shall comply with the requirements as outlined in this section and appendix F. The sidewalk must be unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent element for a minimum height of nine feet. Accessibility is required to connect sidewalks on adjacent sites. 
d.  Enhanced sidewalks shall be required where recommended in the Lewisville Trails Master Plan. 
e.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or pavers and may be embellished with earth tones or the same colors and patterns found on the adjacent facade(s). 
 
 
 
 
Buildings within the Core Sub-district shall be located adjacent to the Sidewalk. 
 
(7)  Trails: 
a.  Trails shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most recently adopted Lewisville Trails Master Plan. 
b.  Any conflicts between the trail requirements and the sidewalk requirements herein should be resolved with staff prior to submitting an engineering site plan or concept plan. 
(8)  Street and pedestrian lighting: 
a.  General: 
1.  All types of exterior lighting shall comply with section 9-3 of the city Code, as amended. 
2.  All lighting shall be directed downward. 
i.  Specific standard for administrative modification: Up-lighting of building walls may be approved with an administrative modification. 
3.  Lighting of signage, parking and walkways is to be controlled or narrowly focused. 
4.  Placement and shielding of light sources shall be done to limit visual impact. Full cut-off metal fixtures are required. 
5.  Distracting, flashing, traveling or animated lighting shall not be permitted with the exception of lights associated with seasonal displays. 
b.  Street lighting: Pedestrian-scaled street lighting shall be provided along all sidewalks and walkways as follows: 
1.  Maximum height of the light pole shall be 15 feet. 
2.  Street lights shall be placed at 40 feet on center, approximately two feet behind the curb line. 
3.  The light standard selected shall be used consistently within an approved concept plan area. 
c.  Exterior building lighting: 
1.  Building lighting shall accentuate important architectural components of the building, such as entries, towers or roof elements, or repetitive columns or bays. 
2.  Building lighting shall provide indirect or direct lighting for adjoining sidewalks and open spaces. 
3.  Equipment and lighting fixtures shall be weather-resistant. 
4.  Lighting fixtures shall include directional shields so as to prevent viewing of the light source. 
5.  Building lighting shall be limited to decorative lighting. Standard pack lights may not be attached on buildings except within loading and service areas. 
6.  LED, halogen, metal halide, incandescent, and compact fluorescent lighting are permitted for exterior lighting. 
7.  High-intensity discharge (HID) lights are prohibited. 
8.  Specific Standard for administrative modification: Neon lighting may be permitted subject to approval of an administrative modification. 
d.  Landscape lighting: Landscape lighting may be used to highlight landscape elements, building entries and other important architectural features and accent elements such as fountains and sculptures. 
(9)  Pedestrian amenities: 
a.  Street furnishings shall be located fully within the amenity zone. In addition to trees and lighting, an applicant shall provide all of the required street furnishing elements and at least two of the optional street furnishing elements. Street furnishings shall be required within the amenity zone along each block face of a primary pedestrian street/private vehicular route. Street furnishings shall be optional along all other streets. Street furnishings within any public right-of-way shall be maintained by the adjacent property owner. 
b.  Required street furnishings: 
1.  Trash receptacles: shall be constructed of metal (steel or aluminum) with a black polyester powder coat finish and a side opening. Trash receptacles shall be approximately 25 inches in diameter and 34 inches high, with an approximate 28-gallon capacity. They shall be placed at a frequency of two per every 500 linear feet of block frontage. 
2.  Bike racks: shall provide at least one bike rack accommodating a minimum of six bicycles per 400 linear feet of block face. An area of two feet by six feet must be provided for each bicycle parking space in order that a bicycle six feet long can be securely held in place with its frame supported by the rack. A bicycle must be able to be placed in the rack in an upright manner that will not damage its wheels or components. The individual floor-mounted, "inverted-U" style or "staple" style rack is recommended, but not required. 
c.  Optional street furnishings: 
1.  Planters: If provided, planters shall be constructed of natural grey concrete/sandstone or beige/light tan precast concrete/cast stone, with a drainage hole for irrigation, and shall be of a round tapered shape. Planters may be circular (24 inches - 42 inches in diameter) or square/rectangular (24 inches - 48 inches wide) with a height between 24 and 36 inches. A minimum of two planters shall be placed for every 200 linear feet of block frontage. Planters shall be irrigated and maintained with landscaping in a healthy growing condition at all times. 
2.  Benches: If provided, benches shall be constructed of metal (steel or aluminum) with a black polyester powder coat finish. Bench seats shall have two-seat configurations, with no more than three sets of seats. Seating surfaces shall be 16 to 18 inches high with a minimum depth of 16 inches for seats without backs and 14 inches for seats with backs. They shall be placed at a frequency of one per every 40 linear feet of block frontage. 
3.  Bollards: If used, bollards shall be constructed of metal (steel or aluminum) with a black polyester powder coat. Bollards may have a maximum height of 36 inches and a maximum diameter of nine inches. Bollards shall be placed at a regular spacing of four to six feet on center. 
4.  Tree grates: If used, they shall be placed around the trees and be manufactured of cast iron with a baked oil finish, and shall be six feet by six feet square, with maximum one-half-inch square openings. 
5.  Specific standard for administrative modification: Other optional street furnishing elements such as art, water features, water fountains, newspaper racks, etc., may be proposed and approved through administrative modifications. 
(f)  Screening of service areas and utilities: These standards provide for the screening of service and loading areas, roof- or ground-mounted utility equipment and similar uses on the site. 
(1)  General provisions: Loading and outdoor storage areas, ground-mounted equipment, roof-mounted equipment, outdoor receptacles and utility accessories shall be screened to reduce the visual impact of these elements on adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. All screening walls shall be measured at the highest finished grade and designed by a professional civil engineer registered in the state. Construction and location details of the required screening devices shall be shown as part of the engineering site plan. In areas where non-single-family development is proposed adjacent to established single-family residential dwellings and a screening wall is required, the screening wall shall be constructed prior to issuance of a building permit. The screening wall portion of the project costs may not be escrowed under the performance escrow policy as established in the LDR. 
(2)  Loading areas: Where off-street loading areas for non-residential and mixed-uses are required by the LDR, such areas shall be screened with one or a combination of the following: 
a.  A minimum eight-foot-tall solid brick, stone, or decorative block masonry wall, of the same color(s) as the principal building on the site; 
b.  Solid metal gates; or 
c.  Overhead doors. 
(3)  Outdoor receptacles, as defined by city Code, shall be enclosed on three sides by solid brick, stone, or decorative block masonry wall, of earth tones or the same color(s) as the principal building on the site. The wall shall be a minimum six feet in height or equal to the height of the equipment to be screened, whichever is greater. All other outdoor receptacle requirements in the city Code apply. 
(4)  Outdoor storage areas as an accessory use under the zoning ordinances shall be located behind a principal building and shall be screened from view of streets/private vehicular routes (excluding alleys) and adjacent properties. Screening walls for outdoor storage shall be either of the following: 
a.  Masonry walls (minimum six feet tall, maximum eight feet tall) of a natural color or the same color(s) as the principal building on the site; or 
b.  Tubular steel fence (minimum six feet tall, maximum eight feet tall) with an irrigated, solid landscape screen consisting of evergreen variety trees and/or shrubs maintained at the same height as the steel fence. 
c.  Materials, equipment or commodities shall be stacked no higher than the height of the screen mechanism. 
(5)  Roof-mounted equipment: All roof-mounted equipment, including fans, vents, and air conditioning units and cooling towers, shall be screened to eliminate the view of the equipment from any adjoining streets/private vehicular route (excluding alleys). 
a.  The height of the screening mechanism shall be the height of the tallest element of the roof-mounted equipment. A parapet or architectural design element on a building may screen roof-mounted equipment; however, the parapet or architectural design element shall be limited to maximum six feet in height. Roof-mounted equipment taller than six feet shall be screened separately by a solid wall or metal panel/louver system. 
b.  The outside of the screening mechanism shall be painted or finished in a similar color to the building facade, trim or roof surface and be architecturally integrated with the design of the building elevation. 
c.  The roof-mounted equipment and the inside of the screening device shall be painted similar to the color of the roof surface in order to minimize visibility of the roof-mounted equipment and screening mechanism from overhead views from the adjacent properties. 
(6)  Ground-mounted equipment: All ground-mounted mechanical, electrical or other utility equipment shall be located behind the rear line of the building or along alleys without frontage along any streets/private vehicular route. If an alternative standard is approved allowing placement along a street/private vehicular route frontage, the equipment shall be screened and the screening shall be as tall as the equipment being screened and shall eliminate the view of the equipment from an adjoining streets (excluding alleys). The screening may be evergreen shrubbery or masonry walls matching the principal building material and color(s) of the site. All screening shall be architecturally integrated into the building elevation and facade along that street/private vehicular route. 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Sec. 17.5-5. - Transition sub-district regulations. 
(a)  Purpose, intent and applicability: 
(1)  Purpose and intent: The vision for the transition sub-district is to create an appropriate transition of the development context from the core sub-districts to existing neighborhoods by: 
a.  Maintaining auto-oriented uses while softening their frontages along major roadways with landscaping and facade improvements; 
b.  Focusing on creating a more attractive frontage along the IH-35E Highway Corridor; 
c.  Minimizing visual clutter with respect to driveways, signage, lack of landscaping, and older declining building facades; and 
d.  Establishing a long-term redevelopment strategy to elevate property values and development context. 
(2)  Applicability: The regulations in this section, as illustrated in Table 1, apply to any property within the transition sub-district as shown on Exhibits 1 through 5 in section 17.5-3. 
(b)  Building and envelope standards: These standards establish where the building should be placed on the property with respect to setbacks and build-to lines, the orientation of a building's facades, alignment of new streets and blocks, height of buildings, driveways and parking, and pedestrian accommodations on the site. 
(1)  Building placement: Building setbacks shall be measured from the property line and shall be provided in accordance with the requirements in Table 3 of this section. 
Table 3. Building Placement Standards 
Street Frontage 	Building Setbacks 
	Minimum (feet) 	Maximum (feet) 
Front (by Street Type) 		
 IH-35E Frontage Road 	20 	None 
 Arterial roadway 	20 	None 
 Collector or Local Street (2—4 lanes) 	10 	None 
 Other or Alley 	5 	None 
Side (interior) 	0 * 	None 
Rear (non-alley) 	0 * 	None 
*Except that any setbacks adjacent to single-family residential uses located outside the Corridor District shall be a minimum of 20 feet. 
 
(2)  Building orientation: If the building only has one street frontage on the IH-35E Frontage Road or an arterial roadway, then the longer side of the building shall be placed parallel to the street. For all properties which are adjacent to the IH-35E Frontage Road or an arterial roadway, the front facade of the building shall be oriented to the higher category roadway. 
(3)  Blocks and lots: 
a.  Maximum block perimeter shall be 2,400 feet. 
b.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to allow for a 20 percent increase to the maximum block perimeter requirement. 
(4)  Building height: 
a.  The minimum building height of a building or parking structure shall be 20 feet. 
b.  Minimum interior ground floor height shall be 12 feet (clear). 
(5)  Driveways: 
a.  Sharing and consolidation of driveways is encouraged in order to reduce the number of curb cuts to ensure smoother, more organized traffic movements and less disruption of pedestrian movement. 
b.  Cross or joint access easements: 
1.  Cross or joint access easements shall be required for all developments unless grade and topography make such cross access unfeasible. 
2.  Cross or joint access easements shall be designated at the time of development in anticipation of future direct or indirect access. 
c.  Except where otherwise required by the access management policy in the LDR, curb cuts (driveway openings) shall: 
1.  Be a minimum of 300 feet apart from any other curb cut or street intersection; and 
2.  Not interrupt the paving material of the sidewalk with another material. Sidewalk paving shall be continuous across the driveway. 
d.  Driveway entrances into multi-building commercial properties along the IH-35E Frontage Road and all arterial roadways shall be enhanced with the addition of signs, accent paving, special landscaping and/or lighting. Design elements shall not be located within any required visibility easements or clear vision triangles. 
(6)  Pedestrian circulation: 
a.  Sidewalks: 
1.  Sidewalks for separate and continuous pedestrian circulation shall be provided along all streets. 
b.  Walkways: 
1.  Walkways shall be no less than four feet in width. 
2.  Walkway connections shall be required: 
i.  Between any existing or future sidewalk, trails, parks or greenways and primary entrances of all buildings on the site; 
ii.  From building entrances to all on-site facilities, such as parking lots, bicycle facilities, and open space; 
iii.  Up to the property line in a manner which will allow walkway connections between adjoining properties and buildings; and 
iv.  To connect to any public transit stop that is adjacent to a site. 
3.  Walkways shall be distinguished from any driving surfaces through the use of colored pavements, bollards, grade changes, pavement markings or combination of treatments, especially when walkways cross or are adjacent to vehicular circulation areas. 
c.  Parking: 
1.  Parking lots and parking structures shall clearly mark walkways between parked vehicles and primary entrances through the use of clearly marked stop signs, wayfinding/directional signage, lighting, and other similar measures. 
2.  Parking stalls shall not overhang onto any walkway, sidewalk or landscape area and shall require wheel stops or an increase in the minimum walkway, sidewalk or landscape area of at least the depth of the overhang. 
(7)  Off-street parking: 
a.  On-site parking shall be provided in accordance with the following parking requirements: 
1.  Non-residential uses: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Residential uses: two spaces per residential unit. 
3.  Mixed-uses: use ratios above to calculate the required spaces based on the composition of the uses on the property. 
b.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to allow credit for available public parking or shared off-street parking on another lot within 1,000 feet of the subject property to apply towards on-site parking requirements. 
c.  Shared parking lots shall be connected to businesses with paved and landscaped walkways per subsection 17.5-5(b)(6), above. 
(8)  On-street parking is encouraged, but not required, along all collector and local streets. 
(c)  Architectural standards: These standards apply to the exterior architectural treatments within the transition sub-districts. External architectural treatments include building articulations, facade composition, exterior materials and colors, windows and doors, and awnings and canopies. These standards are intended to elevate the visual appeal of the Corridor District through a common set of minimum building design standards. 
(1)  Building articulation and facades: 
a.  Building facades visible from any street (except alleys) or open space shall demonstrate horizontal and vertical articulation with a facade rhythm between 20 to 40 feet. This rhythm may be expressed by any of the following: 
1.  A change in a building's horizontal or vertical plane; 
2.  Stepping portions of facades in and out; 
3.  Utilizing balconies, columns or pilasters that are distinctively set out from the facade; or 
4.  Changing types or colors of materials in combination with other techniques. 
 
 
Examples of attractive exterior architectural treatment 
 
b.  All building facades along IH-35E Frontage Road or an arterial roadway shall have a minimum of 40 percent the ground floor facade comprised of windows and doors. 
(2)  Building entrances: 
a.  Primary entrances shall be emphasized architecturally with awnings, recessed entries, pilasters, etc. 
b.  A minimum 12-foot wide secondary walkway shall be required along each building's front facade that is comprised of the primary entrances into businesses and/or tenant spaces, if such a facade faces a parking lot on the property. This secondary walkway shall incorporate shading elements along its entire front facade in the form of canopies, trees, or a combination of the two. 
1.  Canopies may be used for no more than 50 percent of the facade length and shall extend at least two feet from the facade. 
2.  Trees shall be planted at an average spacing of 40 feet. Trees shall be selected from the canopy tree list in appendix G and shall be a minimum of 2-1/2-inch caliper when planted. 
i.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to use other species that are drought-tolerant and adaptive. 
 
Illustration depicting the Secondary Walkway requirement along the interior storefront 
(3)  Facade materials and colors: 
a.  Facade materials: Each exterior wall (except window and door area) of a building or parking structure shall comply with the following material requirements: 
1.  Eighty percent or more of each exterior wall shall be comprised of brick or stone. The remainder of each exterior wall may be comprised of either three-step stucco (EIFS shall only be allowed at locations nine feet above grade), architectural metal, cladding, or panels, or a combination thereof. 
2.  Accent materials may be comprised of pre-cast stone, metal, or other architectural materials. 
b.  Colors: At least two main colors, and no more than three colors, shall be used on each elevation. Eighty percent of each elevation must utilize natural and/or earth tone colors, and each elevation must have 20 percent of another type of color. Buildings shall not have colors that are fluorescent or bright (e.g., yellow, green, purple) visible from any public place or street. This shall include service doors, down spouts, utility boxes, panels and other similar features integral to the principal building. 
 
 
Building Facade with no more than two colors with 80 percent natural/earth tone colors. 
 
(4)  Awnings and canopies: 
a.  All building fronts with business/tenant space entrances shall have an awning or canopy which extends beyond the face of the building over an adjacent walkway or sidewalk for a minimum of 50 percent of the building's front facade width. 
b.  Materials allowed shall consist of metal or canvas. Reflective materials for finishes are prohibited. 
c.  When used, awnings or canopies shall be located as to provide shading for exterior windows and doors and shall cover the entire width of the window opening or groups of windows over which it is installed. 
d.  Awnings and canopies may encroach over walkways up to 50 percent of the width of the walkway or five feet, whichever is greater. They shall maintain a minimum nine-foot vertical clearance as measured between the bottom of the awning/canopy and the finished grade of the walkway. In no case shall an awning or canopy encroach over a travel zone, driveway or fire lane. 
 
 
Awnings should fit into the storefront's overall architecture and appearance. Awnings provide protection and cover from bright sunlight and inclement weather. 
 
(5)  Windows: 
a.  Window framing materials shall consist of anodized aluminum, vinyl or steel. 
b.  For required windows at the ground floor, a minimum 60 percent visible light transmittance shall be required. 
1.  Specific standard and findings for administrative modifications: Windows having a visible light transmittance less than 60 percent may be allowed with an administrative modification if a finding is made by staff that an administrative modification is necessary to satisfy building code requirements related to energy efficiency. 
c.  Mirrored glass is prohibited. 
d.  No more than 50 percent of the windows on any facade may be reflective glass. 
e.  Window screens are prohibited on non-residential ground floors. 
f.  Horizontal groupings of windows shall not exceed five per grouping, where groupings are separated by a mullion, column, or wall section a minimum of seven inches wide. 
g.  Windows shall be a minimum of 30 inches from building corners, unless separated by a corner mullion or column twice the width used in grouping. 
h.  The following are prohibited for use in storefronts: 
1.  Single pane glass windows; 
2.  Black glass, opaque glass, and other "false window" techniques; 
3.  Doors with no opacity; and 
4.  Windows which do not permit unobstructed views into the building. 
 
Windows should maximize visibility to the Street on the Ground Floor. Ensure that commercial Ground Floor uses provide clear unobstructed windows, free of reflective coatings. 
 
(6)  Parking structures: 
a.  Parking structures shall have a facade design with the same colors and materials as the building the parking structure services. If the parking structure serves multiple buildings, it shall have a facade design with the same colors and materials. Parking structures shall be located behind buildings to minimize their visibility from adjacent streets. 
b.  Where a parking structure is located adjacent to any street: 
1.  Parking structure facades shall be designed with both vertical articulation at least every 40 linear feet and horizontal articulation aligning with horizontal elements along the block. The building materials shall be the same materials and color(s) as the building the parking structure serves. 
2.  The parking structure shall be designed and screened in such a way that motor vehicles on all parking levels are hidden from view from all adjacent streets. Parking structure ramps shall not be visible from any street. Ramps shall not be located on the perimeter of the parking structure. Architectural screens shall be used to articulate the facade, hide parked vehicles, and shield the lighting inside the structure. 
Parking Structures shall be located behind buildings to minimize their visibility from adjacent Streets.  	  Parking Structures shall have a Facade design similar to surrounding buildings along the Street front.  
 
(d)  Landscape standards: These standards apply to new trees and shrubs, hardscape and open space treatments, screening of service, parking and utilitarian uses, and parking lot landscaping. Landscaping can reduce the urban heat island effect, soften the built environment and contribute to pedestrian comfort in addition to increasing property values and rents. 
(1)  Trees and plant materials: 
a.  Plantings may be placed in natural groupings along street frontages. 
b.  Tree and plant materials shall be selected by the landscape architect or designer designing the landscape plan from the approved plant material list provided in appendix G. No artificial trees, shrubs, ground covers, turf, or seasonal colors are permitted. 
1.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to use other species that are drought-tolerant and adaptive. 
c.  Irrigation systems provided within all landscaped areas including the secondary walkway area and shall be installed and maintained by the developer or property owner per current parks and recreation department standards. 
d.  Canopy trees shall be: 
1.  Planted along street frontages within the amenity zone and/or secondary walkways; 
2.  Planted at an average spacing of 40 feet on center along all street frontages; and 
3.  A minimum three-inch caliper and at least ten feet in height with a single trunk at planting. 
e.  Tree preservation and landscape maintenance shall comply with the provisions in the LDR. 
f.  Parking lots with frontage on IH-35E shall provide a minimum 20-foot wide landscape area between the public ROW and parking lot. Canopy trees shall be placed at an average spacing of 40 feet. A solid evergreen shrubbery hedge with a minimum 24-inch height at the time of planting shall be planted in a manner which will screen the view of parked vehicles from the street. 
1.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to allow any of the following (minimum height of 36 inches) as a parking lot screen: 
i.  Retaining wall; 
ii.  Berming; or 
iii.  A combination of retaining wall, berming, and/or evergreen screening hedge. 
g.  Parking lots adjacent along all other street frontages (except alleys) shall use one or both of the following screening methods: 
1.  A minimum five-foot wide landscape area between the sidewalk and parking lot, with a solid evergreen shrubbery hedge with a minimum 24-inch in height at the time of planting planted within the landscape area in a manner which will screen the view of parked vehicles from the street; or 
2.  A masonry (brick or stone) wall a minimum of 36 inches in height installed between the sidewalk and the parking lot, placed such that a minimum two-foot parking space overhang is provided on the parking lot side of the wall, and wheel stops are provided for the parking spaces. 
h.  All parking lots shall include the following landscaping elements: 
1.  Expanses of parking in excess of 120 parking spaces shall be organized into blocks of parking with no more than 120 spaces in each block. Each block of parking shall be separated from other parking blocks by a minimum of one ten-foot landscape island with plant cover and trees as required below, as well as walkways of at least four feet in width leading to the front facade of the building. Driveways between the parking blocks shall be provided. 
2.  Landscape islands shall be a minimum of ten feet in width with a minimum of 50 percent plant cover. A landscape island shall be required on the end of each row of parking in addition to between each parking block. 
3.  Each parking lot shall include canopy trees at a ratio of one tree per eight parking spaces. 
(2)  Hardscaping: 
a.  All hardscaping materials shall be of earth tones or colors found on the principal building. 
b.  Walkway and secondary walkway paving shall be comprised of the following materials or a combination thereof: 
1.  Concrete; 
2.  Pavers; or 
3.  Stamped concrete or asphalt. 
(3)  Open spaces: 
a.  Open space shall be provided on developments that incorporate five acres or more. 
1.  The minimum set aside for open space shall be five percent of the development. 
2.  If the open space is designed for public use, it shall be highly visible from the public ROW and accessible to the general public. If the open space is designed solely for private use, it shall be centrally located and easily accessible to all individuals it is expected to serve. 
b.  Developments that incorporate less than five acres may incorporate open space for the use of employees or the public. 
c.  Private open space may be fenced or otherwise controlled for secure access using wrought iron, masonry, or comparable decorative fencing, or vegetative screening. 
d.  Parking, driveway, or rear setback areas may not be used as publicly accessible open space, but publicly accessible open space areas may include front and side setback areas provided that they are integrated into the overall design of the project. Publicly accessible open space shall have public or private street frontage for a minimum of 25 percent of the perimeter of the open space. Retention and detention areas that are incorporated into the overall site design with appropriate amenities may be credited towards 50 percent of the open space requirement. 
e.  A combination of landscape and hardscape materials shall be used in the design of open space. Open space shall be landscaped with trees, as well as turf, shrubs, or groundcover. All plant materials shall be selected from appendix G and permanently maintained and irrigated. 
1.  Specific standard for administrative modification: An administrative modification may be requested to use other species that are drought-tolerant and adaptive. 
 
 
Open Spaces should encourage diverse opportunities for social activities, provide relief and relaxation, expand and reinforce the public realm, and facilitate livability. 
 
(e)  Street and streetscape standards: These standards provide for design of new and improved streets as well as the treatment of areas between the curb and the private property line and street medians, if any, including the placement or installation of trees, sidewalk paving, street furnishings, lighting, and other amenities for pedestrians. 
(1)  General street standards: Streets shall be built or improved in accordance to this section, the street design standards in appendix F, and the construction standards of the city. The city shall have the ultimate approval authority on streetscaping on streets and may establish standards by ordinance for different street types and conditions. Unless otherwise provided herein, all public ROW dedication and construction for streets (existing and new) shall be in accordance with the LDR. 
(2)  Street design standards: Streets shall include a travel zone and a streetscape zone per appendix F. 
(3)  Existing streets: At such time when properties adjacent to the existing streets develop, and/or redevelop, the property owner shall, in accordance this section and for the length of street frontage of the property, dedicate to the city sufficient public right-of-way (or equivalent) to accommodate the required street and streetscape improvements, subject to provisions in the LDR and any other applicable city ordinances. 
a.  Specific finding for administrative modification: The street design standards in appendix F may be adjusted through an administrative modification if staff finds that such an adjustment is necessary in order to fit existing and future utility locations, existing landscaping, or the International Fire Code as adopted by the city. 
(4)  New streets: 
a.  Any new street shall: 
1.  Meet the block perimeter maximums established in this section; 
2.  Continue any established street and block pattern on adjoining sites developed or redeveloped under this chapter; and 
3.  Be designed in accordance with the street design standards in appendix F. 
b.  For any new street, the property owner shall construct the entire street section including travel lanes, on-street parking, and any other sidewalk improvements. Half streets may be provided where necessary to comply with the LDR. 
c.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, all right-of-way dedication and construction for streets (existing and new) shall be in accordance with the LDR. 
(5)  Streetscape zone: 
a.  The streetscape zone along all streets shall be a minimum of nine feet in width. Of this streetscape zone, a minimum of five feet shall be designated for a clear sidewalk and four feet for the amenity zone. 
b.  Sidewalks shall be located adjacent to the amenity zone and shall comply with the requirements as outlined in this section and appendix F. The sidewalk must be unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent element for a minimum height of nine feet. Accessibility is required to connect sidewalks on adjacent sites. 
c.  Enhanced sidewalks shall be required where recommended in the Lewisville Trails Master Plan. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or pavers and may be embellished with the same colors and patterns found on the adjacent facade(s). 
(6)  Trails: 
a.  Trails shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most recently adopted Lewisville Trails Master Plan. 
b.  Any conflicts between the trail requirements and the sidewalk requirements herein should be resolved with staff prior to submitting any engineering site plan or concept plan. 
(7)  Street and pedestrian lighting: 
a.  General: 
1.  All types of exterior lighting shall comply with section 9-3 of the city Code, as amended. 
2.  All lighting shall be directed downward. 
i.  Specific standard for administrative modification: Up-lighting of building walls may be approved with an administrative modification. 
3.  Lighting of signage, parking, sidewalks and walkways is to be controlled or narrowly focused. 
4.  Placement and shielding of light sources shall be done to limit visual impact. Full cut-off metal fixtures are required. 
5.  Distracting, flashing, traveling, or animated lighting shall not be permitted with the exception of lights associated with seasonal displays. 
b.  Street lighting: Pedestrian-scaled street lighting shall be provided along all secondary walkways, walkways, and sidewalks as follows: 
1.  Maximum height of the light pole shall be 15 feet. 
2.  Street lights shall be placed at 40 feet on center, approximately two feet behind the curb line. 
3.  The light standard selected shall be compatible with the design of the street furnishings and buildings or per city standards. 
c.  Exterior building lighting: 
1.  Building lighting shall accentuate important architectural components of the building, such as entries, towers or roof elements, or repetitive columns or bays. 
2.  Building lighting shall provide indirect or direct lighting for adjoining sidewalks and open spaces. 
3.  Equipment and lighting fixtures shall be weather-resistant. 
4.  Lighting fixtures shall include directional shields so as to prevent viewing of the light source. 
5.  Building lighting shall be limited to decorative lighting. Standard pack lights may not be attached on buildings except within loading and service areas. 
6.  LED, halogen, metal halide, incandescent, and compact fluorescent lighting are permitted for exterior lighting. 
7.  High-intensity discharge (HID) lights are prohibited. 
8.  Specific standard for administrative modification: Neon lighting may be permitted subject to approval of an administrative modification. 
d.  Primary entrance lighting: Primary entrances shall be externally lit so as to promote a more secure environment at the door, emphasize the primary point of entry into the building, and provide sufficient lighting for efficient access into the building. Standard security lighting, including but not limited to, wall-packs, shall only be allowed in service and loading areas. 
e.  Landscape lighting: Landscape lighting may be used to highlight landscape elements, building entries and other important architectural features and accent elements such as fountains and sculptures. 
(8)  Pedestrian amenities: 
a.  General: 
1.  Street furnishings shall be located within secondary walkway areas as designated in this section so long as a clear area of at least four feet is designated. A minimum of two of the street furnishings listed in subsection (8)b. below, shall be provided within a secondary walkway area. The street furnishings shall be shown on an approved engineering site plan and landscape plan prior to installation. 
2.  Street furnishings and any adjacent area required for the functional use of the street furnishings shall not be within the clear sidewalk area required by this section. 
3.  All street furnishings shall be affixed to the ground so as to prevent removal or tipping. 
b.  Street furnishings list: 
1.  Trash receptacles: shall be constructed of metal (steel or aluminum) with a black polyester powder coat finish and a side opening. Trash receptacles shall be approximately 25 inches in diameter and 34 inches high, with an approximate 28-gallon capacity. They shall be placed at a frequency of two per every 500 linear feet of block frontage. 
2.  Bike racks: shall provide at least one bike rack accommodating a minimum of six bicycles per 400 linear feet of block face. An area of two feet by six feet must be provided for each bicycle parking space in order that a bicycle six feet long can be securely held in place with its frame supported by the rack. A bicycle must be able to be placed in the rack in an upright manner that will not damage its wheels or components. The individual floor-mounted, "inverted-U" style or "staple" style rack is recommended, but not required. 
3.  Planters: shall be constructed of natural grey concrete/sandstone or beige/light tan precast concrete/cast stone, with a drainage hole for irrigation, and shall be of a round tapered shape. Planters may be circular (24 inches - 42 inches in diameter) or square/rectangular (24 inches - 48 inches wide) with a height between 24 and 36 inches. A minimum of two planters shall be placed for every 200 linear feet of block frontage. Planters shall be irrigated and maintained with landscaping in a healthy growing condition at all times. 
4.  Benches: shall be constructed of metal (steel or aluminum) with a black polyester powder coat finish. Bench seats shall have two-seat configurations, with no more than three sets of seats. Seating surfaces shall be 16 to 18 inches high with a minimum depth of 16 inches for seats without backs and 14 inches for seats with backs. They shall be placed at a frequency of one per every 40 linear feet of block frontage. 
5.  Bollards: shall be constructed of metal (steel or aluminum) with a black polyester powder coat. Bollards may have a maximum height of 36 inches and a maximum diameter of nine inches. Bollards shall be placed at a regular spacing of four to six feet on center. 
6.  Tree grates: shall be placed around the trees and be manufactured of cast iron with a baked oil finish, and shall be six feet by six feet square, with maximum one-half-inch square openings. 
7.  Specific standard for administrative modification: Other street furnishing elements such as art, water features, water fountains, newspaper racks, etc., may be proposed and approved through administrative modifications. 
(f)  Screening of service areas and utilities: These standards provide for the screening of service and loading areas, roof- or ground-mounted utility equipment and similar uses on the site. 
(1)  General provisions: Loading and outdoor storage areas, ground-mounted equipment, roof-mounted equipment, outdoor receptacles and utility accessories shall be screened to reduce the visual impact of these elements on adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. All screening walls shall be measured at the highest finished grade, and designed by a professional civil engineer registered in the state. Construction and location details of the required screening devices shall be shown as part of the engineering site plan. In areas where non-single-family development is proposed adjacent to established single-family residential dwellings and a screening wall is required, the screening wall shall be constructed prior to issuance of a building permit. The screening wall portion of the project costs may not be escrowed under the performance escrow policy of the LDR. 
(2)  Loading areas: Where off-street loading areas for non-residential and mixed-uses are required by the LDR, such areas shall be screened with one or a combination of the following: 
a.  A minimum eight-foot-tall solid brick, stone, or decorative block masonry wall, of the same color(s) as the principal building on the site; 
b.  Solid metal gates; or 
c.  Overhead doors. 
(3)  Outdoor receptacles, as defined by the LDR, shall be enclosed on three sides by a solid brick, stone, or decorative block masonry wall, of earth tones or the same color(s) as the principal building on the site. The wall shall be a minimum six feet in height or equal to the height of the equipment to be screened, whichever is greater. All other outdoor receptacle requirements in the city Code apply. 
(4)  Outdoor storage areas as an accessory use under the zoning ordinances shall be located behind a principal building, and shall be screened from view of streets (excluding alleys) and adjacent properties. Screening walls for outdoor storage shall be either of the following: 
a.  Masonry walls (minimum six feet tall, maximum eight feet tall) of the same color(s) as the principal building on the site; or 
b.  Tubular steel fence (minimum six feet tall, maximum eight feet tall) with an irrigated, solid landscape screen consisting of evergreen variety trees and/or shrubs maintained at the same height as the steel fence. 
c.  Materials, equipment or commodities shall be stacked no higher than the height of the screen mechanism. 
(5)  Roof-mounted equipment: All roof-mounted equipment, including fans, vents, and air conditioning units and cooling towers, shall be screened to eliminate the view of the equipment from any adjoining streets (excluding alleys). 
a.  The height of the screening mechanism shall be the height of the tallest element of the roof-mounted equipment. A parapet or architectural design element on a building may screen roof-mounted equipment; however, the parapet or architectural design element shall be limited to maximum six feet in height. Roof-mounted equipment taller than six feet shall be screened separately by a solid wall or metal panel/louver system. 
b.  The outside of the screening mechanism shall be painted or finished in a similar color to the building facade, trim or roof surface and be architecturally integrated with the design of the building elevation. 
c.  The roof-mounted equipment and the inside of the screening device shall be painted similar to the color of the roof surface in order to minimize visibility of the equipment and screening mechanism from overhead views from the adjacent properties. 
(6)  Ground-mounted equipment: All ground-mounted mechanical, electrical or other utility equipment shall be located behind the rear line of the building or along alleys without frontage along any streets. If an alternative standard is approved allowing placement along a street frontage, the equipment shall be screened and the screening shall be as tall as the equipment being screened and shall eliminate the view of the equipment from any adjoining streets (excluding alleys). The screening may be evergreen shrubbery or masonry walls matching the principal building material and color(s) of the site. All screening shall be architecturally integrated into the building elevation and facade along that street. 
(g)  Pad site standards: These standards provide for the development of pad sites including the architectural treatment of facades, continuity of landscaping, screening of drive-through and service functions, and pedestrian accommodation. 
(1)  Standards: In addition to all other standards applicable to development within the transition sub-district, the following shall apply to pad sites: 
(2)  Building design and orientation standards: 
a.  All building facades shall be designed as the front facade in compliance with all requirements of this section for front facades. If windows and doors cannot be incorporated into the rear and side facades, changes of building materials and color shall be used to create the appearance of solids and voids. 
b.  The longer side of the building shall be oriented towards the primary street frontage and shall be considered the front of the building. 
c.  The primary entrance to the building shall be located in the front of the building and shall be oriented toward the primary street and the sidewalk. 
d.  The primary entrance shall be emphasized along the front facade with doors, display windows, canopies, awnings, increased architectural elements, increased landscaping, lighting, and/or pedestrian-oriented features. 
e.  Pedestrian access shall be provided leading from the primary entrance at the secondary walkway along the storefront to sidewalk at the street. 
f.  Stacking and drive-through lanes shall not be located along the primary facade of the building.  
Appendix A. - Corridor Character Principles 
 
Corridor Character Principles
 
The eight-mile corridor contains unique character areas including water, urban and park. 
The following corridor character principles are intended to provide a thematic vision for public infrastructure along the corridor and its sub-areas. This section is organized to present intent statements for spatial elements contained within the corridor, followed by design principles for each of the character sub-areas. The principles should be used to provide guidance during the decision-making process when evaluating detailed concepts for proposed treatments within the corridor. 
These principles were used in the development of the IH-35E Corridor Identity Plan, which adopted the three character zone designations and determined the appropriate limits for each within the corridor. The physical design elements for the corridor were then developed in terms of the aesthetic character which was then applied to typical interchange locations along the corridor. A vocabulary of common elements was established for the entire corridor, including lighting, banner poles, wayfinding, plantings, cross street gateway identifiers, pedestrian protection barriers, decorative crosswalk pavement and bridge abutment wall treatments. Unique character zone defining elements were developed for pedestrian paving patterns, custom retaining wall graphics, pedestrian protection wall forms and textures, and planting palette. 
The Corridor Experience 
The eight-mile drive along the IH-35E corridor through Lewisville provides a range of experiences that can be interpreted in the physical design of the spatial elements throughout the corridor. This corridor contains modulation through topography, compression of the right-of-way in areas where the highway is depressed, and openness as the highway crests to expansive views of the region. On a smaller scale, the corridor passes under bridges which will serve as landmarks, and along a variety of walled conditions. Through the journey, the corridor also passes along watercourses and open spaces that are amenities to local neighborhoods. These experiences provide inspiration that can inform the design of elements at the scale of the entire corridor and at smaller neighborhood scales. 
Unifying Character Theme 
One of the most impressive natural resources along this corridor is Lake Lewisville. The lake is a psychological and physical place of respite and recreation, and is a regional attraction in the Dallas metropolitan area. During work sessions with the project's Advisory Committee, the lake was identified as the most recognizable asset to the city and the theme of water was proposed as a unifying theme for the corridor. The purpose of providing a unifying theme is to provide a consistent brand for the city and to inform drivers of the range of experiences and opportunities contained in this corridor. 
Subarea Character Themes 
Due to the length of the corridor, the range of experiences it offers, and the character of its adjacent communities, subarea themes are proposed for the north, central and south portions of the corridor. Subarea themes will help to break down scale of the corridor and provide neighborhood identification. 
  Water should be a defining characteristic in the north section and used as a unifying theme.  	North-Water 
The subarea themes for the north section of the corridor are water and recreation. Combined with the vacant parcels available for redevelopment along the corridor, the water theme could serve as an organizing element for future development. Lifestyle oriented development could reflect the unique attributes of living, working and recreating around water. The design elements along this northern reach need to come together to draw visitors off the highway thereby capturing greater market share. 
• Gateways and landmarks should be focused at Garden Ridge Boulevard and Valley Ridge Boulevard, both primary entrances into the Lake area. Higher density nodal development should be focused around these gateways to draw in visitors. 
  
• Water should be a defining characteristic in the treatment of walls, bridges, lighting and art. Species such as Sun Fish and Large Mouth Bass could be utilized as relief along retaining walls to remind visitors of the Lake Lewisville recreational amenity. 
 
 
The central section of the corridor is tied to Old Town Lewisville 
Central-Urban 
The theme of the Central section of the corridor ties to historic Old Town Lewisville. Though located approximately one mile from the center of Old Town, IH-35E currently has little relationship to Old Town and the medical uses in between. Design elements should be consistent with the historic architecture of Old Town. 
• Gateways and landmarks need to be located at both South Mill Street and West Main Street to signify entrance into the historic heart of the community, tying newer land uses along the highway with the history of Old Town. 
• Design treatments for walls, bridges, lighting, building architecture and art should emphasize the area's history. Brick and warm materials need to reflect the historic nature of Old Town. 
 
Hebron Parkway could benefit from a gateway in the southern section 
South-Park 
The southern section of the IH-35E corridor will remain an important center of retail, hospitality and corporate office space. The theme for this area should focus on its location as a gateway and destination, and capitalize on its unique assets, such as Timber Creek. 
• A gateway is needed at Hebron Parkway to distinguish this area as a center of activity and connectivity between uses east and west of the highway. This bridge could exhibit a unique architectural style, such as an arched truss bridge. Tall lighted elements along this bridge could denote this as a special area, and create a nighttime place, while preserving views north and south during the day. 
• Due to the complexity of the intersection of SH-121 to allow for all necessary vehicle movements, this area will contain a high percentage of retaining walls. Special attention will be required to reduce the impact of the walls through a variety of surface treatments, including massing breaks, color changes, and texture variations. Additional surface treatments could include the incorporation of public art to display shallow relief images with colored material. 
Unifying character theme spatial elements 
The experience and character of the corridor will be communicated through the design and treatment of its spatial elements. Following are design principles for the primary spatial elements that will be experienced throughout the corridor. Each of the spatial elements described below should be designed to complement the unifying theme and respective subarea themes along the IH-35E corridor. 
Each spatial element is defined below. Intent statements describe how each element is characterized in the corridor. Principles are included that should be incorporated in the design of each element. 
A.  Landmarks and gateways take the form of natural features and design elements and include bridges, intersection treatments, development form, and significant open space areas. 
Intents: 
• Landmarks identify and brand the City of Lewisville and its neighborhoods. 
• Landmarks form a mental map for wayfinding purposes and can be created through natural or manmade means. 
• Gateways identify particular areas within the city or particular neighborhoods. 
  Landmarks can enhance wayfinding  	  Gateways should be at least 8 feet tall  	Principles: 
  A1. To achieve a consistent treatment where gateways are provided, gateways should be designed as elements that either span across a highway or path, or are symmetrical treatments located on each side of the highway right-of-way or path, and require users to either pass under or pass through. 
  
A2. To promote the diversity that exists in Lewisville, landmark locations are identified within the primary catalysts of Sub-areas 2, 5 and 7. 
  
A3. To diversify community image, landmark and gateway treatments should contain a minimum of three (3) exterior materials. 
  
A4. To promote visual clarity, gateway treatments should be a minimum of eight-feet (8') tall at any dimension from the ground or base condition. 
  
A5. To incorporate nodal development, landmarks and gateway treatments should be integrated with intersection design at identified nodes. 
 
B.  Development Patterns describe how buildings, roads and open space are organized together in a particular area. These patterns contribute significantly to the character of the highway. 
Intents: 
• Development is composed of compact centers, or nodes, of mixed use development. 
• Environments are designed to be comfortable to pedestrians and bicyclists. 
• Networks of transportation modes interconnect development and open space. 
• Land use and transportation are intricately linked to create active, engaging places. 
 
Low-density development (top) and node development (bottom) 
Principles: 
B1.  To reduce sprawl, create development nodes that capture a higher number of vehicle trips accessing the corridor than traditional development. 
B2.  To promote active places, create centers of mixed-use developments near a variety of residential densities. 
B3.  To promote active places, site design for major projects should allow for increased densities over time. 
B4.  To reduce the occurrence of strip development, new development should be nodal in character and concentrate development along the highway at planned areas that are separated by open space. 
B5.  To leverage transportation access, the tallest and densest development patterns should occur within 700 feet to one-quarter mile radius of planned nodes. Most nodes are situated at interchanges. 
B6.  To improve development character, parking locations should be less prominent and located to the rear of buildings or in parking structures. 
B7.  To promote active streets, pedestrian-oriented uses should be located on ground floors of buildings. 
B8.  To facilitate more active places, sidewalks should be wider in planned development nodes than in other lower density areas. 
B9.  To provide amenities for pedestrians, sidewalks should incorporate street trees, benches, kiosks and plazas. 
****Low-density development (top) and node development (bottom) 
B10.  To promote active streets, auto-oriented uses, including service stations and drive through facilities should be discouraged within one-quarter mile radius of planned nodes. 
B11.  To provide a pedestrian-friendly street network, street block sizes should not exceed 600,000 square feet. 
C.  Right-of-way treatments include bridges, walls, fencing, landscaping and lighting. 
 
Intents: 
• Right-of-way treatments embody the unifying and subarea themes described in this plan. 
  
• Aesthetic treatments are visibly consistent for public and private lands when viewed from the corridor. 
	Principles: C1. To improve aesthetic quality, bridges should contain a minimum of three (3) exterior materials, and include accent lighting in addition to standard lighting for safety. 
	C2. To improve aesthetic quality, no chain link fencing is allowed within direct view of the corridor or fifty-feet (50') outside the state owned right-of-way. 
A bridge integrating a gateway treatment and architectural pedestrian railing  	Patterns can break down the scale of walls  	C3. To improve the aesthetic quality, fencing treatments should incorporate live, drought-tolerant vegetation, where direct transparency for safety is not required. 
		C4. To improve the aesthetic quality, landscape treatments, including flowering plants should be provided adjacent to identified gateways and landmark areas. 
		C5. To reduce a canyon effect in the corridor, vertical surfaces of walls should not exceed twenty feet (20') without a twelve inch (12") minimum horizontal break. 
		C6. To break down the scale of walls, patterns should be created that are a maximum of four feet (4') in any direction. 
		C7. To promote a pedestrian-oriented environment, pedestrian routes should be buffered from fast-moving traffic and expanses of parking. 
 
D.  Natural Spaces along the highway are primarily passive in form, and include open space, pedestrian pathways, waterways, wetlands and stormwater drainage areas. 
Intents: 
•  Natural spaces complement and separate areas of nodal development and enhance the natural surroundings. 
•  Natural spaces represent interconnected systems and are organized to facilitate system-wide drainage. 
•  View corridors provide expansive views out of the corridor and identify landmarks when appropriate. 
 
Principles: 
  D1. To facilitate pedestrian connectivity, natural spaces should create linear systems, particularly east-west along the corridor. 
  
D2. To maintain a sustainable landscape, only native plantings should be provided. 
  
D3. To promote expansive views, low plantings should be provided in open spaces designated to frame long views. 
  
D4. To improve water quality, native landscape materials should be utilized to provide primary filtration of stormwater prior to entering sewers. 
Low plantings preserve expansive views  	Native plantings maintain a sustainable landscape  	
 
E.  Access locations include the locations of curb cuts and intersections on frontage roads, arterial streets and intersections within the corridor. 
Intents: 
• Frontage roads facilitate local circulation parallel to the highway and provide access to the local street system. 
• Local streets provide the majority of access to private property along the corridor. 
 
Principles: 
  E1. To promote access, street patterns should form an interconnected grid that simplifies access for all transportation modes. 
  
E2. To improve multi-modal circulation, bridges should include pedestrian paths and bicycle lanes. 
  
E3. To increase capacity of the frontage road system, curb cuts should be minimized. 
Retaining walls with unique character and treatments.  		
 
F.  Nighttime treatments include the organization and design of safety lighting and accent lighting on spatial elements, including landmarks, key building and landscape treatments, bridge and wall treatments and open spaces. 
Intents: 
• Corridor treatments should be designed for daytime and nighttime users. 
• Effect lighting attempts to replicate the daytime experience for nighttime users. 
• Lighting for safety is integrated with effect lighting and provides a consistent design theme. 
 
Principles: 
  F1. To improve the aesthetic quality, accent lighting should be included in right-of-way treatments. 
  
F2. To express the design theme in each subarea, safety lighting should be incorporated with effect lighting. 
  
F3. To promote walking during nighttime, pedestrian scaled lighting should be included on all walkways with one-quarter mile of defined nodes. 
Pedestrian scale lighting promotes walking  		
 
G.  Street design includes both traffic and pedestrian zones. 
Intents: 
• The traffic zone encompasses vehicular and bicycle movements, and can also include medians, crosswalks and on-street parking. 
• The pedestrian zone includes all elements from the back of curb. 
 
Principles: Traffic Zone 
  G1. Vehicular lane width will vary based on the street type and traffic volume. On highways such as IH-35E, 12-foot lanes may be most appropriate. Arterials with heavier volumes of traffic may require 11 to 12 foot lanes. On local streets, 10 to 11 foot lanes are encouraged to help reduce speed and narrow the overall traffic zone width. 
  
G2. Bicycles may be accommodated either through a wider outside lane or through a striped bicycle lane. Bicycle lane widths should be between four and six feet. When placed adjacent to on-street parking, an additional 1 to 2 feet of bicycle lane should be provided. 
  
G3. Medians should provide refuge areas for pedestrians and include special planting, paving treatments, or public art installations at each end to create a visual amenity. 
Traffic zones need to balance vehicular and bicycle modes  	G4. Crosswalks should include inset materials or textures, including brick pavers or stamped concrete which provides visual amenity and functional traffic calming for intersections. 
  
G5. On-street parking is typically 8 to 10 feet wide allowing for parallel parking adjacent to the vehicular lane. On-street parking is typically placed on corridors with lower speed limits and streets with active pedestrian and development to help calm traffic and serve surrounding land uses. 
 
 
Principles: Pedestrian Zone 
  G6. Sidewalks on frontage roads and arterial streets are encouraged to be detached from the curb and setback from the street a minimum of eight feet (8'). Sidewalk widths should be a minimum of six feet (6') and can exceed twelve feet (12') depending on planned pedestrian activity. Sidewalks on local streets should be a minimum of six feet (6') and either be attached or detached depending on other amenities provided. 
  
G7. Curb cuts should be subject to conditions specified by an access management strategy for arterial roads. Curb cuts are only encouraged at combined business entries and for parcels that cannot be accessed from a local road. Curb cuts on all streets should be designed to be as narrow as possible while providing for safe traffic movements and access. 
Benches and sidewalk treatments contribute to street character  	G8. Street trees are encouraged within the amenity zone. The trunk should be setback from the street a minimum of three feet (3') to provide a clear area from the street and to allow the canopy to mature. 
  G9. Planter boxes can be located in the amenity area and provide a buffer along busy streets and create a more intimate pedestrian space. Planters can be seasonal or permanent. 
  
G10. Lighting along sidewalks should be provided to indicate safe pedestrian pathways. Pedestrian scale lighting can be incorporated with traffic lighting poles or provided as independent elements. 
  
G11. Benches/seating on arterials should be provided at bus stops and near intersections in green areas to provide an amenity for people waiting to cross the street or board transit. Additionally, seating is encouraged in green areas with access to public open space, or large parking areas. 
  
G12. Bus stops should provide overhead shelter from sun, snow and rain and provide side shelter from wind and rain. Side panels should provide a high degree of transparency and be clear of visual obstructions. 
  
G13. Bicycle racks along streets should be provided adjacent to active streets containing neighborhood serving businesses. When provided, racks should be located in the amenity zone. 
 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Appendix B. - DESIGN GUIDELINES 
  
 
Design Guidelines
 
Great Places are defined in large party by great streets. Jane Jacobs said it well: "Streets and their sidewalks, the main public places of a city, are its most vital organs." 
These design guidelines are intended to enable the City to work together with the development and business communities in achieving the vision for IH-35E corridor. That vision includes four framework themes: 
• Revitalizing the corridor will require enhancing the established character through multiple public and private realm improvements. 
• Establishing memorable destinations will require creating authentic and diverse public places, while expanding the range of attractions and economic development opportunities that the corridor offers. 
• Integrating the neighborhoods will require a mix of infill housing and services for local neighbors. 
• Achieving a more accessible corridor will require improving the transportation system to minimize barriers and provide regional transportation alternatives. 
The design guidelines are divided into two types: guidelines and standards. The Guidelines contained in this document are general statements describing ideal development along the corridor. The standards are basic requirements for any development or redevelopment along the IH-35E corridor. The use of these two types of statements is intended to give flexibility to the developer and/or applicant to respond and contribute to the corridor vision in advance of a submittal, to give the City of Lewisville a basis on which to make judgments so that its determinations are not arbitrary, and to give certainty to the City of Lewisville and its citizens that the corridor vision is met and that the quality described is maintained. The images in this section reflect examples from across the country, which exemplify the written standards. 
As time passes and the city and its partners in the public and private sector advance in achieving the corridor vision, conditions along the corridor will change. The standards will be added to and amended over time. The guidelines and standards serve as a tool to ensure that the corridor vision and quality of corridor redevelopment remains consistently high. 
Authority 
These Guidelines shall be approved as part of the IH-35E Corridor Redevelopment Plan according to the provisions of the General Development Ordinance. 
Applicability and Review 
The review process follows the approved development process as stipulated in the City of Lewisville's adopted General Development Ordinance (GDO). The required standards of the corridor design guidelines and standards are in addition to the specific requirements of the GDO. These guidelines and standards supersede all other city design guidelines except as noted. 
A design review committee (DRC) should be established by the City for review of projects along the IH-35E corridor. This committee should be responsible for the controls governing the design guidelines and standards. This DRC should have the responsibility to review all development within the boundaries of the corridor overlay area. Review of engineering requirements such as drainage; utilities; police, fire, and emergency service access is the responsibility of city staff. The DRC would have the responsibility of reviewing all design outside of the right of way, while city staff has the responsibility to review the street's engineering, traffic functions, utility and public safety requirements. The DRC should be composed of both public and private individuals. Representatives of the private development community bring value in providing their perspective. 
Amendments 
These Guidelines may only be amended by City Council with a recommendation from the Planning Commission. 
Format 
The format of the following design guidelines consists of development conditions defined by design principle statements and design standards. Development conditions are described for Site Plan, Architecture, Landscape, and Signage. Guidelines describe the design intent for each listed condition and should be incorporated into design treatments of each listed condition. Standards describe the specific treatments that, if incorporated, require no further DRC review. However, if standards cannot be achieved due to outstanding conditions, the DRC may evaluate specific condition proposed treatments against the stated Guidelines. If the DRC approves the proposed treatments no further DRC review is required. Appeals may be made to the Planning Commission. 
A.  SITE PLAN 
A1 Building orientation 
Guidelines 
  
A1.g1 The front facades and main entries of buildings should be oriented toward streets and plazas. 
  
A1.g2 Building orientation should provide views of adjoining publicly accessible streets and open spaces in order to provide passive viewing for safety. 
  
A1.g3 Pedestrian activity should be encouraged through the incorporation of active uses such as retail, commercial and/or institutional uses at the ground level. 
  
A1.g4 Buildings should define the street or public open space. 
  
A1.g5 Buildings should be located to promote sun and sky exposure to public streets and plazas. 	  Facades and entries oriented toward street  
A1.g6 Buildings should be sited to create active outdoor spaces where possible, such as outdoor restaurant seating where appropriate. 
  
Standards 
  
A1.s1 Buildings shall line a street at the Right-of-Way or the build-to line to the greatest extent possible. 
  
A1.s2 Buildings shall use the full width of the lot for the primary structure and/or active outdoor space. 	Driveway across sidewalk identified by material change  	 
 
 
 
A2 Access and driveways 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 A2.g1 Access points, including alleys, and driveways should be located to promote the safe and efficient movement of vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists. 
  
 A2.g2 Uninterrupted pedestrian-ways should be maximized in order to improve walkability. 
  
 A2.g3 The width of driveways and curb cuts should be minimized to reduce the overall impact of vehicular access across a sidewalk. 
 ;sz=7;Identify clear access points for parking  	 A2.g4 Driveways and ramps to underground parking should be perpendicular or generally perpendicular to the street. 
  
 A2.g5 Block frontages should have as few curb cuts as possible. 
  
 A2.g6 Sharing of vehicle entries between two adjacent lots is strongly encouraged. 
  
 Standards 
  
 A2.s1 Developments shall provide access for service vehicles via alleys or parking lots. 
  A3 Parking lot and structure location 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 A3.g1 Buildings should be located to minimize the visual impact of parked vehicles within lots and structures. 
  
 A3.g2 Parking lot location should minimize the impact of parked vehicles on the continuity of active commercial, mixed use, and/or residential frontages. 
  
 A3.g3 Parking lots and structures should be located to minimize the impact of vehicle noise and headlights from within parking lots and structures onto adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
  
 A3.g4 Whenever possible, parking structures should be sited internally to the block so that parking structure street frontages are avoided. If internal siting is not feasible, then the parking structure should be oriented so that the shortest dimension fronts the street. 
  
 A3.g5 If it is only feasible to orient the long dimension of a parking structure along a street, then the structure's street facade should exhibit the same high level of quality in its design, detailing and use of material as is provided in the adjoining commercial and/or mixed use buildings. 	Active uses at street level of parking structure and high quality façade  	Parking structure with retail on ground floor, quality materials, and detail  
 A3.g6 Parking structures that are sited with exposed street frontage should orient the exposed frontage to commercial activities, rather than residential uses. 
  
 Standards 
  
 A3.s1 Surface parking areas shall be located at the side or rear of buildings only. 
  
 A3.s2 Parking structures with exposed street frontage shall not be oriented toward residential uses. 	Parking lot screen  	 
  Utility screening  	A4 Utility location and screening 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 A4.g1 Service areas and utility pedestals should be located to minimize the visual impact of service areas, refuse storage and mechanical/electrical equipment on streets, public open spaces and adjoining development. 
  
 A4.g2 Utility appurtenances should be located behind the sidewalk and out of the sidewalk amenity zone wherever possible. Where it must be in the tree lawn or amenity zone, such equipment should be centered on the tree line and aligned with but no closer than 42 inches from the face of curb. This includes switch boxes, telephone pedestals, transformers, meters, irrigation, and similar equipment. 
		 A4.g3 The use of alleys is encouraged to locate all mechanical, electrical, and utility equipment to the extent possible. 
  
 Standards 
  
 A4.s1 Service areas and refuse storage areas shall not front onto streets and public open spaces. Such areas shall be located to the rear or side of buildings, and screened from view from the street and/or public open space. 
  
 A4.s2 Refuse storage and pick-up areas shall be combined with other service and loading areas. 
A5 Pedestrian access 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 A5.g1 Pedestrian entries to buildings should promote security on a street or public open space through frequent points of access and sources of activity. 
  
 A5.g2 In general, ground floor uses with exterior exposure should each have an individual public entry directly located on a public sidewalk along a street, or on a sidewalk or plaza leading directly to a street. 
  
 Standards 
  
 A5.s1 Primary building entrances shall be oriented toward streets, parks or pedestrian plazas. 
  
 A5.s2 Each block face shall have multiple building entries. A building occupying an entire city block shall include more than one building entrance along each block face. 	 
 A5.s3 All secondary building entries shall be well lit and directly connected to the street. 	Primary building entrances oriented toward streets  	 
 
	B. ARCHITECTURE 
 
B1 Building Character 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 B1.g1 Building character should be creative and within a visually comfortable and familiar environment. 
  
 B1.g2 Buildings should be designed to provide human scale, interest, and variety while maintaining an overall sense of relationship with adjoining or nearby buildings. 
  
 B1.g3 Art integrated into building facades or forms, and/or specially designed architectural ornament is encouraged. 
  Variations of material, color and texture  	 
  Standards 
  
 B1.s1 All buildings shall be designed specifically for the context and character of the corridor. "Iconic" corporate standard building design is encouraged at identified gateway and landmark locations. 
  
 B1.s2 The majority of the building(s) of a development shall possess an architectural character that respects traditional design principles, such as: 
  
   • Variation in the building form such as recessed or projecting bays; 
  
   • Expression of architectural or structural modules and detail; 
  
   • Diversity of window size, shape or patterns that relate to interior functions; 
  
   • >Emphasis of building entries through projecting or recessed forms, detail, color or materials; 
  
   • Variations of material, modules, expressed joints and details, surface relief, color, and texture to scale; 
  
   • Tighter, more frequent rhythm of column/bay spacing, subdividing the building façade into smaller, more human scaled elements. 
 
B2 Building Form 
Guidelines 
  
B2.g1 New development should create occasional special building forms that terminate views, create a unique skyline, and aid in way-finding. 
  
B2.g2 Building form should emphasize important components of a building, such as an entry, or a special internal space 
  
B2.g3 Lower building heights or upper level stepbacks are encouraged on the south or east side of the street or public open space in order to provide more sun penetration to the ground level. 	  Example of upper level stepbacks  
B2.g4 Taller buildings adjacent to lower buildings shall establish scale relationships with lower, neighboring buildings through methods such as: compatible horizontal alignment of architectural features and fenestration, and height and form transitions from one building to another. 
  
Standard 
  
B2.s1 Building form shall employ a uniform level of quality on all sides of the building. 	  Emphasis on entry or special internal space  	 
 
  Varied steps in height  	  Vertical divisions in façade  	B3 Building Façade 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 B3.g1 Building facades should be designed to provide human scale and detail and to avoid large areas of undifferentiated or blank facades. 
  
 B3.g2 Each building facade oriented to the street or public space should provide architectural variety and scale through the use of such elements as: expressions of building structure; patterns of window, door or other openings that provide surface variation through change of plane, change in color; change in texture; change in material module or pattern; art or ornament integral with the building. 
  Scale relationships  	 B3.g3 Primary building facades should include some elements that provide a change in plane that create interest through the interplay of light and shadow. Examples of such elements are: 
  
   • recessed windows, at least 3 inches; 
  
   • recessed entries and doors; 
  
   • projecting sills; 
  
   • recessed or projecting balconies; 
  
   • projecting pilasters, columns, bays; 
  
   • projecting cornices, roofs. 
  
 B3.g4 Each "base" should be composed of the first floor or first two floors of the building. 
  
 B3.g5 Each "base" in its entirety should be designed to give the appearance of greater height than any single floor of the middle. 
B3.g6 Each "base" should have a greater level of transparency than the "middle" or "top". 
  
B3.g7 The architectural treatment of the "top" should be designed to create a sense of distinctly completing the dominant architectural theme of the "middle" of the building. This architectural completion may be accomplished by such strategies as: change in the window rhythm, change in apparent floor height, setback, use of other materials, or a combination of these elements. 
  
B3.g8 Distinctive corner, entry treatments and other architectural features designed to interact with contextual features may be designed differently than the "base", "middle", and "top". This difference would allow the addition of vertical emphasis at significant architectural points along the building facade. 	 
B3.g9 The "top" of buildings above four (4) stories may have a "cap" set back above the lower stories, which is distinctive in shape and smaller than the previous floor. 
  
Standards 
  
B3.s1 The building facade shall generally have three vertical divisions: "bases", "middles", and "tops". In buildings of three stories or less in height, the "top" may be comprised of an ornamental "cap" or cornice rather than the articulation of an entire floor of habitable space. 
  
B3.s2 The design of "roofscape" elements of tall buildings shall relate directly to the building walls. 
  
B3.s3 Building design shall create varied roof parapet and cornice lines in order to create interesting and human scaled skylines. 	  Vertical divisions in facade  	 
 
  Upper floor transparency  	B4 Building Transparency 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 B4.g1 Where functionally appropriate, the ground floor, street-facing facade shall be made of transparent materials designed to allow pedestrians to view activities inside the buildings, retail goods for sale, or display lighted windows related to these activities. 
  
 B4.g2 When transparency is not functionally appropriate, other means should be used to provide activity along the street-facing façade such as public art; architectural ornament or detailing; or material, texture, or color patterns. 
  
 B4.g3 Buildings should incorporate a window or glazing-to-wall ratio that is sufficient to establish the visual solidity of the building form. 
  Building transparency  	 
 B4.g4 Reflective glass should be used sparingly, if at all, to reduce glare, reduce the opacity or "blankness" of the facade. Coated or tinted glass may be considered to reduce heat gain, particularly on west and south facades. 
  
 B4.g5 Windows or glazing on upper levels should be sufficiently transparent to provide an awareness of internal activities when viewed from the street or public spaces. 
  
 Standards 
  
 B4.s1 Glass without coatings or tints shall be used for all retail glazing. In no case shall highly reflective glass be used. 
  
B5 Building Entries 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 B5.g1 For mixed-use buildings with residential units, one or more separate building entrances from the sidewalk should be used to provide access to the residential units. 
  
 B5.g2 Detailed and elaborate entries should be used as another way to create street level interest and architectural variety. 
  
 B5.g3 Major building entries should be emphasized through such design devices as changes in plane, differentiation in material and/or color, greater level of detail, enhanced lighting, ornament, art, and/or building graphics. 
  
 B5.g4 Primary building entries should be oversized, and generally break the storefront/ground floor façade pattern. 	 
  Standard 
  
 B5.s1 Each multi-story building shall have one clearly identifiable "front door" that addresses the street. In addition to this "front door," a building occupying an entire city block shall include at least one other building entrance along each block face. 	  Emphasis on building entry  	 
 
 
B6 Building Materials 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 B6.g1 New development should use materials and colors that possess a comfortable and familiar character, convey a sense of quality and attention to detail, and are compatible with materials of adjacent buildings. 
  
 B6.g2 New development should use lasting materials that weather well, need little maintenance, and resist vandalism. 
  
 B6.g3 Materials and/or detailing at retail frontages should distinguish between the structural parts of a building (columns, walls and beams), and the infill parts of a building (wall panels, frames, windows and doors). 
  High quality materials  	 
 B6.g4 Infill materials should have a non-structural appearance. 
  
 Standards 
  
 B6.s1 A significant portion of the facade facing a street or public open space (not including windows, doors and their framing systems), shall be composed of highly durable materials such as: brick, stone, cast stone, specially treated concrete masonry units, terra-cotta, and/or glass. All building materials shall be integrally tinted. 
  
 B6.s2 Building materials shall maintain a uniform level of quality on all sides of the building. 
B7 Parking Structures 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 B7.g1 The exterior of parking structures should be wrapped with mixed-use space in order to minimize the visual impact of parking on the pedestrian experience, and the street environment and to increase pedestrian activity and interest along the street by locating active uses at the street level of parking garages. 
  
 B7.g2 Garage facades visible from public streets and open spaces should be compatible in character and quality with adjoining buildings. 
  
 B7.g3 Parking structures should create visually interesting facades that provide human scale and detail while avoiding large areas of undifferentiated or blank facades. 	  Retail wrap and compatible facade on upper stories of parking structure  	  Street facade of parking structure that screens parked cars  
 B7.g4 Openings should be vertically and horizontally aligned. 
  
 Standards 
  
 B7.s1 Street oriented facades shall conceal or effectively reduce the impact of parked cars and light sources from the exterior view for the full height of the structure. 
  
 B7.s2 Multi-story parking structures (3 levels or more) with facades facing public streets shall provide commercial, live-work, residential and/or institutional space for not less than 50% of the garage's ground level street facing frontage, or the design and structure of the ground floor street frontage should be able to accommodate in the future one of the above listed uses. 
  
 B7.s3 Sloping ramps shall not be visible within the street facade of any parking structure. 	 
 
 
B8 Building Lighting 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 B8.g1 Building lighting should accentuate important architectural components of the building, such as entries, towers or roof elements, or repetitive columns or bays, and include decorative lighting. 
  
 B8.g2 Building lighting should provide indirect or direct lighting for adjoining sidewalks and open spaces. 
  
 B8.g3 Primary building entries should be externally lit so as to promote a more secure environment at the door, emphasize the primary point of entry into the building, and provide sufficient lighting for efficient access into the building. 
  Lighting at building entries  	 
B8.g4 Steps and/or ramps at or leading to a primary building entry should be illuminated sufficiently for safe access. 
  
 Standard 
  
 B8.s1 Entry lighting shall complement the building's architecture. Standard security lighting such as wallpacks shall not be allowed. 
B9 Rooftop Design 
  Guidelines 
  
 B9.g1 Rooftop design should maintain the integrity of architecturally designed building tops and help create interesting and varied skylines. 
  
 B9.g2 In mixed use development, if residential uses are located near mechanical equipment, care should be taken to mitigate the impacts of noise and odors. 
  
 B9.g3 Antennae that extend over five feet above the roof line are encouraged to have screening techniques applied such as color and material to minimize visibility. 	  Screening of rooftop mechanical equipment  	 
 B9.g4 Streetscape within the corridor area should not be cluttered by utility elements. 	
 B9.g5 Utility boxes should be located so that they do not obstruct pedestrian traffic or block sight lines at intersections. 	
  Standards 	
 B9.s1 All roof-mounted mechanical and electrical equipment, communication antennae or dishes shall be enclosed, screened, organized, designed and/or located as part of the architectural expression and shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. Any equipment shall be covered or screened to its full height. 	
 B9.s2 Switch boxes, transformers, electrical and gas meters, and other above ground utility elements shall be screened or located out of view from the street. 	
 
 
C. LANDSCAPE 
  
C1 Perimeter Landscaping 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 C1.g1 Perimeter landscaping design should create street and plaza spaces that join buildings, uses, pedestrian areas, and streets into a unified urban place. 
  
 C1.g2 Perimeter landscaping should reinforce the pedestrian environment established in the adjoining street right-of-way. 
  
 C1.g3 Perimeter landscaping should be designed to provide seamless transitions between buildings, uses, and open spaces that promote the mixing of commercial, residential, and institutional uses. 
  Perimeter landscaping design  	 
C1.g4 Where a landscape perimeter area occurs between a building frontage and a street right-of-way, it should be designed to extend the pedestrian amenities of the street, such as increased walkway widths, areas for outdoor café/restaurant seating, increased sidewalk widths to allow window shopping out of the stream of pedestrian traffic, and space for the temporary display of a retailer's goods. 
  
 C1.g5 Where space permits, planting in containers, raised planters, or cutouts in the paving is encouraged. 
  
 Standard 
  
 C1.s1 Where a side setback landscape perimeter area occurs, it shall be designed to contribute to a pedestrian amenity zone such as a passageway, or contribute to a paved driveway or alley. 
C2 Internal Courtyards, Plazas and Open Spaces 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 C2.g1 Internal courtyards, plazas, or open spaces should be designed to create useable open spaces, suitable for passive recreational activities such as informal play, reading, and sitting in the sun or shade. 
  
 C2.g2 All open spaces accessible to the general public should be open a minimum of 12 hours per day. 
  
 C2.g3 Private open space may be fenced with wrought iron, masonry or comparable decorative fencing or otherwise controlled for security. 	  Front setback perimeter area  	 
  Standard 
  
 C2.s1 All public and private open space not used for recreation shall be attractively landscaped with plant material and hard surfaces. 	  Internal courtyards  	 
  Variety in sidewalk paving materials  	 
C3 Hardscape Design 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 C3.g1 Hardscape design should provide a quality of paving materials and patterns consistent with the quality of the surrounding architecture and open spaces and provide safe paving conditions for all persons. 
  
 C3.g2 Hardscape design should create interest and variation within paved surfaces that includes but is not limited to public art, coloring, or materials. 
  
 C3.g3 Special paving should be carefully chosen for structural capability and durability in the local climate. Uncolored concrete, colored concrete, brick, hydraulically pressed concrete unit pavers or stone is recommended. 
	 
 C3.g4 Special paving patterns and materials should be used to emphasize important building entries, provide interest and variation, and differentiate between sidewalks, plazas, medians, and crosswalks. 
  
 Standards 
  
 C3.s1 Sidewalks shall be separated or buffered from vehicle travel lanes by street/pedestrian lights, and/or street trees in grates or in a tree lawn. 
  
 C3.s2 In transition areas, sidewalks shall be separated from the street by trees in tree lawns. 
C4 Landscape: Trees and Plant Materials 
  Guidelines 
 C4.g1 Landscaping should create a strong identity for each street and use quality plant materials that are located, sized, and provided in quantities sufficient to emphasize important streets. 	
 C4.g2 Landscaping should use plant materials that tolerate an urban condition. 
  
 C4.g3 Trees should align parallel and perpendicularly across the street with each other whenever possible. 
  
 C4.g4 Ornamental trees should not be used in a street right-of-way. 
  
 C4.g5 Tree grates or planting cut-outs should be used in paved areas to prevent excessive soil compaction. 	 
 
 C4.g6 Large tree pits that allow for a broader canopy are preferred over typical street trees. 
  
 C4.g7 All tree lawns and street trees in cut-outs, tree pits, and grates should be irrigated with an automatic irrigation system. Drought-tolerant turf or low, continuous ground covers should be used as the primary ground cover for continuous tree lawns. 
  
 C4.g8 To the maximum extent feasible, topsoil that is removed during construction activity should be conserved for later use on areas requiring revegetation and landscaping. 	  Tree lawns in right-of-way  	 
  Pedestrian lighting that provides an identity  	 
  Standards 
  
 C4.s1 No artificial trees, shrubs, turf, or plants shall be used to fulfill the minimum requirements for landscaping. 
  
 C4.s2 Tree lawns shall be a minimum of 6 feet in width, measured from the back of curb to the edge of the sidewalk. 
  
 C4.s3 Street trees shall be centered within the width of the tree lawn. 
  
 C4.s4 Street trees in tree grates shall be at least 2 feet 6 inches from the face of the curb. Tree grates shall be at least 24 sq. ft. with openings no more than 1/4 inch to 3/8 inch in width and should be designed to allow for tree trunk growth. 
  Alignment of pedestrian lighting  	 
C5 Street and Pedestrian Lighting 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 C5.g1 Lighting should provide a safe and secure environment for motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians. 
  
 C5.g2 Lighting should create an identity for the development and/or special streets. 
  
 C5.g3 Lighting should enhance the quality of streets in the commercial core through the design of the light poles, bases, fixtures, and attachments. 
  
 C5.g4 Street and/or pedestrian light poles should be aligned with and centered between street trees. 
 
 C5.g5 Where the light source is directly visible, the luminaries should be designed to incorporate elements to reduce glare, such as translucent, internal refracting surfaces to direct light down and away from adjoining private property; lower height poles; lower wattage or pole location. 
  
 Standards 
  
   none in this section 
  C6 Street Furniture 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 C6.g1 Seating should be durable, comfortable, attractive, securely anchored, and easy to maintain. Seating surfaces should be 16 to 18 inches high with a minimum depth of 16 inches for seats without backs and 14 inches for seats with backs. 	  Consolidated newsracks  
 C6.g2 Where bus stops occur within tree lawns, a minimum of one 6-foot long bench should be placed on a concrete pad. Where a bus stop occurs on a wide attached sidewalk, a 6-foot long bench should be provided within the sidewalk's amenity zone. 
  
 C6.g3 Trash receptacles should be conveniently located near benches and other activity nodes. 
  
 C6.g4 Trash receptacles should relate in appearance and color to other street furniture. They should be firmly attached to paving to avoid vandalism. Covered tops and sealed bottoms should be included to keep the contents dry and out of sight at all times. 
  	  Durable and comfortable seating  
  Wayfinding signs  	 
 C6.g5 Bicycle racks should be placed near entrances or gathering places, but out of pedestrian and bicycle traffic areas where they may create tripping or other safety hazards. If possible, locate racks where parked bicycles are visible from the inside of adjacent buildings. 
  
 C6.g6 Newspaper racks and trash receptacles should be located at areas where high pedestrian activity is anticipated. 
  
 C6.g7 Newspaper boxes should be clustered together and screened by specially designed railings. They should be located adjacent to pedestrian activity, but not so as to obstruct drivers' views at intersections, or car overhang/door swings at the curb. 
  
 Standards 
  
  none in this section 
	 
C7 Wayfinding Elements 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 C7.g1 Wayfinding should compliment and enrich the pedestrian experience and create interesting streets and spaces. 
  
 C7.g2 Wayfinding information should be conveyed clearly and efficiently with high quality sign and graphic design. 
  
 C7.g3 Information should be provided for events on-site as well as within the City. 
 C7.g4 To provide art, whimsy and contrast to the civic structure of the street furnishings, wayfinding elements should relate to local culture and flavor. 
  
 C7.g5 Information kiosks and wayfinding elements should be located near pedestrian origin points such as parking structure stairs and elevators, public plazas and near entrances to public buildings. 
  
 Standards 
  
   none in this section 
  C8 Gateway Elements and Public Art 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 C8.g1 Public art should engage the community, and express community identity. 
  
 C8.g2 Art should create experiences for the senses and opportunities for surprise, wonder, interest, contemplation, reflection, humor, interaction and play. 	  Public Art  	 
 C8.g3 Art should provide shade structures at appropriate locations, particularly on the north side of the street. 
  
 C8.g4 Commissioned works should exhibit superior craftsmanship and design, and be fabricated of durable, low maintenance materials using proven technologies. A range of signature pieces should include integrated urban design elements, architectural detailing and interactive features. 
  
 C8.g5 Art should be sited to create areas of emphasis within the urban fabric while supporting the social function of each space. 		
 
 
 C8.g6 Selected artworks should include interactive elements allowing residents and visitors to walk through, play, sit on, and otherwise physically interact with the finished work. 
  
 C8.g7 Artwork, where appropriate, should be integrated into infrastructure and site furnishings (i.e., hardscape/landscape elements, building facades, tree grates, wayfinding devices, seating, etc.). 
  
 Standards 
  
 C8.s1 All plaza areas shall include public art. 
  
 C8.s2 Artwork shall be designed and sited to correlate with surrounding activity patterns. 
  
 
D. SIGNAGE 
  D1 General Criteria 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 D1.g1 Signs should be located, sized, and designed for single or multiple uses so as to eliminate conflicts, predict the impact and effects of the signs on adjoining properties, avoid clutter and achieve the desired character of their application. 
  
 D1.g2 In an effort to limit the variety of sign types used on a single building along the corridor, the following combinations should be considered: 
  
   • One (1) wall sign per use; window signs limited to 10 percent of any window area; one (1) monument sign per building frontage, but awning signs, pole signs, or projecting signs are discouraged in this combination. 
   • Window signs limited to 20 percent of the window area, awning signs, and one (1) projecting sign per use, but wall signs, pole signs, or monument signs are discouraged in this combination. 
  
   • One (1) wall sign per use, one (1) projecting sign per use if located or designed so as not to visually conflict, window signs limited to 10 percent of any window area, but awning signs, pole signs, or monument signs are discouraged in this combination. 	  Signage examples  	 
  Standards 
  
 D1.s1 Rehabilitated buildings shall provide a sign plan showing locations, sizes, heights, and probable design and illumination of all sign types to be used on the building or its site. 
  D2 General Number and Location of Signs 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 D2.g1 Signs should be limited in number commensurate with the needs of the uses in the building. 
  
 D2.g2 Signs should respect the architectural character and design of the building in their number and location. 
  
 D2.g3 Sign clutter, where the number and size of signs dominate the storefront or façade of the building, should be avoided. 	  Awning sign  	  Projecting sign  
  Wall sign  	  Standards 
  
 D2.s1 Wall, window, awning, and projecting signs shall not be allowed above the ground floor with the exception of the following with the discretion of the design review committee: 
  
   • Painted, face-lit wall signs; 
  
   • Internally lit channel letter signs and/or logos; 
  
   • Painted wall murals with a minor component for the identification of a business; 
  
   • One unlit window sign per business; 
  
   • The extension of a ground floor projecting sign; 
  Window sign  		   • The name of the building integrated into the material and/or design of the façade. In no case shall an internally lighted, cabinet type wall sign be allowed above the ground floor. 
  
 D2.s2 Signs shall not be located within the residential portion of the facade of any mixed use building. 
  
 D2.s3 A maximum combination of three sign types shall be used for any building frontage. Such sign types are: wall, projecting, ground, window, awning, marquee and arcade. 
  D3 General Size and Height 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 D3.g1 The size of signs should be related to the location and speed of movement of the typical person viewing the sign. 
  
 Standards 
  
   none in this section 
D4. General Design and Illumination 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 D4.g1 Signs should respect the architectural character and design of the building. 
  
 D4.g2 Signs should be expressive of the activity, product, or use for which they are displayed. 
  
 D3.g3 Signs should be compatible with existing residential uses. 
  
 Standards 
  
 D4.s1 Materials for signs shall compliment the color, material and overall character of the architecture. 	  Signs compliment color, material and character of architecture  
 D4.s2 Signs shall be constructed of high quality, durable materials. All materials must be finished to withstand corrosion. All mechanical fasteners shall be of hot-dipped galvanized steel, stainless steel, aluminum, brass or bronze. 	
 D4.s3 All conduits, transformers, and other equipment shall be concealed, and shall have UL ratings. 	
 D4.s4 Exterior lighting of signs shall be oriented down onto the face of the sign, not up from below to minimize night sky light pollution. 	
 D4.s5 Sign illumination shall not create objectionable glare to pedestrians, motorists, and adjoining residents. 	
 D4.s6 A business's corporate logo or typical sign design may be allowed by the design review committee. However, the design review committee shall retain complete control over the design, dimensions, location, number and type of the sign. 	
 D4.s7 Hand painted signs shall not be allowed, unless painted by a sign contractor specializing in hand painted or hand crafted signs. 	
  Acceptable projecting wall sign  	  Wall sign with mounted letters  	 D4.s8 Sign illumination shall be integrated into the design of the sign. Signs may be externally lit so long as the external lighting has been conceived and controlled as part of the sign design. 
  
 D4.s9 Internally illuminated sign cabinets, either for wall or projecting signs, shall not have white or light colored back-lit translucent face panels. 
  D5 Wall Signs 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 D5.g1 Wall signs should be integrated with the architecture of the building. 
  
 D5.g2 In general, wall mounted sign cabinets should be discouraged. 
  
 Standards 
		 D5.s1 Wall signs shall be located within any sign areas clearly designed for signs on existing or proposed building facades. 
		 D5.s2 Lighted wall signs shall not be located at the top of a building's facade if the facade is higher than two stories and shall not directly face a residential neighborhood. 
		 D5.s3 Maximum wall sign size shall not be increased by an increase in sign height. 
		 D5.s4 No more than one wall sign shall be allowed per building. 
		 D5.s5 Wall signs shall not overlap, or generally conflict with important architectural features such as windows, cornices, belt courses, or other details. 
 D5.s6 Wall signs located on the side wall of a building that faces a side property line, alley, or parking area (including a side property line along a street), shall not be lighted above the ground floor. 
  
 D5.s7 Wall signs shall be composed of individually mounted letters, logos or icons without sign backing panels, or letters/logos mounted on a backing panel. 
  
 D5.s8 Phone/Fax numbers on all signs, with the exception of window signs, shall not be allowed. 
  
 D5.s9 Neon signs, except those located in a window, shall not be allowed. 
  D6 Projecting Signs 	  Appropriately scaled lighting and signage  
  Guidelines 
  
 D6.g1 Projecting signs should not be closer than 50 feet apart, and no more than 3 for 300 feet of street frontage. 
  
 Standards 
  
 D6.s1 Each use by right shall be limited to one projecting sign for each of that use's street frontage. 
  
 D6.s2 Projecting signs shall not be located above the ground floor. 
  
 D6.s3 All projecting sign structures on a building shall be located at the same height as the other sign structures. 
  
 D6.s4 Projecting signs shall be located above or below non-signed awnings, but not in line with the awnings. 	  Desirable ground sign  
 
 D6.s5 Projecting signs shall not be greater in size than 12 square feet per face or 24 square feet per sign. 
  
 D6.s6 Projecting signs shall be externally lit. Internally lit sign cabinets are generally discouraged except where the sign face is composed of metal with back lit cut out letters or logos. 
  D7 Ground Signs 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 D7.g1 Ground signs should be refined, creative and unique. 
  
 D7.g2 "Designed" pole or post signs are encouraged when the vertical supports are integrated into the design of the sign. 
  Desirable window signs  	 D7.g3 The design of a joint identification sign should be unified, uncluttered, easily readable, and of high quality. Ways to avoid a cluttered appearance are: 
  
    • The sign text for most components is composed of the same type face and size. 
  
    • The sign structure or frame is dominant enough or simple enough to visually organize varied components. 
  
    • The sign has a clear hierarchy or importance in its components. 
  
 Standards 
  
 D7.s1 Only one (1) monument or per street frontage sign shall be allowed per building. The monument sign may also be a joint identification sign. 
  
 D7.s2 Ground signs shall have no more than one sign cabinet or backing panel. 
  
 D7.s3 If lighted, monument signs should be externally lit with a shielded or directed light source. 
  D8 Window Signs 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 D8.g1 Window signs should emphasize a window's transparency and sense of openness to the interior. 
 D8.g2 Window signs should avoid clutter: 1) within the text and graphic components of the window signs, and 2) in combination with the objects of view through the window. 
  
 Standards 
  
 D8.s1 Window signs shall generally be located in the lower or upper 25 percent of the window area. Window signs may be located in the middle portion of the window, but should not substantially obscure the activities or displays beyond the window. 
  
 D8.s2 Window signs should not be larger than 10 percent of each window or door area, except that window signs may be as large as 20 percent of each window area if no wall sign is provided. 
  
 D8.s3 Storefront window signs shall be limited to either the tenant's name or logo. Operating hours may be applied onto the glass, but shall be kept small, preferably on the windows next to the front door. 	 
 D8.s4 Window signs on glazing shall be either silk screened, back-painted, metal-leafed, or sand-blasted onto the glass. Vinyl letters are not allowed. 
  D9 Awning Signs 
  
 Guidelines 
  
 D9.g1 Awning signs should be carefully controlled so as not to become substitutes for wall signs or projecting signs. 
  
 Standards 
  
 D9.s1 Each awning may have a sign printed on its valence. 	 
  Desirable awning signs  	 
 D9.s2 Awning signs shall not be allowed above the ground floor. Awnings without signs may be allowed above the ground floor if they are compatible with the architecture. 
  
 D9.s3 Awnings shall be consistent in color and visually balanced over the façade of the building. 
  
 D9.s4 Standard residential type aluminum awnings shall not be used. Awnings shall be composed of non-combustible acrylic fabric. 
  
 D9.s5 Back-lit translucent awnings with or without signs shall not be allowed. Shielded down lights within an awning that light only the paving under the awning may be acceptable. 
  
 D9.s6 Entry canopies shall not be allowed if they extend more than 4 feet from the building face. 
  
 D9.s7 Awning signs shall be located primarily on the awning valence that faces the street, not on a valence that is generally perpendicular to the street. 
  
 D9.s8 If side panels are provided, such panels should not carry signs greater in area than 20 percent of the area of the awning sign panel. 
  
 D9.s9 Text on awning valences shall not be greater than 8 inches high. A valence drop length shall be no greater than 12 inches. 
  
 D9.s10 Awnings shall not extend vertically beyond a building's or storefront's individual bays. 
  
 D9.s11 Awnings shall be composed of traditional forms, and compliment the window or bay within which it occurs. Straight, more steeply sloped awnings are preferred. Rounded "barrel" awnings are discouraged. Rounded awnings designed to fit arched windows or bays are acceptable. 
 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Appendix C. ILLUSTRATIVE PLANS 
 
Main Street Sub-District Illustrative Plan 
 
Central Sub-District Illustrative Plan 
 
Southern Sub-District Illustrative Plan 
 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Appendix D. FRAMEWORK PLANS 
Northern Gateway Core Sub-District Framework Plan 
 
Main Street Core Sub-District Framework Plan 
 
Central Core Sub-District Framework Plan 
 
Southern Gatway Core Sub-District Framework Plan 
 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Appendix E. PROCESS FLOW CHART 
Appendix E.
Process Flow Chart 
 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Appendix F. CORE SUB-DISTRICT STREET DESIGN STANDARDS 
  
Appendix F.
Core Sub-district Street Design Standards 
Street Types ? 	Arterial 	Collector (Divided) 	Collector (Undivided) 	Local Street/Private
Vehicular Route 	Alley 
				Commercial 	Residential 	Commercial 	Residential 
ROW* (min-max) 	74' - 106' 	84' - 118' 	52' - 93' 	52' - 86' 	52' - 58' 	32' 	18' - 58' 
Design Speed 	45 MPH 	35—45 MPH 	25—35 MPH 	25 MPH 	25 MPH 	<20 MPH 	<20 MPH 
Travel Zone 
Number of Lanes (min-max) 	4—6 	4 	2—3 	2 	2 	2 	1 Yield 
Lane Widths** (min-max) 	11' 	10' - 11' 	10' - 11' 	10' - 11' 	10' - 11' 	11' 	Yield # (12' - 15') 
Median Required (Y/N; min-max) 	Y (14' - 16') 	Y (12' - 14') 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 
On-Street Parking Permitted (Y/N) 	N 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 	Y 
On-Street Parking Required (Y/N) 	N 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 	N 
Allowable Parking design and Min. Width 	Parallel (8' min.) 	- 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	- 	-Y 
	Angled (60 degree, 18') 	- 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 	- 	-Y 
	Head-in (20' min.) 	- 	N 	N 	Y € 	N 	- 	-Y 
On-Street Bike Lane *** Permitted (Y/N) 	-N 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N- 	-N 	-N 
Streetscape Zone 
Total Streetscape Zone 							
  Primary Pedestrian Street 	12' (min.) 	12' (min.) 	12' (min.) 	12' (min.) 	10' (min.) 	NA 	NA 
  All other Streets 	8' (min.) 	8' (min.) 	8' (min.) 	8' (min.) 	8' (min.) 	NA 	NA 
Amenity Zone 							
  Primary Pedestrian Street 	6' (min.) 	6' (min.) 	6' (min.) 	6' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	NA 	NA 
  All other Streets 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	NA 	NA 
Sidewalk (clear width)µ 					- 	- 	
  Primary Pedestrian Street 	6' (min.) 	6' (min.) 	6' (min.) 	6' (min.) 	6' (min.) 	NA 	NA 
  All other Streets 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	NA 	NA 
 
;sz=9;*  Standard ranges for width provided. Max. ROW widths may vary based on the Streetscape Zone. ROW widths for dedication along existing Streets shall be based on the city's adopted Thoroughfare Plan and LDR. 
;sz=9;**  Total pavement widths shall be sufficient for fire access 
;sz=9; #  Unless alley acts as a fire lane, then fire lane standards shall apply. 
;sz=9; €  Less than 6,000 cars/day and non Primary Pedestrian Street frontage. 
;sz=9;***  Shall be based on any adopted bike plans. 
;sz=9; µ  Any enhanced sidewalks shall meet the city's adopted Trail Plan standards. 
Appendix F
Transition Sub-district Street Design Standards 
Street Types ? 	Arterial 	Collector (Divided) 	Collector (Undivided) 	Local Street 	Alley 
				Commercial 	Residential 	Commercial 	Residential 
ROW* (min-max) 	74' - 106' 	70' - 112' 	36' - 87' 	38' - 80' 	42' - 58' 	32' 	18' 
Design Speed 	45 MPH 	35—45 MPH 	25—35 MPH 	25 MPH 	25 MPH 	<20 MPH 	<20 MPH 
Travel Zone 
Number of Lanes (min-max) 	4—6 	4 	2—3 	2 	2 	2 	1 Yield 
Lane Widths** (min-max) 	11' - 12' 	10' - 11' 	10' - 11' 	10' - 11' 	10' - 11' 	11' 	Yield # (12' - 15') 
Median Required (Y/N; min-max) 	Y (14' - 16') 	Y (12' - 14') 	N 	N 	N 	N 	N 
On-Street Parking Permit'd (Y/N) 	N 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 	N 
Allowable Parking design and Min. Width 	Parallel (8' min.) 	- 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	- 	- 
	Angled (60 degree, 18' min.) 	- 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N 	- 	- 
	Head-in (20' min.) 	- 	N 	N 	Y € 	N 	- 	- 
On-Street Bike Lane*** (Permitted Y/N) 	-N 	Y 	Y 	Y 	N- 	-N 	-N 
Streetscape Zone 
Total Streetscape Zone 	9' (min.) 	9' (min.) 	9' (min.) 	9' (min.) 	9' (min.) 	NA 	NA 
Amenity Zone 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	4' (min.) 	NA 	NA 
Sidewalk (clear width)µ 	5' (min.) 	5' (min.) 	5' (min.) 	5' (min.) 	5' (min.) 	- NA 	- NA 
 
;sz=9;*  Standard ranges for width provided. Max. ROW widths may vary based on the Streetscape Zone. ROW widths for dedication along existing streets shall be based on the city's adopted Thoroughfare Plan and LDR. 
;sz=9;**  Total pavement widths shall be sufficient for fire access. 
;sz=9; #  Unless alley acts as a fire lane, then fire lane standards shall apply. 
;sz=9; €  Less than 6,000 cars/day and non Primary Pedestrian Street frontage. 
;sz=9;***  Shall be based on any adopted bike plans. 
;sz=9; µ  Any enhanced sidewalks shall meet the city's adopted Trail Plan standards. 
Example Core District Cross Sections 
The following street cross sections are examples developed from the Street Design Standards for Street types in the Corridor District. These are provided to show how elements can be combined. ROW widths shall be derived from the Master Thoroughfare Plan, where applicable, and Street Design Standards. 
 
 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Appendix G. APPROVED PLANT MATERIAL LIST 
The following lists contain all species approved for use in the Corridor District. It contains native and acceptable adapted species. Other species that are drought-tolerant and adaptive may be used for planting within the Corridor District with approval of an Administrative Modification, as specifically authorized in this chapter. 
CANOPY TREE LIST 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
Live Oak 	Quercus virginiana 
Red Oak* 	Quercus shumardi 
Bald Cypress 	Taxodium distichum 
Sweetgum 	Liquidambar styraciflua 
Cedar Elm 	Ulmus crassifolia 
Lacebark Elm* 	Ulmus parvifolia 
Bigtooth Maple* 	Acer grandidentatum 
Caddo Maple 	Acer saccharum "Caddo" 
Texas Ash* 	Fraxinus velutina "Rio Grande" 
Bur Oak 	Quercus macrocarpa 
Chinquapin Oak 	Quercus muhlenbergii 
Escarpment Live Oak 	Quercus fusiformis 
Ginkgo 	Ginkgo biloba 
Pecan 	Carya illinoensis 
*Species preferred but not required for Amenity Zones 	
 
ORNAMENTAL TREE LIST 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
Yaupon Holly 	Ilex vomatoria 
Crape Myrtle 	Lagerstromia indica 
Deciduous Yaupon 	Ilex decidua 
Southern Crabapple 	Malus app. 
Mexican Plum 	Prunus Mexicana 
Wax Myrtle 	Myrica carifera 
Chitalpa 	Chitalpa tashkentensis 
Deciduous Holly 	Ilex decidua 
Desert Willow 	Chilopsis linearis 
Eve's Necklace 	Sophora affinis 
 
SHRUBBERY LIST 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
Dwarf Nandina 	Nandina domestica "nana" 
Dwarf Burford Holly 	Ilex cornuta "burfordi nana" 
Abelia Grandiflora 	Abelia grandiflora 
Barberry 	Barberry spp. 
Yucca (Red, Yellow or Soft Tip) 	Hesperaloe parviflora 
Texas Sage 	Leucophyllum frutescans 
Indian Hawthorn 	Raphiolepsis indica 
Dwarf Crape Myrtle 	Lagerstromia indica "nana" 
Dwarf Yaupon Holly 	Ilex vomitorria "nana" 
Pampas Grass 	Cortaderia selloana 
Black-Eyed Susan 	Rudbeckia hirta 
Dwarf Wax Myrtle 	Myrica pusilla 
Needlepoint Holly 	Ilex cornuta "Needle Point" 
Knockout Rose 	Rosa "Knock Out" 
Rosemary 	Rosmarinus officinalis 
 
GROUND COVER/VINES LIST 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
Asian Jasmine 	Trachelosperum Asiaticum 
Big Blue Liriope 	Lirope muscari 
Mondograss 	Ophiopogon japonicus 
Purple Winter Creeper 	Euonymum coloratus 
Santolina 	Santolina virens 
Trumpet Vine 	Campsis radicans 
Virginia Creeper 	Parthenocissus quinquifolia 
Lady Banks Rose 	Rosa banksiaw lutea 
Confederate Jasmine 	Trachelospermum jasminoides 
Crossvine 	Bignonia capreolata 
Evergreen Wisteria 	Millettia reticulata 
Lantana "New Gold" 	Lantana camara "New Gold" 
Liriope "Silver Dragon" 	Liriope muscari "Silver Dragon" 
Prostrate Rosemary 	Rosmarinus officinalis prostrata 
Sweet Autumn Clematis 	Clematis terniflora 
 
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES LIST 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
Dwarf Fountain Grass "Little Bunny" 	Pennisetum alopecuroides "Little Bunny" 
Dwarf Maiden Grass 	Miscanthus sinensis "Adagio" 
Fountain Grass 	Pennisetum alopecuroides 
Inland Seaoats 	Chasmanthium latifolium 
Maiden Grass 	Miscanthus sinensis "Gracillimus" 
Mexican Feather Grass 	Stipa tenuissima 
Muhly Grass 	Muhlenbergia capillaris 
Weeping Lovegrass 	Eragrostis curvula 
 
TURF 
Common Name 	Botanical Name 
Bermuda 	Cynodon dactylon 
St. Augustine 	Stenotaphrum secondatum 
Zoysia 	Zoysia tenuifolia 
 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18)  
Appendix H. IH-35E CORRIDOR OVERLAY DISTRICT BOUNDARY 
Exhibit 1. IH-35E Corridor Overlay District Boundary 
The IH-35E Corridor Overlay District is defined as all land located within the area bounded by the following: Beginning at the southwest corner of the intersection of North Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) and North Garden Ridge Boulevard, running westerly along the south right-of-way line of North Garden Ridge Boulevard to the northwest corner of a 3.221-acre tract of land out of the F. Pierce Survey, Abstract No. 1016 conveyed to IH-35 & Garden Ridge Acquisitions, LP, then southerly and easterly along the western and southern boundaries of said IH-35 & Garden Ridge Acquisitions, LP tract to the west right-of-way line of North Stemmons Freeway, (IH-35E), then southerly along the west right-of-way line of North Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) and crossing Bogard Lane to the southeast corner of the intersection of Bogard Lane and McGee Lane, then southerly along the east right-of-way line of McGee Lane to the northeast corner of the intersection of McGee Lane and the KCS Railroad, then easterly along the north right-of-way line of the KCS Railroad to the northeast corner of the intersection of the KCS Railroad and North Summit Avenue, then southerly along the east right-of-way line of North Summit Avenue to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block H, Valley Ridge Residential Addition, then easterly along the north boundaries of Lot 1, Block H, Valley Ridge Residential Addition and Lot 3, Block I, Valley Ridge Business Park West Phase 9 to the west right-of-way line of North Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E), then southerly along the east boundary and westerly along the south boundary of Lot 3, Block I, Valley Ridge Business Park West Phase 9, then westerly along the south boundary of Lot 1, Block H, Valley Ridge Residential Addition to the north right-of-way line of College Parkway, then crossing the right-of-way College Parkway in a southwesterly direction to the eastern corner of Lot 1, Block A, Parkway Estates Addition, then in a southwesterly direction along the eastern and southern boundaries of Lot 1, Block A, Parkway Estates Addition to the southeast corner of a drainage right-of-way dedicated on the final plat of Fireside Village Addition, then westward along the southern boundary of said drainage right-of-way to the eastern right-of-way line of North Summit Avenue, then southward along the east right-of-way line of North Summit Avenue crossing West Main Street and continuing southerly along the east right-of-way line of Surf Street to the southwest corner of Lot 3, Block B, Harbor Heights, then eastward along the south boundary of Lot 3, Block B, Harbor Heights to the southeast corner of said lot, then northward along the east boundary of Lots 3, 2, and 1A, Block B, Harbor Heights to the southwest corner of Lot 6 (PT), Valley Square, then easterly along the south boundary of Lots 6 (PT), 3 and 2, Valley Square to a point being the intersection of the south boundary of Lot 2, Valley Square and the northward extension of the western boundary of Lot 5, Block G, Quailcrest, then south across the public alley to the northwest corner of Lot 5, Block G, Quailcrest and continuing southerly along the west boundaries of Lots 5, 4B, 3, 2 and 1, Block G, Quailcrest to the north right-of-way line of West Purnell Street, then east along the north right-of-way line of West Purnell Street to the west right-of-way line of South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E), then southeasterly along the west right-of-way line of South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) to the northwest corner of a 0.9759-acre tract of land out of the J. Sutton Survey, Abstract No. 1155 conveyed to Neville Texas Investments, LLC, then south along the west boundary of said Neville Texas Investments LLC tract and continuing south along the west boundary of a 4.0839-acre tract and an 8.141-acre tract, both out of the J. Sutton Survey, Abstract No. 1155 conveyed to AVB Ltd, to the north right-of-way line of Fox Avenue, then in a southeasterly direction across the Fox Avenue right-of-way to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block A, Fox Haven Addition, then south and easterly along the west boundary and south boundary of Lot 1, Block A, Fox Haven Addition to the west boundary of Lot 6R, Block A, Fox-IH35E Addition, then southeasterly, east, and northeasterly along the west, south and southeast boundaries of Lot 6R, Block A, Fox-IH35E Addition to the west right-of-way line of South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E), then southeasterly along the west right-of-way line of South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) to the north-most corner of Lot 3 (PT), Block A, Lakeland Plaza Addition, then southwesterly and southerly along the northwest and west boundaries of Lots 3 (PT) and 1 (PT), Block A, Lakeland Plaza Addition to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block A, Peppermint Addition, then south along the west boundary of Lot 1, Block A, Peppermint Addition to the north right-of-way line of Oakwood Lane, then easterly, southerly and easterly along the north, east and north right-of-way lines (following curves) of Oakwood Lane to the east right-of-way line of SH 121 Business, then south along the east right-of-way line of SH 121 Business to the southwest corner of Lot 1, Block A, Rider Addition, then east along the south boundaries of Lot 1, Block A, Rider Addition and Lot 1R, Block A, Bankston Nissan Addition to the west boundary of Lot 1, Block A, Lewisville Mitsubishi Addition, then south along the west boundaries of Lot 1, Block A, Lewisville Mitsubishi Addition and Lot 1, Block A, Toyota of Lewisville to the southwest corner of Lot 1, Block A, Toyota of Lewisville, then east along the south boundary of Lot 1, Block A, Toyota of Lewisville to the northwest corner of Lot 1A, Block C, Timber Creek Square Phase I, then south along the west boundary of Lot 1A, Block C, Timber Creek Square Phase I to the northeast right-of-way line of East Southwest Parkway, then southeasterly along the northeast right-of-way line of East Southwest Parkway to the south right-of-way line of East Corporate Drive, then southwesterly along the south right-of-way line of East Corporate Drive to the north most corner of Lot 2, Block C, Timber Creek Square Phase 2, then southeasterly along the northeast boundary of Lot 2, Block C, Timber Creek Square Phase 2 to the northwest corner of Lot 6, Block A, Vista Ridge Pointe Addition, then south along the west boundaries of Lot 6, Block A, Vista Ridge Pointe Addition and Lots 2 and 1A, Block B, Vista Ridge Village Addition Phase 3 to the north right-of-way line of Oakbend Drive, then in a southeasterly direction across the Oakbend Drive right-of-way to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block A, Oakbend and Rockbrook Addition, then south and east along the west and south boundaries of Lot 1, Block A, Oakbend and Rockbrook Addition to the west boundary of Lot 4, Block A, Vista Ridge Village Addition Phase 2, then south along the west boundaries of Lots 4, 3 and 2, Block A, Vista Ridge Village Addition Phase 2 to the north right-of-way of East Round Grove (FM 3040), then east along the north right-of-way line of Round Grove Road (FM 3040) to the east right-of-way line of Mac Arthur Boulevard, then southerly along the east right-of-way line of MacArthur Boulevard to the north right-of-way line of SH 121, then easterly along the north right-of-way line of SH 121 to the east right-of-way line of Lake Vista Drive, then southerly and easterly along the east and north right-of-way line of Lake Vista Drive to the south most corner of Lot 1RA, Block L, Vista Ridge to the southwest corner of a 38.0408-acre tract of land out of the McKinney-Williams Survey, Abstract No. 936 conveyed to Dallas Gun Club, then east along the south boundary of said Dallas Gun Club tract and following the City of Lewisville corporate limit line along the south boundary of a 2.2-acre tract of land out of the McKinney-Williams Survey, Abstract No. 936 and conveyed to Denton County Levee Improvement District No. 1 and continuing east and following the City of Lewisville corporate limit line along the south boundary of said Dallas Gun Club tract and continuing east following the City of Lewisville corporate limit line along the south boundary of a 5.8-acre tract of land out of the McKinney-Williams Survey, Abstract No. 936 conveyed to Denton County Levee Improvement District No. 1 and continuing east following the City of Lewisville corporate limit line along the south boundary of a 38.0408-acre tract of land out of the McKinney-Williams Survey, Abstract No. 936 conveyed to Dallas Gun Club to the west most southwest corner of Lot 6R, Block A, I-35 Boat City Addition, then east, south, easterly, northerly, west and north (following curves) along the south, west, south, east, north and east boundaries of Lot 6R, Block A, I-35 Boat City Addition to south corner of Lot 5, Block A, I-35 Boat City Addition, then northeasterly along the southeastern boundary of Lot 5, Block A, I-35 Boat City Addition to the west right-of-way line of South Stemmons Freeway (I-35E), then following the City of Lewisville corporate limit line northeasterly across the South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) right-of-way to the east right-of-way line of South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) then following the City of Lewisville corporate limit line northwesterly to the southeast corner of a 14.029-acre tract of land out of the McKinney-Williams Survey, Abstract No. 936 conveyed to City of Carrollton, then northwesterly and east following the City of Lewisville corporate limit line along the southwest, west and north boundaries of said City of Carrollton tract to the west boundary of 109.6-acre tract of land out of the J. Chowning Survey, Abstract No. 242 conveyed to City of Carrollton, then north following the City of Lewisville corporate limit line along the west boundary of said City of Carrollton tract to the west right-of-way line of the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway, then northerly along the west right-of-way line of the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway, crossing the SH 121 right-of-way, to the north right-of-way line of SH 121, then southwesterly along the north right-of-way line of SH 121 to the southeast corner of Lot 4 (PT), Block A, Arthur James Addition, then northwesterly along the northeastern boundary of Lots 4 (PT), 3 and 2, Block A, Arthur James Addition to the east right-of-way line of Arthur's Lane, then northwesterly across the Arthur's Lane right-of-way to northeast corner of Lot 8R, Block H, Lakepointe Phase 5, then northwesterly along the northeast boundary of Lots 8R, 7B (PT) and 7A (PT), Block H, Lakepointe Phase 5 to the southeast corner of Lot 3, Block H, Lakepointe Phase 1, then northwesterly and northeasterly along the southwest and northwest boundaries of Lot 3, Block H, Lakepointe Phase 1 to the northmost corner of Lot 3, Block H, Lakepointe Phase 1, then in a northeasterly direction across Lot 3, Block G, Lakepointe Phase 3 to the southeast corner of Lot 2R-1, Block G, Lakepointe Phase 3, then northeasterly along the southeast boundaries of Lots 2R-1 and 1R-1B, Block G, Lakepointe Phase 3 and continuing in a straight line across the right-of-way of Lakeside Circle to the north right-of-way line of Lakeside Circle, then northwesterly along the north right-of-way line of Lakeside Circle to the south corner of Lot 1R-2A, Block E, Lakepointe Phase 3, then northeasterly along the southeast boundaries of Lots 1R-2A and 1R-3, Block E, Lakepointe Phase 3 and Lots 1, 2R1, 3R1 and 4, Block A, Hebron Lakepointe Addition to the south right-of-way line of Hebron Parkway, then crossing the right-of-way of Hebron Parkway to the east corner of Lots 3B and 3C, Block D, Lakepointe Phase 3, then northwesterly and southwesterly along the northeast boundary of Lots 3B and 3C, Block D, Lakepointe, Phase 3 and the northeast and northwest boundaries of Lots 3A (E PT) and 3A (W PT), Block D, Lakepointe Phase 3 to the northeast right-of-way line of Lakepointe Drive, then crossing the right-of-way of Lakepointe Drive to the southwest right-of-way line of Lakepointe Drive, then northwesterly along the southwest right-of-way line of Lakepointe Drive to the south corner of the intersection of Lakepointe Drive and Waters Ridge Drive, then southwesterly along the southeast right-of-way line of Waters Ridge Drive to the west corner of Lot 7, Block A, Lakepointe West, then northwesterly across the right-of-way Waters Ridge Drive to the south corner of Lot 4A, Block B, Lakepointe Phase 2, then northwesterly, west and north along the southwest, south, and west boundaries of Lot 4A, Block B, Lakepointe Phase 2 to the south right-of-way line of Lakepointe Drive, then northwesterly along the south and west right-of-way line of Lakepointe Drive and crossing East Corporate Drive and continuing northwesterly along the southwest right-of-way line of Lakepointe Drive to a point being the intersection of the south right-of-way line of Lakepointe Drive and the southerly extension of the west boundary of Lot 5, Block A, Xerox Facility Addition, then north across the right-of-way of Lakepointe Drive to the southwest corner of Lot 5, Block A, Xerox Facility Addition, then north along the west boundary of Lot 5, Block A, Xerox Facility Addition to the south right-of-way line of Bennett Lane, then northeasterly across the Bennett Lane right-of-way to the southeast corner of a 0.963-acre tract of land out of the E. Aday Survey, Abstract No. 11 conveyed to City of Lewisville, then north to the northeast corner of said City of Lewisville tract then west along the north boundaries of said City of Lewisville tract; and continuing west, north and west along the north boundaries of a 1.926-acre tract of land out of the E. Aday Survey, Abstract No. 11 conveyed to City of Lewisville; Lot 1, Block A, Bennett Park Center; Lot 1, Block A, Octavi Hernandez Addition; a 0.75-acre tract of land out of the E. Aday Survey, Abstract No. 11 conveyed to Noblitt Living Trust; Lot 1, Block A, Tyson Estates; a 0.959-acre tract of land out of the E. Aday Survey, Abstract No. 11 conveyed to E&H Contractors; a 3.0-acre tract of land out of the E. Aday Survey, Abstract No. 11 conveyed to Rafael Corona; and a 3.027-acre tract of out of the E. Aday Survey, Abstract No. 11 conveyed to Nancy A. Stevens; to the east right-of-way line of Yates Street, then northerly along the east right-of-way line of Yates Street to the northwest corner of Lot 1, Block A, WRN Creekside Development Addition, then east, north and west along the south, east and north boundaries of a 57.3366-acre tract of land out of the J.W. King Survey, Abstract No. 695 conveyed to AMC Northwood, LLC, to the southwest corner of Lot 2, Block A, DCTA Maintenance Facility Addition, then north and east along the west and north boundaries of Lot 2, Block A, DCTA Maintenance Facility Addition to the southeast corner of 3R, Block A, Zander Place Addition, then north and northwesterly along the east and northeast boundaries of Lot 3R, Block A, Zander Place Addition to the southeast right-of-way line of SH 121 Business, then continuing in a straight line northwest across the SH 121 Business right-of-way to the northwest right-of-way line of SH 121 Business, then southwesterly along the northwest right-of-way line of SH 121 Business to the west corner of the intersection of SH 121 Business and McKenzie Street rights-of-way, then west along the south right-of-way line of McKenzie Street to the northeast corner of Lot 7, Block 10, McKenzie-Hembry Addition, then southerly, westerly and southerly along the east boundary of Lot 7, Block 10, McKenzie-Hembry Addition to the northeast corner of a 1.45-acre tract of land out of the J.W. King Survey, Abstract No. 695 conveyed to City of Lewisville, then southwesterly along the southeast boundaries of said City of Lewisville tract to the north-most corner of a 2.44-acre tract of land out of the J.W. King Survey, Abstract No. 695 conveyed to City of Lewisville, then southeasterly, southwesterly, westerly and northwesterly along the northeast, southeast, south and southwest boundaries of said City of Lewisville tract to the east right-of-way line of South Mill Street, then north along the east right-of-way line of South Mill Street to the northeast corner of South Mill Street and Mesquite Street, then westerly across the South Mill Street right-of-way to the northeast corner of a 0.482-acre tract of land out of the E. Pickett Survey, Abstract No. 1014 conveyed to Lebz Brothers Inv. LLC, then west and south along the north and west boundaries of said Lebz Brothers Inv. LLC tract to the north right-of-way line of Yale Avenue, then southerly across the Yale Avenue right-of-way to the northwest corner of Lot 17, Block A, Termin, then south along the west boundaries of Lot 17, Block A, Termin and continuing southerly along the west boundary of a 0.45-acre tract of land out of the E. Pickett Survey, Abstract No. 1014 conveyed to Reid M. Anderson to the north right-of-way line of Harvard Avenue, then south across the Harvard Avenue right-of-way to the northwest corner of a 0.441 acre tract of land out of the E. Pickett Survey, Abstract No. 1014 conveyed to Bruce Properties LLC, then south along the west boundary of said Bruce Properties LLC tract to the north boundary of Lot 1, Block A, Batterton Addition, then west along the north boundaries of Lot 1, Block A, Batterton Addition and continuing west along the north boundaries of Lot 2, Block B, Huffines Dodge Addition, and a 3.7969-acre tract of land out of the E. Pickett Survey, Abstract No. 1014 conveyed to 1090 St. Charles Property, LLC, to the east right-of-way line of South Charles Street, then west across the South Charles Street right-of-way to the west right-of-way line of South Charles Street, then south along the west right-of-way line of South Charles Street to the north corner of a 0.711-acre tract of land out of the E. Pickett Survey, Abstract No. 1014 conveyed to Michael & Hiyasmin Noyes, then southwesterly along the northwest boundary of said Noyes tract to the east corner of Lot 9, Block B, Lakeland Terrace 1, then northwesterly along the northeast boundary of Lot 9, Block B, Lakeland Terrace 1 to the north corner of Lot 9, Block B, Lakeland Terrace 1, then northwesterly across the Lake Shore Drive right-of-way to the west right-of-way line of Lake Shore Drive, then north along the west right-of-way line of Lake Shore Drive to the southwest corner of Lake Shore Drive and Harbor Drive, then westerly, northwesterly and northerly along the south, southwest and west right-of-way line of Harbor Drive to the southwest corner of Harbor Drive and Lake Haven Drive, then north across the Lake Haven Drive right-of-way to the north right-of-way line of Lake Haven Drive, then northwesterly along the northeast right-of-way line of Lake Haven Drive to the east corner of Lake Haven Drive and Fox Avenue, then northeasterly across the right-of-way of Fox Avenue to the southeast corner of Lot 9, Block 4, James Degan, then westerly along the south boundaries of Lots 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3 and 2 (PT), Block 4 James Degan to the northeast right-of-way line of South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E), then northwesterly along the northeast right-of-way line of South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) to the northeast corner of South Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) and West Purnell Street, then east along the north right-of-way line of West Purnell Street to the northwest corner of West Purnell Street and South Edna Avenue, then north along the west right-of-way line of South Edna Avenue to the southwest corner of South Edna Avenue and West Main Street, then north across the West Main Street right-of-way to the north right-of-way line of West Main Street, then west along the north right-of-way line of West Main Street to the northwest corner of West Main Street and Degan Avenue, then north along the west right-of-way line of Degan Avenue to the northwest corner of Degan Avenue and West College Street, then west along the north right-of-way line of West College Street to the northwest corner of Harn Drive, then north along the west right-of-way line of Harn Drive to the southwest corner of Harn Drive and Millican Drive, then north across the Millican Drive right-of-way to the north right-of-way line of Millican Drive, then east along the north right-of-way line of Millican Drive to the southwest corner of Lot 18, Block E, Lewisville Park Estates, then north along the west boundaries of Lots 18, 17, 16, 15, 14, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1, Block E and Lots 1—5, Block A Lewisville Park Estates to the northwest corner of Lot 5, Block A, Lewisville Park Estates, then east along the north boundaries of Lots 5—12, Block A, Lewisville Park Estates to the northeast corner of Lot 12, Block A, Lewisville Park Estates, then northeasterly across two drainage right-of-way lots to the southeast corner of Lot 3A, Block A, Valley Ridge Business Park East, then north along the east boundary of Lot 3A, Block A, Valley Ridge Business Park East to the northeast corner of Lot 3A, Block A, Valley Ridge Business Park East, then northwesterly across the Valley Ridge Boulevard right-of-way to the southeast corner of Lot 3, Block B, Valley Ridge Business Park East, then north along the east boundary of Lot 3, Block B, Valley Ridge Business Park East to the northeast corner of Lot 3, Block B, Valley Ridge Business Park East, then westerly along the south right-of-way line of the KCS railway to east corner of Lot 1, Block A, May Trailer Sales Addition, then northwesterly across the KCS Railway right-of-way to the southeast corner of Lot 3, Block A, Butler Addition, then north along the east boundaries of Lot 3, Block A, Butler Addition and Lot 1, Block A, Denton County Addition to the south right-of-way line of West Jones Street, then northerly across the West Jones Street right-of-way to the southeast corner of Lot 2R1, Block A, Fairway Business Park, then north along the east boundary and west along the north boundary of Lot 2R1, Block A, Fairway Business Park to the east boundary of Lot 1, Block A, Phil Dill Jr. Addition, then north along the east boundaries of Lot 1, Block A, Phil Dill Jr. Addition and Lot 2, Block A Lewisville Boat Storage Addition (PT) to the southwest right-of-way line of the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway, then northwesterly along the southwest Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway right-of-way line to the northwest corner of Lot 2, Block A, Franklin Street Addition, then northeasterly across the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway right-of-way to the southeast corner of Lot 1, Block A, CB Green Addition, then north along the east boundary of Lot 1, Block A, CB Green Addition to the south right-of-way line of Lake Park Road, then north across the Lake Park Road right-of-way to the north right-of-way line of Lake Park Road, then west along the north right-of-way line of Lake Park Road to the southeast corner of a 3.2258-acre tract of land out of the P.K. Waggoner Survey, Abstract No. 1342 conveyed to the James C. Holmes Family Trust, then north along the east boundary of said James C. Holmes Family Trust tract to southeast corner of Lot 2, Block A, Callmark Addition, then north and westerly along the east and north boundaries of Lot 2, Block A, Callmark Additon and continuing westerly along the north boundary of Lot 1, Block A, Callmark Addition to the east right-of-way line of Oakridge Boulevard, then northwesterly across the Oakridge Boulevard right-of-way to the west right-of-way line of Oakridge Boulevard, then south along the west right-of-way line of Oakridge Boulevard to the northeast corner of Lot 30A, Block A, Oakridge Park Estates Section G, then northwest, west and south along the northeast, north and west boundaries of Lot 30A, Block A, Oakridge Park Estates Section G to the northeast right-of-way line of the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway, then crossing the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway right-of-way in a southwesterly direction and continuing northwesterly along the southwest right-of-way line of the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway to the southwest corner of the Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) Railway right-of-way and North Garden Ridge Boulevard, then westerly across the North Stemmons Freeway (IH-35E) right-of-way to the point of beginning. 
( 0032-18-ORD , § 1(Exh. 2), 6-4-18) 
