7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/349
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Leon Valley, Texas, as compiled, edited and published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance
adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Leon
Valley, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the article, division or section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided,
shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008
Code, sec. 1.01.003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be
inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Leon Valley, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other
city officer or department shall be construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officer or department,
respectively, of the City of Leon Valley, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded
and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of the City of Leon Valley, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Bexar, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it
shall be construed to authorize such officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision
specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to
males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers
or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the
words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/349
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the
entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies
politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
State law reference–“Preceding” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public
rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.004; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase,
clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by
the city council without the incorporation in the code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008
Code, sec. 1.01.005; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been previously repealed.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.006; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or presented to the city council for enactment, shall be
drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so
shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.007; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the
code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes
made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have
become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the
adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted
pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal,
nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For
example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement and make
changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material,
change existing article or section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may
be; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/349
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the
codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.008; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this
code or such ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of
any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of
refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(c) A person convicted of an offense under title 7, subtitle C, Transportation Code (the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways) for which another penalty is not
provided shall be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus such other penalties and costs as may be
provided by such subtitle C.
(d) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental
state.
(e) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
(f) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(g) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition
to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.009; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of
culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Aiding or abetting violation
The prohibition of any act in this code, and any rule or regulation adopted hereunder, shall include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do such
act. (1972 Code, sec. 1.701; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.010)
Sec. 1.01.011 Altering code
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions
thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever (except pursuant to ordinance or other official act of the city council) which will cause the law of
the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009 hereof. (1972 Code, sec. 1.501; 2008 Code,
sec. 1.01.011)
Sec. 1.01.012 Effective date of ordinances
All ordinances, including all amendments hereto, shall be effective immediately upon their passage and approval unless otherwise provided therein or by law. (1972
Code, sec. 1.801; 2008 Code, sec. 1.01.012)
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 Posting of bonds
Every person required by ordinance or by this code to post bond shall post same with the city secretary and shall post such bond either in cash or by filing with the city
secretary a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. (1972 Code, sec. 1.901; 2008 Code, sec. 1.02.002)
Sec. 1.02.002 Date of expiration of annual licenses and permits; proration of fees
Unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or code provision, all annual licenses and permits issued under the provisions of this code shall expire on the 31st day of
December in the year when issued. The fee for annual licenses and permits issued on and after February 1st each year shall be prorated, but no annual license shall be
issued on and after November 1st each year, and monthly licenses shall thereafter be the license of greatest duration granted for the balance of said year. This provision
shall include, without limitation, those contained in the following chapters:
Article 3.02, division 4, electricity.
Article 3.02, division 6, plumbing.
Article 3.04, signs.
Article 4.03, alcoholic beverages.
Article 4.05, peddlers and solicitors.
Chapter 6, health and sanitation.
(1972 Code, sec. 1.1101; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.02.003; Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 1(e), adopted 8/1/17)
Secs. 1.02.003–1.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Claims Against City*
Sec. 1.02.041 Notice requirements
The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or
injured, or someone in his behalf, or, in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such
death or injury, shall, within sixty (60) days or within six (6) months for good cause shown from the date the damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the
city manager or designee of the following facts:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/349
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received;
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained;
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained;
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred;
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle;
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented;
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant,
witnessed the happening of the injury of any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is committed;
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all
persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof.
(1972 Code, sec. 2.501(a); 2008 Code, sec. 1.02.041; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.02.042 Refusal required prior to instituting suit
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original
petition the plaintiff applied to the city manager for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was refused by the city's
insurance carrier. (1972 Code, sec. 2.501(b); 2008 Code, sec. 1.02.042)
Sec. 1.02.043 Service of notices
All notices requested by this division shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the following location: City of Leon Valley, 6400 El Verde Road, Leon
Valley, Texas 78238, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. (1972 Code, sec. 2.501(c); 2008 Code,
sec. 1.02.043)
Sec. 1.02.044 Waiver of notice requirements
The above written notice requirements shall be waived if the city has actual knowledge of death, injury or property damage likely to result in a claim against the city. The
city shall not be deemed to have actual knowledge unless that knowledge is attributable to an appropriate city official whose job duties include the authority to investigate
and/or settle claims against the city. (1972 Code, sec. 2.501(d); 2008 Code, sec. 1.02.044)
Sec. 1.02.045 Notice to be sworn
The written notice required under this division shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf.
Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city's insurance
carrier as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. (1972 Code, sec. 2.501(e); 2008 Code, sec.
1.02.045)
ARTICLE 1.03 ELECTIONS
Sec. 1.03.001 Dates
An election shall be held as provided in state law each even-numbered year to elect a mayor and two councilmembers at large for the city council, to wit: Council Place
No. 2 and Council Place No. 4. An election shall be held as provided in state law each odd-numbered year to elect three councilmembers at large for the city council, to
wit: Council Place No. 1, Council Place No. 3, and Council Place 5. (E.C. section 41.001) (Ordinance 06-064, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/06; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code;
2008 Code, sec. 1.03.001)
State law reference–Uniform election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 41.001.
Sec. 1.03.002 Voting method
At said election each of the foregoing named officers shall be voted upon separately, and the person receiving the highest number of votes for each of said offices shall
be elected to such office. (1972 Code, sec. 7.102; 2008 Code, sec. 1.03.002)
State law reference–Election by plurality, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.001 et seq.
Sec. 1.03.003 Installation of elected members of council
On the fifth day after the date of the election, excluding Sundays, or as soon as possible after the fifth day, the newly elected city council meets at the usual meeting
place to be installed. The meeting shall be scheduled after the canvass is complete. Installation shall take place at the beginning of the city council meeting. (L.G.C.
sections 22.006 and 22.036 and E.C. chapter 67) (Ordinance 06-064, sec. 2, adopted 12/19/06; 2008 Code, sec. 1.03.003)
State law references–Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67; date on which officers begin to perform duties, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.006; installation
of governing body, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.036.
ARTICLE 1.04 CITY COUNCIL*
Sec. 1.04.001 Meetings
A regular council meeting shall be held on both the first and third Tuesdays of each month beginning at 6:00 p.m. Regular city council meetings may be cancelled or
rescheduled, and the meeting time adjusted upon a majority vote by city council. Special meetings may be called as provided by law. Meetings of the council shall
always be open to the general public except as may be specifically provided by state law, and no vote or action of any kind shall ever be taken by the council except at a
regular meeting or at a lawfully called special meeting. In the event that the meeting date falls on a holiday, the meeting will be rescheduled to the following Tuesday.
(1972 Code, sec. 2.104; 2008 Code, sec. 1.04.001; Ordinance 15-002 adopted 3/9/15; Ordinance 2017-23 adopted 6/6/17)
State law references–Meetings of governing body, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.038; open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
Sec. 1.04.002 Assignment of councilmembers to committees
The mayor, from time to time, may appoint one or more councilmembers to temporary committees to assist the mayor and city manager in developing administrative
policies or programs, as may be appropriate. (1972 Code, sec. 2.101; 2008 Code, sec. 1.04.002)
Sec. 1.04.003 Powers of committees
The powers of such committees shall be prescribed by the city council from time to time. In general, they shall consist solely of the right to investigate, to formulate
recommendations, and to report to the city council. (1972 Code, sec. 2.102; 2008 Code, sec. 1.04.003)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/349
Sec. 1.04.004 Reports by department heads and employees
Except when expressly authorized by the mayor in the assignment of special committees, department heads shall report to the mayor and council solely through the city
manager. All employees likewise shall report through their department head and the city manager. (1972 Code, sec. 2.103; 2008 Code, sec. 1.04.004)
Sec. 1.04.005 Travel expenses
Travel expenses shall be limited to travel outside the boundaries of the city and shall be limited in both scope and amount to reimbursement for those facilities and
services which are necessary, customary and reasonable in price. Travel expense shall never be reimbursed except upon a full written accounting, supported by
vouchers, receipts and the like. Said vouchers, receipts, etc., must be submitted to the business office as set out in Procedural Directives D4 and A13 for processing.
The expenses of spouses, children, relatives and friends shall never be reimbursed. Travel, accommodations and entertainment for spouses of councilmembers which
do not add to the cost to the member shall be considered to be only a seeming exception to this rule. To the extent such services for spouses increase such cost, the
cost will be borne by the member. No member of the council can incur any reimbursable travel expense unless authorized to make such trip in advance by the council, or
unless such trip and expenses are authorized during the city budget process each year and subsequently ratified by the council. (1972 Code, sec. 2.105; 2008 Code,
sec. 1.04.005)
ARTICLE 1.05 CITY OFFICERS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.05.001–1.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. City Manager*
Sec. 1.05.031 Appointment; functions; absence or disability
The city council shall appoint a city manager, who shall be the chief administrative and personnel officer of the municipal government under the direction and supervision
of the mayor and city council. During the absence or disability of the city manager, the city secretary shall perform the duties of such office. (1972 Code, sec. 2.201; 2008
Code, sec. 1.05.031)
Sec. 1.05.032 Powers and duties
The powers and duties of the city manager shall be as follows:
(1) To devote all of his working time and attention to the affairs of the city, and be responsible to the council for the efficient administration of its affairs;
(2) To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced;
(3) To receive all bid proposals on contract work to be done in the city, bids to be opened on instruction from the council;
(4) To promulgate all policies and procedures pertaining to the administration of personnel not otherwise set by ordinance;
(5) To exercise supervision and control over all departments created by the council or that may hereafter be created;
(6) To attend all meetings of the council with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote, and he shall be notified of all special meetings of
the council;
(7) To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the city, or its inhabitants, in any utility franchise, are faithfully kept and performed, and upon
knowledge of any violation thereof to call the same to the attention of the council;
(8) To act as budget officer and as such to prepare and submit to the council, prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, a budget of proposed expenditures
for the ensuing year, showing in as much detail as practicable the estimated amounts required for the efficient operation of each department of the city and
the reasons for such estimated expenditures;
(9) The city manager, in addition to the foregoing, shall make and file a budget as required by state law;
(10) To make a full written report to the council as soon after the close of each month's accounts as possible, showing the operation and expenditures of
each department of the preceding month, with the monthly allowances made for such departments in the annual budget, and to keep the council fully advised
at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city;
(11) To act as, or designate, a purchasing agent for the city to purchase all needed merchandise, material and supplies, and to establish, if needed, a
suitable storehouse where such supplies may be kept and from which same may be issued as needed; and to adopt such rules and regulations governing
requisitions and transaction of business between himself as such purchasing agent and the heads of the departments, officers and employees of the city as
the council may approve.
(1972 Code, sec. 2.202; 2008 Code, sec. 1.05.032)
Sec. 1.05.033 Compensation; bond
The city manager shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix from time to time by ordinance and shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the
council by ordinance, the premium to be paid by the city. (1972 Code, sec. 2.203; 2008 Code, sec. 1.05.033)
State law references–Compensation of elected and appointed officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 141.001; bond for officials, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
22.072.
Secs. 1.05.034–1.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. City Secretary*
Sec. 1.05.061 Powers and duties
(a) The city secretary shall perform the duties as set forth in the job description in the city personnel manual, as amended, and such other duties as may be prescribed
from time to time by the city manager or city council.
(b) The city secretary shall attend and keep minutes of all council meetings.
(c) The city secretary shall prepare all public notices required under any regulation or ordinance of the city.
(d) The city secretary shall:
(1) Keep all contracts made by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/349
(2) Engross and enroll all laws, resolutions, and ordinances of the city council.
(3) Keep the corporate seal.
(4) Take charge of, arrange, and maintain the records of the city council.
(5) Countersign all commissions issued to municipal officers and all licenses issued by the mayor, and keep a record of those commissions and licenses.
(e) The city secretary shall perform all other duties required by law, ordinance, resolution, or other assigned task or duties assigned by the mayor or the city council or
the city administrator.
(1972 Code, sec. 2.204; 2008 Code, sec. 1.05.061; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.05.062 Bond
The city secretary shall furnish such surety bond as may be required by the council by ordinance, the premium to be paid by the city. (1972 Code, sec. 2.205; 2008
Code, sec. 1.05.062)
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
ARTICLE 1.06 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES*
Sec. 1.06.001 Zoning commission to serve as capital improvements advisory committee
(a) The zoning commission is hereby reappointed to serve in the additional capacity as the capital improvements advisory committee with the following duties:
(1) Advise and assist the city council in adoption of land use assumptions;
(2) Review the capital improvements plan and file written comments for city council consideration;
(3) Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan;
(4) File semiannual reports with respect to the progress of the capital improvements plan and report to the city council any perceived inequities in
implementing the plan or imposing the impact fee; and
(5) Advise the city council of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fee.
(b) In its capacity as the capital improvements advisory committee, the commission shall comply with the procedural regulations as set forth in state statutes, Local
Government Code, chapter 395, and article 15.02 (zoning) of the city code.
(Ordinance 06-038 adopted 9/19/06; 2008 Code, sec. 1.06.001)
State law reference–Capital improvements advisory committee, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 395.058.
Sec. 1.06.002 Tree Advisory Board
(a) Membership. The tree advisory board (TAB) is hereby created and established as a ten (10) member and alternate board, with seven (7) regular members and
three (3) alternate members for the city, whose members shall be appointed as follows: three (3) members appointed by the mayor, two (2) members from the earthwise
living committee, two (2) members from the city's park commission and three (3) alternate members. The alternate members of the board do not have voting status
unless directed by the board chair in the absence of a regular member; this provision is not intended to restrict in any way the nonvoting participation of alternates to the
extent allowed by the chairperson.
(b) Terms. Appointed members and alternates of the board will serve for a term of two (2) years, conterminous with the mayor.
(c) Compensation. Members and alternates of the tree advisory board shall serve without compensation.
(d) Certified arborist. The city shall also use a certified arborist to act in an advisory capacity to the board and to the city council.
(e) Duties. The city tree advisory board (TAB) shall serve with the following duties:
(1) Study the problems and determine the needs of the city in connection with the development and execution of a tree planting program, specifically
Resolution 09-012, the Leon Valley Tree Challenge Initiative, working toward the city's goal to plant 10,000 trees by the year 2020, a goal which supports the
efforts of El Verde by 2020;
(2) Review and monitor enforcement and application of the city's existing tree ordinances;
(3) Organize a community tree survey that identifies the location of all heritage trees in the city;
(4) Inform the public and provide education regarding the importance of trees and the care, preservation, pruning, removal, selection, planting and
maintenance of such;
(5) Create educational programs and encourage local schools and other public and private agencies/organizations to conduct Arbor Day events and other
similar campaigns to meet the Leon Valley Tree Challenge;
(6) Provide regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees, insofar as it relates to the city, may be discussed by the members of the tree
advisory board (TAB);
(7) Coordinate the board's efforts with related projects by the public works department, park commission and earthwise living day committee and other
similar committees;
(8) Communicate with the state department of transportation as to any highway projects which would affect public trees;
(9) Review, with the mayor and city council, all plans for preserving existing public trees and planting new public trees;
(10) Recommend with the assistance of the selected arborist the removal of any public tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or is affected
with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest, or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other
public improvements;
(11) Recommend to the proper authority the type and kind of public trees to be planted upon city-owned streets or parts of city-owned streets or in parks as
is designated. Recommendations will be appropriate to the visibility requirements of existing on- and off-premises business signage. The types and kind of
trees will be responsibly chosen to avoid materially obstructing the property by impairing the visibility of business signage;
(12) Provide periodic reports to the city council and community regarding the program and its progress;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/349
(13) Submit the annual renewal application to Tree City USA.
(Ordinance 09-023 adopted 5/19/09; Ordinance 10-047 adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, sec. 1.06.002)
Sec. 1.06.003 Police department citizen's police advisory committee
(a) Committee's charge. The committee serves as a liaison between the police department and community. The committee serves as an advocate for programs,
ideas, and methods to improve the relationship between the police and community and to enhance the quality of life in our community. The committee shall not have
independent authority, but shall work in conjunction with the police department.
(b) Mission statement.
(1) The committee's mission is to work in partnership with the city police department to assure it maintains the highest standards of integrity. Furthermore, it
is to assist in the quality of life through the delivery of professional, superior, and compassionate police services to the community. Finally, the committee
should apply knowledge, skills, and resources to foster an environment where all people can live safely and without fear. Furthermore, it is designed to assist
making recommendations that will enhance the quality of life through delivery of service.
(2) The committee's mission is accomplished within the framework of the following set of values:
(A) Accountability;
(B) Protection;
(C) Prevention;
(D) Commitment;
(E) Compassion;
(F) Achievement.
(c) Objective. The committee's objective is to advise and/or assist the police department through the engagement of interaction with its citizens through friendly
community police initiatives in preserving the peace in a manner consistent with the freedoms secured by the Constitution. In doing so, the role of the police department
is to enforce the law in a fair and impartial manner, recognizing both the statutory and judicial limitations of law enforcement authority and the constitutional rights of all
persons.
(d) Committee structure and membership.
(1) Mayor and city council shall appoint not more than twenty-three (23) voting members. Twenty-one (21) members shall be recommended by the city
neighborhood in which the volunteer lives. The remaining two (2) recommended volunteers shall be from apartment complexes within the city. Appointments
to the committee shall be for a two (2) year term, starting on the day of their appointment. Terms may be extended for additional one (1) year term, upon
approval by the mayor and city council. A quorum exists when fifty percent (50%) plus one (1) of the appointed voting members are present.
(2) The members of the committee shall either be permanent residents of the city, work or maintain a place of business in the city, or be engaged in the
community in a serving capacity. Diversity of the committee is essential to its success, i.e., youth, millennials, baby boomers, etc.
(3) Committee members shall have good reputations for integrity and community service and shall not have been convicted or received a deferred
sentence for a felony crime.
(4) No nominee to the committee or any members of the nominee's immediate family shall be currently employed by the city nor be a former sworn
employee of the city police department.
(5) No nominee may currently be a party nor be a legal representative in litigation against the city.
(6) Each nominee must be prepared and committed to invest the necessary time in enhancing police community relations in a manner that helps reduce
crime and enhances relationships between the police and the community.
(7) One city council member shall be assigned as a non-voting city council member liaison to the committee. The city council liaison shall be rotated at the
end of one (1) year of service to the committee, and may only be extended if there are no other city council members available or desiring to serve.
(8) The committee shall have board officers which shall consist of a chairperson, vice chairperson, and a secretary. The chairperson, vice chairperson and
secretary shall be elected by the voting members of the committee, and shall take place biannually every September of each calendar year. Elections for
open positions on the board, occurring throughout the year, shall be held as soon as possible for the remaining term of the position.
(9) All members of the committee shall be considered to be city volunteers. The committee shall function in an advisory capacity only and shall have no
authority over city employees.
(10) The committee members receive no direct or indirect compensation from the city for their services as members of the committee.
(11) The committee may not include any employee of the city, or any vendor or contractor of the city.
(12) A committee member serves at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. If a committee member resigns, violates the ethics policy contained herein,
fails to attend two consecutive committee meetings without reasonable excuse, or otherwise becomes unable to serve on the committee, the chairperson may
declare the position on the committee to be vacant and request that the mayor and city council appoint another qualified person to the committee. Future
appointments will follow the process as outlined in this section.
(13) The committee will geographically represent the city with an individual representative from the following neighborhoods: Forest Oaks, Forest Oaks
Estates (Canterfield II), Seneca I, Seneca II, Seneca West, The Ridge, Monte Robles, the Althea area, Hodges area, Old Mill, Linkwood, Shadow Mist,
Pavona Place, the El Verde Road area, Bandera Pass, Canterfield I, Canterfield II, Grass Valley, Leon Valley Ranches, Sun Valley, and Castle Estates
neighborhoods. The apartment communities in the city will be represented by two citizens who live or work in an apartment complex in the city.
(14) New committee members will be considered and appointed according to the neighborhood they currently live in. Replacements will be considered and
appointed based on a vacancy in a neighborhood. When someone leaves or is replaced, the new appointee will come from the same neighborhood or a
neighborhood not currently represented on the committee.
(15) If a committee member moves out of the neighborhood they currently represent, they will be required to resign from the committee, unless there is a
current vacancy in the neighborhood to which they have moved in the city.
(e) Duties and responsibilities.
(1) The committee advises and assists the police department to:
(A) Create dialog and explore the perceptions of the police department, and the community concerning the inter-relationship with each other
regarding public safety issues within the community;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/349
(B) Receive information concerning the police department programs and operations;
(C) Assist in developing new programs that will increase the public safety activities of the police department and strengthen the bond between the
police/community;
(D) Provide input to the police department regarding service needs within the community;
(E) Assist the police department in assessing the effectiveness of department operations/programs;
(F) Identify gaps in services and/or communication;
(G) Enhance the community understanding of the capabilities of the police department in providing services to the community;
(H) Identify potential police-community partnerships to address public safety related issues within the community;
(I) Identify community resources and support for public safety activities; and give input concerning perceived effectiveness;
(J) Provide input on assisting community police initiatives to enhance awareness.
(2) The committee is also responsible for disseminating information to the community and to the government officials of the city. The committee chair shall
provide an update to the city council on an annual basis or as requested by the mayor and city council.
(f) Committee meetings.
(1) The committee shall meet, at the discretion of the chairperson, to perform the duties as provided herein.
(2) All committee meetings shall be held within the city geographic boundaries.
(3) All information received [by] the committee will be available to the public under the terms of the Texas Open Records Act and will be retained pursuant
to the rules of the Texas State Archives and Library Commission and the city.
(4) A quorum of the committee shall consist of fifty percent (50%) of the currently appointed members plus one (1). A quorum must be present to decide on
any action items presented to the committee.
(5) Minutes of the previous meeting and agenda of the upcoming meeting should be sent to the committee members no later than three business days
before the upcoming meeting. Whenever possible, an explanation of agenda items shall accompany the notification. Members who are absent shall receive
all materials distributed at missed meetings.
(6) A copy of the agenda must be presented to the city secretary (3) three business days prior to the 72 hours posting requirements pursuant with Texas
Local Government Code section 551.043.
(7) A copy of the minutes of the previous meeting must be given to the city secretary within ten (10) days of the approval of the minutes by the committee.
(8) The current rules of conduct for the city council shall govern the parliamentary procedures, disciplinary proceedings, and rules for the conduct of
meetings, so long as not inconsistent with these bylaws. No action of the committee shall be invalidated, or the legality thereof affected, by the failure or
omission to observe or follow the rules of conduct.
(g) City support. The city shall provide to the committee necessary technical and administrative assistance as follows:
(1) Provision of a meeting room, including any necessary audio/visual equipment;
(2) Preparation and copying of any documentary meeting materials, such as agendas and reports; and distribution of those materials to the committee in a
timely manner;
(3) Retention of committee meeting records, and providing public access to such records on an Internet website maintained by the city.
(h) Committee termination. The city will sunset when a majority of the city council, by way of voting, believes the committee's existence shall be terminated.
(i) Charter. This section shall grant the authority and rights to the Citizens Police Advisory Committee and this document will be known as the “Citizens Police
Advisory Committee Charter.”
(Ordinance 16-019 adopted 5/17/16; Ordinance 16-040 adopted 9/20/16; Ordinance 2017-41 adopted 8/1/17; Ordinance 2018-72 adopted 9/4/18)
Sec. 1.06.004 Library board of trustees
(a) Definition. For the purposes of this article, the words “public library” shall mean the public library of the city.
(b) Creation. A public city library is hereby created as part of the government of the city, to constitute a separate department thereof, and to be known as “The Leon
Valley Public Library.”
(c) Board of trustees. The library shall be administered under the supervision and control of the city manager by board of trustees to be appointed by the city council
and to consist of seven (7) members and two (2) alternates. Such trustees shall be appointed to serve staggered, two (2) year terms to balance continuity with new
perspective. A trustee who is absent for three consecutive board meetings except for illness of disability, or without first being excused in advance, shall be deemed to
have vacated his trusteeship, and the city council may appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term. Appointees need not be residents of the city, but preference shall
be given first to such residents and second to residents of the northwest part of the county.
(d) Adoption of rules and regulations. The board of trustees of the library shall formulate and adopt rules and regulations for the orderly use of the library, books and
facilities and governing the performance of duties by library employees and other city personnel in connection with the library. Such rules (and all proposed amendments
thereof) shall be submitted to the city manager for comments and recommendations and then to the city council for approval or modification and adoption.
(1972 Code, secs. 2.601, 2.603, 2.701; 2008 Code, secs. 1.08.001–1.08.004; Ordinance 02-006, sec. 2, adopted 2/19/02; Ordinance 2017-75 adopted 12/19/17)
Sec. 1.06.005 Park commission
(a) The commission shall consist of an advisory commission of citizens to be known as the city park commission.
(b) The commission shall consist of nine (9) members who are appointed by the city council for a term of two (2) years, conterminous with the mayor.
(c) The commission shall prepare and submit park regulations to the council for adoption and to make suggestions concerning park ordinances and park policies, and
assist the council in the development, maintenance and regulation of city parks as the council may prescribe and serve as a liaison for the city with the public for park
matters.
(d) The commission shall prepare and submit recommendations to the council concerning items to be purchased for the park; however, the council shall have final
decision-making power on all issues.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/349
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.010)
Sec. 1.06.006 Board appointments and succession
(a) All members and alternates shall be appointed by city council through resolution.
(b) For boards and commissions that have alternates, if a member position becomes vacant, the chairman of that board, committee, or commission may ask the first
alternate if he or she wishes to become a regular member. If the alternate consents to the appointment in writing, the board, committee, or commission shall vote to
approve such recommendation and submit that recommendation to the city council that such alternate be appointed as a regular member and forward the written
consent of the alternate. Should the first alternate position be vacant or the alternate does not consent in writing, the chairman of that board, committee, or commission
may ask the second alternate, vote, and then forward such recommendation and written consent to the city council for appointment, and so on until a recommendation
and written consent is presented to city council. Should alternate positions be vacant or the alternates do not consent to the consideration of appointment, the city
council may consider other candidates for the member position, when all alternates considered for recommendation have been exhausted.
(Ordinance 2018-37 adopted 5/1/18)
ARTICLE 1.07 FINANCES*
Sec. 1.07.001 Returned check charge
Whenever a person, individual or business shall make any payment to the city provided by or pursuant to this code or any city ordinance, whether for utility payments,
traffic fines and costs, permits and licenses or otherwise, with a check which is not honored by the bank on which drawn by reason of insufficient funds, no account, or
any other reason, such person is hereby required to pay to the city a service charge as provided in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by
ordinance from time to time in addition to the full amount of the obligation sought to be paid by the issuance of such bad check. No city employee is or may be
authorized to waive such service charge or to accept anything less than payment in full of such obligation, including such service charge. (1972 Code, sec. 2.402;
Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.07.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.07.002 Use of credit cards, debit cards, or other electronic means for payment due to the city
(a) Credit card use authorized. Each official employed by the city who, as part of that employment, collects fees, fines, court costs, or other charges from members of
the public that are due to the city is authorized to accept credit cards as payment for such fees, fines, court costs, and other charges.
(b) Amount of processing fee. For each municipal court related fee, fine, court cost, or other charge that is paid by credit card, the official collecting the same shall also
collect a processing fee in an amount equal to the five percent (5%) of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost, other charge to be paid, as authorized by section
132.003(b), Texas Local Government Code. For each non-municipal court related fee, fine, court cost or other charge that is paid for by credit card, the official collecting
the same shall not collect a processing fee.
(c) Service charge. If for any reason a payment by credit card is not honored by the company on which the funds are drawn, the officer shall collect from the member
of the public who attempted to pay by credit card an additional service charge in an amount equal to the fee then being charged for the collection of a check drawn on an
account with insufficient funds, as authorized by section 132.005, Texas Local Government Code.
(d) Deposit of processing fees and service charges. Processing fees and service charges collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the general fund of
the city, as provided by section 132.006, Texas Local Government Code.
(Ordinance 16-020 adopted 6/7/16)
ARTICLE 1.08 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.08.001 Organization
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director;
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and
responsibilities set forth in this division. He/she may delegate authority for execution, but responsibility shall remain with the director;
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in
the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such
officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance 16-033 adopted 8/31/16)
Sec. 1.08.002 Emergency management director; powers and duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation
of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all
mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the
consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity
and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this division. Such proclamations,
regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the
emergency management plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/349
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political
subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other
municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions
which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (chapter 418 of the Government Code).
(Ordinance 16-033 adopted 8/31/16)
Sec. 1.08.003 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and
designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this division. As
provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of
organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all
departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The
emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this division and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (Ordinance 16-033 adopted
8/31/16)
Sec. 1.08.004 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency
management program for the county, and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the
appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar
as said program may affect the city. (Ordinance 16-033 adopted 8/31/16)
Sec. 1.08.005 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing
ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 16-033 adopted 8/31/16)
Sec. 1.08.006 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and
representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be liable for any damage sustained
to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a
license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of
sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be
civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage
to, the property of such person. (Ordinance 16-033 adopted 8/31/16)
Sec. 1.08.007 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this division without prior
approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city
council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and
necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (Ordinance 16-033 adopted 8/31/16)
Sec. 1.08.008 Offenses; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or
regulation issued pursuant to this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency
management organization of the city, unless authority to do has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(Ordinance 16-033 adopted 8/31/16)
Sec. 1.08.009 Limitations
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. (Ordinance 16-033 adopted
8/31/16)
Secs. 1.08.010–1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. National Incident Management System
Sec. 1.08.031 Adopted
The city council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System dated September 20th, 2015. (Ordinance 16-034 adopted 8/31/16)
Secs. 1.08.032–1.08.060 Reserved
Division 3. Hazard Mitigation Plan
Sec. 1.08.061 Adopted
The city council hereby adopts the county hazard mitigation plan found at the following link:
http://www.leonvalleytexas.gov/government/community_development/floodplain_management/index.php
(Ordinance 2017-58 adopted 9/19/17)
ARTICLE 1.09 PARKS AND RECREATION
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/349
Sec. 1.09.001 Definitions
All-terrain vehicle. Any motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider, designed to propel itself with three or four tires or belt tracks in contact with the ground.
Arms and firearms. Any device from which a shot, projectile, arrow, or bolt is fired by the force of an explosion, compressed air, gas or mechanical device. To include, but
not limited to, a rifle, shotgun, handgun, air rifle, pellet gun, longbow, crossbow, slingshot, blow gun, or dart gun.
Artifacts. Objects used or modified by humans, including but not limited to arrow points, dart points, stone, bone or shell implements or any other prehistoric or historic
objects.
Cultural features. Includes but is not limited to archeological landmarks, archeological sites and structures, Indian rock art or historic rock art.
Motorcycle. A two- or three-wheeled vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine or battery, to include motorbikes, minibikes, trail bikes, or scooters.
Plant life. All plants, including trees, dead or downed wood, shrubs, vines, wildflowers, grass, sedge, fern, moss, lichen, fungus, or any other member of the plant family.
Public nudity. To disrobe or appear nude in public. Females are considered to be disrobed when their breasts below the top of the areola are exposed, except when
nursing a baby.
Unattended pet. A pet that is unaccompanied or not under immediate control by leash.
Volume-drinking device. Any object used, intended for use or designed for use in artificially increasing the speed with which, and/or amount of, alcohol is ingested by
carrying the liquid from a higher location into the mouth by force of gravity or mechanical means, including but not limited to funnels, tubes, and hoses. The term includes
a beer bong.
Wildlife. Any wild animal, bird, amphibian, reptile, fish, shellfish, aquatic life, or invertebrate.
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.001)
Sec. 1.09.002 Request for variance
(a) Request. A person, agency, or organization may file a written request for a variance from this article. The request must contain the following information:
(1) The specific nature of the variance requested;
(2) A detailed explanation of why the person, agency, or organization believes they should be granted the variance, including any supporting
documentation; and
(3) A signed statement that the facts contained in the request are true and within the person's personal knowledge.
(b) Park commission. The park commission will hear requests for variances and make recommendations regarding the granting of a variance to the city council.
(c) Additional information. The park commission may request the person, agency, or organization to provide additional information, which must be filed within ten days
of the request or as otherwise directed in the request.
(d) When variances may be granted.
(1) A variance to the park ordinance may be granted when the request is consistent with the goals of this article;
(2) Granting the variance will not cause significant harm to any other person or group of persons or result in the city being in violation of regulatory
requirements; and
(3) The activity being granted will not disturb the peace and dignity of the surrounding residential neighborhoods.
(e) Terms and conditions of variance.
(1) The city council may grant a variance for such a term and in accordance with any conditions the city deems appropriate consistent with the
requirements of subsection (d) above.
(2) It is a term of every variance granted by the city that the variance may be rescinded based on changed circumstances, new information, or failure of the
holder of the variance to abide by the terms and conditions of the variance or to comply with these rules or any other order or rule of the city.
(3) The city may require a person granted a variance to file reports with the city containing such information as the city believes relevant to monitoring the
continuing appropriateness of the variance.
(Ordinance 15-028 adopted 12/1/15)
Sec. 1.09.003 Penalty
(a) Anyone who violates the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense.
(b) No violation, definition, or penalty under this [section] shall have bearing on any violation, definition or penalty under any other section of this article.
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.011)
Secs. 1.09.004–1.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Use Regulations
Sec. 1.09.031 Motor vehicles
(a) No person shall drive, push or propel any motor vehicle, of any size or description, on any public park property, natural area, city-owned Huebner Creek, trail, or
related drainage.
(b) Excepted from this prohibition are city vehicles, vehicles specifically authorized by the city, powered equipment specifically for and being used by disabled persons,
or within designated parking areas.
(c) Included in this prohibition are motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, powered scooters, mini-bikes, and the use of any motorized or propellant powered model aircraft,
rocket, or similar projectile.
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.002)
Sec. 1.09.032 Alcoholic beverages
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/349
No person shall consume or possess any intoxicating beverage whatever on city public park property except for wine, beer, ale and malt liquor as those products are
defined by the laws of the state. No person shall use or possess a volume-drinking device on city park property. (Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec.
1.09.003)
Sec. 1.09.033 Vendors and solicitors; posting signs
(a) No person shall act as a vendor or solicitor on public park property belonging to the city under any circumstances whatsoever.
(b) It shall also be against the law to erect or post signs, bulletins or advertising devices of any kind in or on such park property.
(c) An authorized group with a reservation can post two signs in the assigned area to identify the group and the event as long as same are posted not more than one
hour before the event begins and are removed not more than one hour after it ends.
(1) Such a sign shall never be required.
(2) Such a group may also vend beverages, food, games, rides and craft and gift items to the persons in attendance and solicit the sale of same when
given permission by the city to do so in writing in connection with its reservation and under such regulations, if any, as may be prescribed and not otherwise.
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.004)
Sec. 1.09.034 Additional prohibited uses and activities
(a) Damaging property. No person shall willfully injure, destroy, deface, remove, or alter public or privately-owned property, including cultural features, artifacts,
signage, equipment, benches, or structures within city parkland, natural area, trails, city-owned Huebner Creek, or related drainages.
(b) Removing, cutting or harvesting trees or plants. No person shall remove, cut, or harvest any trees or plants except as specifically authorized for community garden
users and within the community garden area, or as specifically authorized by the city.
(c) Fires. Prohibited are fires, except in approved BBQ pits or grills, and only at designated picnic pad sites, and the disposal of embers is only permitted in containers
designated, approved and provided for this purpose.
(d) Fireworks and explosives. It is an offense to possess or ignite, within city parkland, trails, natural area, Huebner Creek or related drainages, any fireworks,
explosives, or similar devices capable of explosion, or to discharge, set off, or cause to be discharged in or into these areas any devices capable of explosion, or to
discharge, set off, or cause to be discharged in or into these areas any devices or substance except as permitted by specific city authorization.
(e) Metal detectors. The use of metal detectors is specifically prohibited in each of these areas.
(f) Glass containers. For the health and safety of all park users, no glass containers are permitted on city park property.
(g) Trash or refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any trash or refuse of any type on any park or other city-owned property within the city limits.
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.005; Ordinance 15-015 adopted 9/1/15)
Sec. 1.09.035 Firearms and weapons; throwing projectiles or driving golf balls
No person shall bear or discharge any firearm except as permitted by law enforcement certification or by concealed carry permit. Prohibited within city parkland, natural
area, trails, city-owned Huebner Creek and related drainages are:
(1) Paintball, BB, or pellet guns;
(2) Archery equipment, slingshots, and catapult devices;
(3) Machetes, spears, or similar weaponry;
(4) Throwing rocks, logs, branches, similar projectiles; or
(5) Driving golf balls in these areas.
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.006)
Sec. 1.09.036 Pets and other animals
(a) In addition to existing city leash law requirements, it shall be unlawful to enter any playground area with a pet except for trained assistance animals accompanied
by a disabled individual user.
(b) It shall be unlawful to enter the Leon Valley Huebner-Onion natural area with any pet.
(c) In addition to the requisite that all pets within city parkland remain leashed at all times, leash lengths will be limited to eight (8) feet, and all canine or feline pets
must bear proof of current rabies vaccination.
(d) Pet owners will be held responsible for the retrieval and appropriate disposal of pet feces.
(e) It shall be unlawful to harm, disturb, trap, confine, catch, possess, or remove any wildlife from city parkland, natural area, trails or city-owned Huebner Creek or
related drainage areas except as specifically authorized by the city.
(f) It shall be unlawful to release or abandon any animal within any of these areas.
(g) It shall be unlawful to hunt or trap in any of these areas except as specifically authorized by the city.
(h) Prohibited is the introduction of ponies, horses, or any dangerous animal, for any purpose, in city parkland.
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.007)
Sec. 1.09.037 Park resource usage
(a) All parkland resources, except for specified exemptions, are available on first come, first served basis during authorized operating hours specified as sun-up to
sundown. Entry or remaining in any parkland, natural area, trails, city-owned Huebner Creek or related drainage areas except during authorized operating hours is
specifically prohibited, including overnight camping (no exception), erecting a tent, or arranged bedding, or both, for the purpose of or in such a manner as will permit
remaining overnight.
(b) Only large or small pavilions, individual areas of multi-use sports field areas, softball fields or volleyball courts may be reserved for single, and specific, day use.
(c) Auxiliary canopy shelters, portable recreational units and portable grills may be used in conjunction with identified picnic areas, but may not extend beyond the
immediate area reserved or in use, nor may they be used in playground areas, tennis courts, athletic field play areas, natural areas, trails, green space, or similarly
enclosed or fenced areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/349
(d) Tables in playground areas are for use by adults accompanying children, or children's groups visiting the playground areas, and are not available as part of the
normal picnic facility resources.
(e) Recreational resource users may not interfere with adjacent resource use, including, but not limited to, picnic areas, trails, athletic fields, playgrounds, rest areas,
tennis and volleyball courts, pedestrian crossings, parking areas, and similar areas.
(f) Use of auxiliary lighting is prohibited except for city-authorized security lighting.
(g) Athletic or group activity is specifically prohibited in wooded picnic and trail areas except for hiking, biking, or observation of wildlife or land.
(h) All lewd or lascivious behavior, including nudity, is specifically prohibited.
(i) Climbing trees is prohibited.
(j) It will be the responsibility of park visitors to respect other visitors and nearby residents by avoiding creating noise beyond that considered reasonable, noninvasive,
or objectionable.
(k) Skateboarding in the paved drainage ditch along Poss Road, away from pedestrian crossings and during park operating hours, is permitted.
(l) Moonwalks and other inflatables may be used at Raymond Rimkus Park as a part of the rental activity at the pavilions. Moonwalks and other inflatables are not
allowed in any other area of the park system. Persons bringing moonwalks or other inflatables must provide their own power source (generator) for such use.
(Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.008; Ordinance 14-009 adopted 6/9/14)
Sec. 1.09.038 Use of park resources for inappropriate activities
A person commits an offense if he or she uses, or permits a minor under his or her control to use, the city park facilities, including but not limited to basketball courts,
pavilions, rest areas, bridges, pedestrian crossings, benches, and in other restricted use or posted park areas, for non-appropriate activities, including but not limited to
rollerskating, rollerblading, skateboarding, [and] bicycling in these described areas. (Ordinance 08-032 adopted 8/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.09.009)
ARTICLE 1.10 PUBLIC GATHERINGS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.10.001–1.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parades
Part I. In General
Sec. 1.10.031 Definitions
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city.
Parade. Any group of persons moving along, by whatever means, in an orderly, formal manner on any street, alley, or public thoroughfare from a point of origin to a point
of termination, or a group of persons moving along, by whatever means, in an orderly, formal manner, anywhere else in the city from a point of origin to a point of
termination in such a way as to impede the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
Parade permit. A permit as required by this division.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1101; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.031; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.032 Penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful to fail to obtain a permit required under this division for any parade. Any violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) The intentional, knowing or reckless commission of any act made unlawful by section 1.10.034 shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be
punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.033 Police security personnel
(a) Due to the inherent risks involved regarding traffic and other safety issues, both as to participants and others, all permit holders shall be required to hire city police
officers, at a number to be determined by the chief of police, dependent upon:
(1) The route and the identification of roadways that cross through or feed into the street of the proposed route;
(2) The number of anticipated participants and vehicles in the event;
(3) Identification of other roadways, or public transportation and emergency vehicle routes that may be affected by the event;
(4) Length of the route and the identification of the number of intersections along the route that will require barricades or traffic-control personnel;
(5) Whether intersections must be individually barricaded or whether officers can be assigned to move along with the event;
(6) The date and time of the event;
(7) Volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic typical on and along the route for the time of day, day of the week and time of year for the proposed route.
(b) If an applicant believes the number of officers required is an undue amount, the applicant can appeal this to the city council. The applicant, within 10 days of
receiving the number of officers required under this section, shall submit a written appeal to the city secretary. The city council shall act upon this appeal within 30 days
after its receipt.
(Ordinance 00-008 adopted 3/7/00; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.032; Ordinance 14-030 adopted 12/8/14; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.034 Public conduct
(a) No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or
used in a parade.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/349
(b) No driver of any vehicle whatsoever shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a parade.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1112; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.033; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.035 Parking on parade route
The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of
the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation
thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this section. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1113; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.034; Ordinance 15-006
adopted 6/2/15)
Secs. 1.10.036–1.10.070 Reserved
Part II. Permit
Sec. 1.10.071 Required
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. (1972 Code, sec.
26.1102; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.071; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.072 Application; fee
(a) Filing of application. A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms approved by the chief of police as
follows:
(1) An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than thirty (30) calendar days nor more than one hundred fifty (150)
calendar days before the proposed procession date.
(2) Where the organization of a parade, however, begins within thirty (30) calendar days of the proposed parade date, an application for a parade permit
shall be filed with the chief of police within three (3) calendar days of the date on which organization of the procession begins, but not less than two (2)
calendar days before the proposed procession date.
(3) The chief of police may consider a parade permit application filed less than thirty (30) calendar days, but not less than two (2) calendar days, before the
proposed procession date if:
(A) The applicant(s) began planning the parade more than thirty (30) calendar days before the proposed parade date; and
(B) There is adequate time for the city police department to process the application and plan for the parade.
(b) Contents of application. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade;
(2) If the parade is proposed to be conducted for or on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization;
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct;
(4) The date when the parade is to be conducted;
(5) The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination point;
(6) The approximate number of persons who, and the animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade, the type of animals, and a description of the
vehicles;
(7) The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
(8) A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
(9) The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade;
(10) The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas;
(11) The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade;
(12) If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the
chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; and
(13) Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued
based on the standards set forth in section 1.10.073.
(c) Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance
from time to time.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1103; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.072; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15; Ordinance 15-009 adopted 7/7/15; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.10.073 Standards for issuance
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and other information as may otherwise be obtained, the
chief of police finds that:
(1) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route, and the parade route
shall not be conducted along/across any of the following routes due to the safety issues created by congestion and heavy traffic flow: Highway 16 (Bandera
Road); FM 471 (Grissom Road); Wurzbach Road; and Huebner Road, east of Highway 16;
(2) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the
areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city, such number to be determined by the chief of police;
(3) The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/349
(4) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or
ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas;
(5) The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
(6) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
(7) The applicant has fulfilled the requirements of this article; and
(8) The event does not conflict with a previously scheduled event that is scheduled to:
(A) Occur at the same time and place; or
(B) Occur at the same time, though at a different location or along a route that crosses over or conflicts with previously scheduled events.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1104; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.073; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.074 Action on application; notice of denial
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a procession permit within five (5) calendar days after it has been filed with the chief of police. If an application for a
parade permit has been filed under section 1.10.072(a)(2) or (3) for an event which will take place within five (5) days of the submission of the application, the chief of
police shall act upon the application as soon as is practicably possible. If the chief does not approve the application, he shall mail, by certified mail/return receipt
requested, to the applicant, within ten (10) calendar days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reason for his denial of a
permit. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1105; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.074; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.075 Appeal of denial
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days after notice. The city
council shall act upon the appeal within ten (10) days after its receipt. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1106; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.075; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.076 Alternate permit
The city secretary and the chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time,
or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within ten (10) days after notice of the action of the
city, file a written notice of acceptance with the city secretary. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade
permit under this division. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1107; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.076; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.077 Notification of city officials
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to:
(1) The city manager;
(2) The mayor;
(3) The city secretary; and
(4) The fire chief.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1108; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.077; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.078 Contents
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
(1) Starting time;
(2) Minimum speed;
(3) Maximum speed;
(4) Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;
(5) The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
(6) The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
(7) Types and numbers of animals approved;
(8) Mode of transportation, i.e., vehicles, pedestrians, etc.; and
(9) Such other information as the city secretary and chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this division.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1109; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.078; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.079 Duties of permittee
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman or other person heading
or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1110; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.079; Ordinance
15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Sec. 1.10.080 Revocation
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a procession permit issued pursuant to this division when the conditions supporting the findings made by the chief
of police pursuant to section 1.10.073 change in such a way, prior to the date on which the procession is to be held, that a procession permit would not otherwise be
issued. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1114; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.080; Ordinance 15-006 adopted 6/2/15)
Secs. 1.10.081–1.10.110 Reserved
Division 3. Block Parties
Part I. In General
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/349
Sec. 1.10.111 Definitions
Block party. A neighborhood social event intended to and actually taking place in whole or in part on a roadway in a residential area, and which obstructs vehicular
traffic.
Collector street. A street or road providing for travel between local streets and the arterial street network.
Local street. A local road that is situated completely within the single-family residential area where a block party takes place. A local street shall not include a collector
road. The local street shall mean only the paved portion of the right-of-way. The local road shall not include a private road within the single-family residential area where
a block party takes place.
Single-family residential area. An area consisting of single-family and two-family dwellings.
(Ordinance 08-012 adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.111)
Sec. 1.10.112 Conduct; statement of non-objection by neighborhood residents
A block party shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) The block party shall take place only within a single-family residential area;
(2) The block party permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location where the block party takes place;
(3) If the neighborhood where the block party is planned is governed by a mandatory homeowners' association, the applicant for the permit may be the
association, acting through its representative board of directors, or one (1) or more neighborhood residents. If the neighborhood is not governed by a
mandatory homeowners' association, the applicant shall be one (1) or more neighborhood residents. All applications shall be accompanied by a petition of
non-objection to the block party that has been signed by at least 70% of the persons residing in the homes in the same block on the local street where the
block party is planned to take place, unless the area is adjacent to a corner, and then the petition must also be signed by the persons in the adjacent blocks of
the intersecting streets;
(4) The road where the block party takes place shall be a local street, and may not interfere with a bus route;
(5) A block party shall not take place on a particular street more than two (2) times per calendar year;
(6) Whenever possible, the block party shall take place in a cul-de-sac;
(7) The block party shall begin no earlier than 10:00 a.m. and shall end no later than 9:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and 10:00 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday. A block party that begins on December 31 shall end no later than 1:00 a.m. on January 1;
(8) The block party shall not be open to the general public;
(9) An admission fee shall not be charged or solicited to attend the block party;
(10) The anticipated attendance shall not equal or exceed one hundred (100) persons at any point in time;
(11) Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted, served, or consumed on the local street;
(12) The permittee shall control the parking of motor vehicles so as not to create a hazard or an unsafe condition adjacent to or near the location of the
block party, shall place cones, a movable barricade or the like at the site of the local street where the block party takes place, and shall ensure that no motor
vehicles, inflatables, tents, canopies, banners, stages, and/or fixed barriers obstruct access to the street for a width of at least fourteen (14) feet, and a
vertical distance of at least thirteen and one-half (13-1/2) feet;
(13) The local street that is used for the block party shall not be disturbed or damaged, and structures shall not be affixed to it;
(14) Commercial activity by commercial vendors shall not be conducted on the local street, sidewalk, or other right-of-way where the block party takes
place;
(15) Sound amplification equipment or similar devices shall be permitted, subject to, and in compliance with, the noise ordinance (article 8.07 of this code).
If live entertainment is proposed, the applicant shall describe the nature of that entertainment in the application. Depending upon its nature, the city may
prohibit the live entertainment, or approve it with conditions;
(16) The block party shall be subject to the conditions of the block party permit, if any; and
(17) The block party shall be subject to all other applicable laws and ordinances.
(Ordinance 08-012 adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.113)
Secs. 1.10.113–1.10.150 Reserved
Part II. Permit
Sec. 1.10.151 Required; application; fee
(a) No person may conduct a block party without a permit having been issued pursuant to an application filed under subsection (b).
(b) An application for a permit to conduct a block party must be submitted by an authorized person on a form provided by the city and shall have the signature of the
person applying for the permit. The application shall be filed with the city at least twenty (20) calendar days prior to the event. The applicant shall identify the local street
or portion thereof where the block party is proposed to take place. Within ten (10) calendar days after receipt of the application, the city shall approve the permit, with or
without conditions, or deny the permit. If the application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be stated in the denial notice. Before making a decision regarding the
application, the application shall be distributed to public works and the fire department. Those departments shall review the application and forward their comments and
recommendations to the police department, in a timely manner, for consideration in determining whether to approve or deny the application. If issued, such a permit shall
be valid only for the date and time period as set forth in the permit. Moreover, the city shall not be responsible or liable for any injury, death, or damage to property that
may occur during the course of the block party. The permittee and participants shall be responsible or liable for, and shall indemnify and hold the city harmless for, any
such injury, death, or damage, and they shall assume all risk of holding and participating in the block party in the local street.
(c) A nonrefundable application fee to defray the costs and expenses shall be included with the application. The fee is as provided in appendix A of this code as
amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(Ordinance 08-012 adopted 2/19/08; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.151; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 1.10.152 Suspension or revocation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/349
The city may suspend or revoke a block party permit if it learns or finds that the block party is being conducted in [a manner] contrary to the permit or to any of the
provisions of this division. (Ordinance 08-012 adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. 1.10.152)
Sec. 1.10.153 Exceptions
Participants in city-sponsored events, such as National Night Out, are not required to obtain a block party permit. (Ordinance 08-012 adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec.
1.10.153)
ARTICLE 1.11 MEMORIAL NAMING OR RENAMING OF CITY STREETS AND FACILITIES
Sec. 1.11.001 Definitions
Facility means anything that is built, constructed, installed, grown, or established to perform or be used for a particular function or to serve or facilitate some particular
purpose. This shall include but not be limited to recreational and sports buildings and areas, community centers, fire and police stations, office buildings, theaters, parks,
hiking or nature trails, refuges, convention centers, bridges, fountains, monuments, gardens, or gazebos.
Significant reason means a thoughtful, important, notable, or meaningful explanation or justification for action.
Street means any public highway or road within the city limits.
(Ordinance 2013-10-14-03, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/13)
Sec. 1.11.002 Approval of names by city council
No streets or buildings shall be memorialized or renamed within the limits of the city until the name for said street or building has been approved by the city council.
(Ordinance 2013-10-14-03, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/13)
Sec. 1.11.003 Exclusions
This article shall not apply to street names as approved as part of new residential or commercial building projects or subdivisions (see section 3.10.002 for
requirements). (Ordinance 2013-10-14-03, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/13)
Sec. 1.11.004 Choice of names
(a) In all cases, the name choice should reflect and be appropriate for the street or building proposed for renaming or naming. The name choice shall also reflect the
street's or facility's location, character, and history in the context of the city.
(b) If the name is to honor a living person, caution should be exercised to ensure that the person is of such a character that the name shall still hold honor upon that
person's death.
(c) Although the choices for a name are unlimited, names generally should be chosen to reflect:
(1) The location, geographical area or feature;
(2) Names which memorialize nations or state leaders or figures;
(3) Names which memorialize Leon Valley local leaders or persons;
(4) Mascots or characters of folklore and fiction;
(5) Events or dealings of historical significance;
(6) Ideals or goals both nationally or locally;
(7) Facilitators or benefactors of property, streets or facilities; or
(8) Traditional names which reflect the type of facility and its number, division and/or precinct.
(d) Significant reasons for renaming a street include the following:
(1) To establish continuity of a street name;
(2) To eliminate duplication of name spelling phonetics;
(3) To correct a misspelling;
(4) To enhance the ease of arriving at a location;
(5) For consistency with the street numbering system;
(6) To provide necessary roadway designation, including “street,” “road,” “lane,” “circle,” “drive,” or “boulevard”;
(7) To honor a person, place, institution, group, entity, or event; or
(8) To enhance a neighborhood area by way of association of the street name with the location, characteristics and historical significance.
(e) Significant reasons for naming city buildings or facilities include, but are not limited to, the honoring of a person(s), place, institution, group, entity, or event/special
event.
(Ordinance 2013-10-14-03, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/13)
Sec. 1.11.005 Application for naming or renaming
(a) Application shall be made to the office of the city secretary specifying the street renaming request. The process may be initiated by any of the following parties:
(1) A member of the city council;
(2) The city secretary, if it is determined that the street name change is in the best interest of the health, safety, welfare, and public convenience of the
citizens of the city;
(3) A group, agency, business or owner of property located in the subject street; or
(4) An officer or authorized representative of a government subdivision, agency, or department.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/349
(b) Fees shall be rendered as prescribed in accordance with the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time for
street and facility naming or renaming.
(c) A thirty (30) day comment period must occur prior to city council consideration.
(d) Setting the proposed date of city council consideration shall cause notice to be served:
(1) By mail to all residents or businesses within a two hundred (200) foot radius of the facility to be named or renamed; or
(2) By mail to all residents, businesses and owners of the properties on the street to be named;
(3) By public service announcements, press releases, or other appropriate community bulletins to the entire city.
(Ordinance 2013-10-14-03, sec. 1, adopted 10/14/13; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
As used in this chapter:
Abandoned animal. Any animal that has been deprived of any of the necessities of life, including air, food, water, medical care, exercise and/or shelter.
Animal. Any living vertebrate or invertebrate, domestic or wild, not including man.
Animal control/rescue facility. The facility operated or contracted by the city for the impounding of dogs, cats and/or other animals.
Animal control officer. A person designated by the state, or the city, who is qualified to perform such duties under the laws of this state and the ordinances of this city.
Animal licensing. The annual assignment by the city of a numbered tag to each animal for whom the appropriate fee has been paid and which animal has been
vaccinated with antirabies vaccine according to the regulations of the Texas Health and Safety Code, section 826.014 [826.021 et seq.], for which the animal license has
been issued.
Animal nuisance. A public nuisance created within the corporate limits of the city by the following acts or omissions of animal owners:
(1) The keeping of an animal in such a manner whereby the animal is free of restraint to roam or run at large, at will;
(2) The keeping of an animal which barks or whines in such a manner, with such intensity, or with such continued duration so as to annoy, distress or
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons of normal nervous sensibilities within the vicinity of hearing thereof;
(3) The keeping of an animal which bites or injures other animals or human beings without provocation; and/or
(4) The keeping of an animal which has a propensity to damage or destroy public property or the property of a person other than its owner's private
property.
Cat. Both the male and female of the species Felis catus.
City veterinarian. Any veterinarian who is under contract with the city.
Dangerous animal. Any animal that meets any or all of the following criteria:
(1) An animal which, by species or nature, is vicious or dangerous to man;
(2) An animal that has bitten two (2) or more people or one (1) person on two (2) or more occasions;
(3) An animal that has killed a person or another pet or livestock animal; and/or
(4) An animal that has attacked a human being and the nature of the attack or the resulting injury was such as might endanger the life or permanent health
of the human.
Dog. Both the male and female of the species Canis familiaris.
Domesticated. Any animal adapted to life in intimate association with and to the advantage of man.
Impound. The placing of an animal in the city's animal control facility, or the taking into custody of an animal for purposes of transportation to the city's animal control
facility.
Local health authority. The animal control officer of the city.
Owner. Any person who harbors or keeps, or causes or permits to be harbored or kept, or has an animal in his care or custody, or permits an animal to remain on or
about his premises.
Quarantine. The detention or isolation of an animal suspected of carrying an infectious or contagious disease.
Rabies vaccination. A protective inoculation against rabies with an antirabies vaccine recognized and approved by the United States Department of Agriculture, Bureau
of Animal Industry, given in an amount sufficient to provide an immunity against rabies for a period of three (3) years.
Run at large. To be free of restraint while outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner.
Stray animal. Any animal not under restraint.
Tagged. Any animal which has a current city animal license.
Vaccination certificate. A document showing on its face that the animal described thereon has received a current inoculation of antirabies vaccine in an amount sufficient
to produce an immunity for a period of three (3) calendar years, inscribed with the date of the inoculation and the name of the animal's owner, and signed by a licensed
veterinarian.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/349
Veterinarian. A person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state.
Veterinary hospital. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis of and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.
Vicious animal. An animal which habitually or repeatedly without provocation chases, snaps at, attacks or bites any person or domestic animal.
Wild animal. Any nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, wolf, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, bobcat, or other warm-blooded animal, or any poisonous or dangerous
snake which can be found in an untamed state.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.100; Ordinance 03-004 adopted 4/1/03; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 2.01.002 Violations; penalty; additional remedies
(a) It shall be unlawful to do any act prohibited hereby and it shall be unlawful to fail to do or perform any act required hereby.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined an amount in accordance with section
1.01.009 of this code.
(c) Nothing in this section shall limit the remedies available to the city in seeking to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(d) The animal control officer, the code compliance (code enforcement) officer, or a city policeman may, at his discretion, issue a citation for any violation of this
chapter.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.200; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 2.01.003 Interference with enforcement
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any city employee in the performance of the employee's duties under this chapter. (1972 Code, sec. 4.305; 2008 Code,
sec. 2.01.004)
Sec. 2.01.004 Hearings
(a) A person aggrieved by an action of the city in amending, limiting, defining, suspending, or revoking any approval required by this chapter may request a hearing
before the city manager or his appointed supervisory officer. A hearing must be requested in writing and filed with the city manager within ten (10) days of the protested
decision or action, by the aggrieved party. If no such request is received, the decision or action of the animal control officer becomes final. Any decision should include
the written opinion of the city veterinarian, when indicated.
(b) Based on the recorded evidence of such hearing, the city manager, or a supervisory officer appointed to hold the hearing, shall make a final finding, and shall
sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the person requesting the hearing
by the animal control officer or the city manager.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.323; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.005)
Sec. 2.01.005 Dogs or cats running at large
(a) Every owner of a dog or cat and any person having charge, care, custody or control of any dog or cat shall restrain such animal from running at large.
(b) Any dog or cat running at large contrary to this chapter, or charged with viciousness by affidavit, or noticeably sick or injured and not in the care of an owner, may
be impounded by the animal control officer or a city policeman as provided in section 2.02.001.
(c) Any dog or cat so found running at large that cannot be safely taken up and impounded may be euthanized by the animal control officer or any city policeman.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.301; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.006; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.01.006 Large animals running at large
It shall be unlawful for the owner, or person in possession or control thereof, to permit any horse, mule, jack, jennet, cattle, sheep, goat, swine or other large animal to
run at large within the city limits, and such owner or person in possession of any such animal running at large will be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1972 Code, sec. 4.302;
2008 Code, sec. 2.01.007)
State law references–Animals at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.026; estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, ch. 142.
Sec. 2.01.007 Trapping animals
(a) No person shall set up or allow to be set up on his property steel jaw traps, spring traps with teeth or perforated edges on the holding mechanism, or any type of
trap with a holding mechanism designed in such a fashion as to reasonably ensure the cutting, slicing, tearing or otherwise traumatizing of the entrapped prey, for the
purpose of ensnaring domestic or wild animals within the city limits, unless the use of such traps is specifically deemed necessary by the local health authority of the city
for the purposes of animal control, in or for the control of communicable disease. This section is not to be construed to include those traps designed to trap common
rodents, i.e., rats, mice, gophers and groundhogs; provided, the owner is responsible for taking care that any of the aforementioned “rodent” traps are not placed or used
on or about his property in such a manner as to reasonably ensure the trapping of any other domesticated or wild animal, or of a human. It shall be a prima facie
violation of this section that the traps proscribed in this section were, in fact, set up by the person in question, or were allowed to be set up by the person in question; no
intent or further culpable mental state shall be required to prove such a prima facie violation.
(b) Humane traps used to capture dogs, cats, and other small animals alive shall be checked at least once every twelve (12) hours by the individual setting the trap.
Humane care shall be provided for any trapped animals, including the provision of food and water and protection from extremes of the environment, including heat, cold
and precipitation. Trapped domesticated animals shall be turned over to the city's animal control officer or the animal's owner the next working day.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.304; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.008)
Sec. 2.01.008 Keeping horses
It shall hereafter be unlawful to keep a horse inside the city limits unless such horse is securely penned up in an enclosure which, at any given point thereof, shall be no
less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the nearest residence or residences on any adjacent property under other ownership or possession. (1972 Code, sec. 4.315;
2008 Code, sec. 2.01.009)
Sec. 2.01.009 Horseback riding
(a) Horseback riding on any public street in the city which is either curbed, or has a sidewalk on one or both sides, or is both curbed and sidewalked, is hereby
prohibited.
(b) Horseback riding on or across private property or premises without the express permission of the owner or tenant thereof, other than that owned or tenanted by the
rider, is hereby prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/349
(1972 Code, sec. 4.316; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.010)
Sec. 2.01.010 Vicious animals
Whenever an affidavit shall be made before the judge of the municipal court that any animal has bitten, or attempted to bite, or attacked, or attempted to attack, any
person in a vicious manner in the city and it shall appear that the person so bitten or attempted to be bitten, or attacked, or attempted to be attacked, in a vicious manner
as aforesaid was not at the time trespassing upon the property of the owner thereof and not otherwise at fault, then the judge of the municipal court shall, upon proof
thereof, fine for each offense. The judge of the municipal court, where it is proven that such animal has bitten any person, may direct the owner of such animal to kill or
remove such animal permanently beyond the city limits, and failure to do so within three (3) days thereafter shall constitute an offense hereunder. (1972 Code, sec.
4.317; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.011; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 2.01.011 Maximum number of dogs and cats
(a) In all residential areas of the city, no household shall keep, shelter, maintain or harbor more than two (2) unneutered adult dogs or cats or four (4) neutered adult
dogs or cats. An adult dog or cat is hereby defined as one over four (4) months of age.
(b) Anyone keeping, maintaining or harboring on his business or household premises more than one (1) unneutered adult male dog or cat and one (1) unneutered
adult female dog or cat, and/or a combined total of four (4) neutered adult dogs and cats, shall be deemed to be operating a kennel, and must comply with all city, county
and state requirements for such operation, including registration and licensing required by this chapter.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.318; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.012)
Sec. 2.01.012 Operation of kennel
(a) Anyone deemed operating a kennel under section 2.01.011 of this chapter shall be subject to obtaining a license from the city on a yearly basis. Such license shall
be given by the city after inspection by the public health official of the city or the animal control officer and payment of the required fee in accordance with appendix A of
this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(b) No kennels shall be maintained in a household. If a kennel be maintained in a household, the animal control officer shall have the authority to impound such
number of animals over the limit laid out in section 2.01.011 of this chapter. Impoundment will remain in effect until either the passage of applicable time as set out in
section 2.02.001 of this chapter or until the owner or person in control of the property becomes in compliance with this chapter. Which animals are to be impounded shall
be at the total discretion of the animal control officer.
(c) If such kennel be maintained in a place of business, the owner or person in control of the business must comply with the licensing requirement under this chapter
on or before the last day of January each year, beginning with January 31st, 1991. If request is made of the city to open a business which would operate or house a
kennel as defined in section 2.01.011, licensing shall be mandatory prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. In cases of noncompliance with city licensing
guidelines, the public health official or the building inspector of the city has the right to revoke the certificate of occupancy. In addition, the animal control officer has the
authority to impound any animals kept on such noncomplying premises.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.319; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.013; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 2.01.013 Keeping animals other than dogs, cats or horses
(a) Vicious animals prohibited. No person shall keep on his premises a vicious animal.
(b) Enclosure required. It shall hereafter be unlawful to keep chickens, ducks, geese, rabbits or other food or farm animals inside the city limits unless such animals
are securely caged or penned up in an enclosure which, at any given point thereof, shall be no less than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the nearest residence or
residences on any adjacent property under other ownership or possession.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.320; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.014)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to prohibit or otherwise regulate the keeping of livestock and swine, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.026(b).
Sec. 2.01.014 Keeping wild or dangerous animals
No person shall keep or harbor on his premises any wild or dangerous animal. This prohibition does not apply to a traveling circus, pet shop or zoological garden under
competent and sanitary supervision as determined by the animal control officer. (1972 Code, sec. 4.322; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.015)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.01.015 Removal of animal waste
Every owner or handler of any animal shall promptly, in a sanitary manner, remove and dispose of excreta deposited by their animal on any public or private property not
owned or occupied by the animal's owner or handler. (Ordinance 10-043 adopted 10/19/10; 2008 Code, sec. 2.01.016)
ARTICLE 2.02 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.02.001 Authorized; holding period
(a) At his option, the animal control officer or a city policeman may, in lieu of or in addition to issuing a citation, gather up or cause to be gathered up all animals found
running at large within the city limits and impound the same.
(b) Cats running at large, whether owned or unowned, and dogs running at large or not under constant control of, or by, the owner by means of a leash strong and
sufficient enough to control its actions, whether or not outside the boundaries of the real property of the owner, may be impounded by the city animal control officer or a
city policeman, and may be impounded for not over twenty-four (24) hours in the temporary holding cages of the city, or may be taken directly to the animal shelter of the
city veterinarian.
(c) Impounded dogs or cats may be released only to their owners, if identified and redeemed, only if the owner presents a receipt for city charges accrued by the
animal control facility. Tagged animals will be kept impounded for a total of five (5) days and untagged animals will be kept impounded for a total of three (3) days. After
the impoundment expires, unregistered or unredeemed dogs or cats may be euthanized or sold to anyone for use as a pet. Whoever adopts the dog or cat must have
the animal vaccinated for rabies and purchase a city animal license at the time of purchase.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.303; 2008 Code, sec. 2.02.001)
Sec. 2.02.002 Release of impounded animal to owner; fees
(a) Owners of impounded dogs or cats will contact the city to obtain a receipt for presentation to the animal control facility before their animal can be released from
impoundment. The animal control officer shall mark the receipts to indicate that all requirements of this chapter have been met, including but not restricted to the
following:
(1) Citing the owner for any violation of this chapter, at the discretion of the animal control officer or police department;
(2) Payment to the city for keeping the animal and notifying the owner;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/349
(3) Proof of vaccination and registration as prescribed in this chapter;
(4) A total receipt will be furnished to the owner listing the items of services, as applicable to the owner.
(b) Vaccination for rabies and other treatment by the city veterinarian will be charged for at the current mutually agreeable rate set by agreement between the city and
the city veterinarian. All impoundment fees are to be paid directly to the city. An authorized development department employee will ascertain total charges in each
instance for administrative fees which are reimbursable to the city veterinarian.
(c) The city veterinarian will send the city an itemized statement each month for services and supplies expended on impounded animals. The statement will be
reconciled with the monthly report of animal control activities and registration fees.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.306; 2008 Code, sec. 2.02.002)
Sec. 2.02.003 Notice to owner; payment of fees
(a) If the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall immediately, upon impoundment, attempt to notify the owner at the address
listed on the most recent city animal license application. If the dog or cat owner is unknown, or if the owner cannot be contacted, the animal control officer shall keep a
written list of all impounded animals, describing the dog or cat so impounded, and the location at which such animal was impounded. Animals shall remain on this list
until such time as the redemption period is past for unclaimed animals.
(b) The owner may reclaim such dog or cat upon payment of fees as listed in section 2.02.002 and the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised
by ordinance from time to time. The owner is responsible for all impoundment fees, whether or not the animal is reclaimed. Notice of failure to pay shall be given to the
owner by certified mail or by posting notice on the owner's last known address. Failure by the owner to pay all fees due to the city will result in theft of service charges
being filed against the owner.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.307; 2008 Code, sec. 2.02.003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 2.02.004 Unclaimed animals
Unclaimed tagged dogs or cats will be disposed of under direction of the city veterinarian by a painless and humane method or sold or given away as pets, if desired,
after they have been kept in the animal control facility for over five (5) days. Any unclaimed and untagged dogs or cats will be disposed of in the same humane method
or sold or given away as pets after they have been kept in the animal control facility for over three (3) days. (1972 Code, sec. 4.308; 2008 Code, sec. 2.02.004)
ARTICLE 2.03 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.03.001 Reports of suspected rabid animals
A person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies, or of an animal that
the person suspects is rabid, shall report the incident or animal to the animal control officer. The report shall include the name and address of any victim and the owner
of the animal, if known, and any other data which may aid in the locating of the victim or the animal. The owner of an animal that is reported to be rabid or to have
exposed an individual shall submit the animal for quarantine with the city veterinarian. The animal control officer shall investigate all reports filed under this section.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.309; 2008 Code, sec. 2.03.001)
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041.
Sec. 2.03.002 Quarantine of suspected rabid animals
(a) The animal control officer shall quarantine for at least ten (10) days any domestic dog, cat, or domestic ferret that he has probable cause to believe is rabid or has
exposed an individual to rabies. The owner may quarantine at his veterinarian with the approval of the local health authority for the purposes of animal control.
(b) If it is determined by a veterinarian that a quarantined animal shows the clinical signs of the disease rabies, the veterinarian shall humanely destroy the animal. If
an animal dies or is destroyed while in quarantine, the veterinarian shall remove the head or brain of the animal and submit it to the nearest department of state health
services laboratory for testing.
(c) If the authorized veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal does not show the clinical signs of rabies, he shall release it to the owner following the
quarantine period if:
(1) The owner has an unexpired rabies vaccination certificate for the animal; or
(2) The animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense.
(d) The owner of an animal that is quarantined shall pay to the city the reasonable costs of the quarantine and disposition of the animal as provided in section
2.02.002 of this chapter and the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. The animal control officer may sell and
retain the proceeds or keep, grant or destroy any animal that the owner or custodian does not take possession of on or before the third day following the final day of the
quarantine.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.310; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.03.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042; release or disposition of quarantined animal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
826.043.
Sec. 2.03.003 Area rabies quarantine
(a) If rabies is known to exist within an area, the city council may declare an area rabies quarantine.
(b) Upon the declaration that a quarantine exists, the city council shall:
(1) Define the borders of the area quarantined; and
(2) Adopt permanent or emergency rules in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act, as amended (V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, chapter 2001).
(c) The area quarantine shall remain in effect for one hundred eighty (180) days following the last case of rabies diagnosed in a dog or cat, or other animal species
responsible for declaration of the area quarantine, unless removed prior to that date by declaration of the city council.
(d) Every person owning or keeping a dog or cat shall confine it securely on his premises during the quarantine period, unless such dog or cat has a muzzle of
sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. An unmuzzled dog or cat running at large during the quarantine shall be seized and impounded unless noticeably
infected with rabies. All dogs or cats noticeably infected with rabies or displaying vicious propensities may be killed by the animal control officer or any city policeman,
without notice to the owner. Dogs or cats not infected with rabies but impounded during the period of such quarantine shall, if reclaimed within three (3) days, be
released to the owner, upon payment of impounding charges provided in section 2.02.002. If unclaimed after that period, such dog or cat may be summarily destroyed.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.311; 2008 Code, sec. 2.03.003)
State law reference–Area rabies quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.045.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/349
ARTICLE 2.04 REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS*
Sec. 2.04.001 Required; expiration
(a) Dog and/or cat owners who are city residents shall, when and if the animal exceeds four (4) months of age, apply to the city for registration. The city, upon
receiving proof of each animal's vaccination for rabies, will issue a numbered metallic tag to each approved dog or cat owner to be attached to each animal's collar.
Records will be kept to assure that the animal's owner can be located from the tag's number. Animals belonging to persons in transit who do not or will not have resided
for over thirty (30) consecutive days in the city are exempt from requirements for dog/cat registration and tags. However, owners will comply with other applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(b) Such registration will be valid until such time as the rabies vaccination expires. Renewal of the registration must be purchased when the animal is revaccinated
against rabies.
(c) No person shall use a certificate or tag for any dog or cat other than the one for which it was issued.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.312; Ordinance 03-004 adopted 4/1/03; 2008 Code, sec. 2.04.001)
Sec. 2.04.002 Revocation
(a) The animal control officer or his designate may revoke any dog or cat registration after a hearing for any one (1) or more of the following reasons:
(1) Impoundment of a dog by the city more than three (3) times during a twelve-month period;
(2) More than three (3) final convictions of a person for violating this chapter when such conviction relates to the dog/cat which is being considered for
revocation of its registration;
(3) Upon a determination that the dog or cat is a vicious animal, as defined by this chapter;
(4) Refusal to admit the animal control officer or city policeman onto the owner's premises for inspections or investigation of a complaint on premises
wherein a violation is suspected;
(5) Failure to restrain a female dog or cat in heat sufficiently to prevent contact with a male of the species, except where planned breeding is carried out;
(6) Failure to exercise proper care and control of an animal in repeated instances of barking, chasing vehicles, attacking other animals or other nuisances;
(7) Failure to keep premises sanitary and reasonably clean and free of excrement and free of any offensive odors due to animal keeping;
(8) Cruelty to an animal, failure to provide proper veterinary care, failure to feed, water or properly shelter an animal, beating, tormenting, or otherwise
abusing an animal; and/or
(9) Intentionally abandoning an animal.
In addition to or in lieu of registration revocation, the above offenses shall constitute violations of this chapter.
(b) Upon revoking the registration of any animal, the animal control officer shall notify the owner of the animal of said action in writing. Written notification shall be
deemed made when a certified letter, return receipt requested, addressed to the last known mailing address of the owner, is deposited in the United States mail.
(c) Upon the expiration of ten (10) days after written notification of revocation is deposited in the United States mail as provided above, no person shall keep, maintain
or harbor within the city limits any dog which has had its registration revoked.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.313; 2008 Code, sec. 2.04.002)
Sec. 2.04.003 Fees
Fees for registration are listed in section 2.02.002 of this chapter or in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(1972 Code, sec. 4.314; 2008 Code, sec. 2.04.003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 2.05 DANGEROUS DOGS*
Sec. 2.05.001 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another dog that causes bodily injury and that occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog
was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from
leaving the enclosure on its own, and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person.
Dog. A domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family.
Owner. A person who owns or has custody or control of the dog.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the city.
Unprovoked. With respect to an attack or attempt to attack by a dog, the dog was not hit, kicked, or struck by a person with any object or part of the attacked person's
body nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched, or squeezed or in any other manner provoked by the person attacked.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.05.001)
Sec. 2.05.002 Requirements for owner
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/349
(a) Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with animal control;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure;
(3) Muzzle the dog when it is outside the secure enclosure;
(4) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by
the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal
control officer; and
(5) Have the dangerous dog spayed or neutered.
(b) If a person reports an incident described by section 2.05.001 in the definition of a “dangerous dog,” the animal control officer may investigate the incident. If, after
receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control officer determines the dog is a dangerous dog, he or she shall notify the owner of that fact.
(c) An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is a dangerous dog, may appeal the determination of the
animal control officer to the municipal court. An owner may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the same manner as for other civil cases.
(d) The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the dog to the animal control officer not later than the 30th day after the
owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(e) If, on the application of any person, a justice court, county court, or municipal court finds, after notice and hearing as provided herein, that the owner has failed to
comply with subsection (a) or (d), the court shall order the animal control officer to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control
officer shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions.
(f) The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the dog.
(g) The court shall order the animal control officer to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied with subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on
which the dog is seized or delivered to the animal control officer. The court shall order the animal control officer to return the dog to the owner if the owner complies with
subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the animal control officer.
(h) The court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before the 15th day after the seizure and impoundment of the
dog.
(i) For purposes of this article, a person learns that the person is an owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in section 2.05.001 in the definition of a “dangerous dog”;
(2) The owner receives notice that a justice court, county court, or municipal court has found that the dog is a dangerous dog after a hearing on the matter;
or
(3) The owner is informed by the animal control officer that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.05.002)
Sec. 2.05.003 Registration
(a) Animal control shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(1) Presents proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by section 2.05.002(a)(4), proof of current rabies vaccination, and proof of
sterilization of the dangerous dog; and has a secure enclosure in which the dangerous dog will be kept that is inspected and approved by the animal control
officer; and
(2) Pays an annual registration fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(b) The animal control officer shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The owner must place the tag on the dog's collar. The collar
must be of a distinctive color and design that identifies the dog as a dangerous dog.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the 14th day after the date of the sale or move, shall
notify the animal control officer for the area in which the new address is located. On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and
payment of a fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time, the animal control officer shall issue a new registration
tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar.
(d) An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer of any attacks the dangerous dog makes on any person or animal.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.05.003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 2.05.004 Attack by dog
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's
enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person.
(b) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor.
(c) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog destroyed by:
(1) A licensed veterinarian;
(2) Personnel of a recognized animal shelter or humane society who are trained in the humane destruction of animals; or
(3) Personnel of a governmental agency responsible for animal control who are trained in the humane destruction of animals.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.05.004)
Sec. 2.05.005 Violations
(a) A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply with section 2.05.002.
(b) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor, and any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with
section 1.01.009 of this code.
(c) An offense under this section is a class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the defendant has previously been convicted under this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/349
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.05.005)
Sec. 2.05.006 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.05.004 or 2.05.005 that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal
shelter, or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in
connection with that position.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.05.004 or 2.05.005 that the person is an employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal
justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.05.004 or 2.05.005 that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company under chapter 1702,
Texas Occupations Code.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.05.006)
ARTICLE 2.06 DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.06.001 Definitions
In this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section:
Animal registration agency. The municipal or county animal control office with authority over the area where a dangerous wild animal is kept.
Board. The state board of health.
Commercial activity.
(1) An activity involving a dangerous wild animal conducted for profit that is not inherent to the animal's nature;
(2) An activity for which a fee is charged and that is entertainment using or an exhibition of the animal; or
(3) The selling, trading, bartering, or auctioning of a dangerous wild animal or a dangerous wild animal's body parts.
Dangerous wild animal.
(1) A lion;
(2) A tiger;
(3) An ocelot;
(4) A cougar;
(5) A leopard;
(6) A cheetah;
(7) A jaguar;
(8) A bobcat;
(9) A lynx;
(10) A serval;
(11) A caracal;
(12) A hyena;
(13) A bear;
(14) A coyote;
(15) A wolf;
(16) A jackal;
(17) A baboon;
(18) A chimpanzee;
(19) An orangutan;
(20) A gorilla; or
(21) Any hybrid of an animal listed in this definition.
Owner. Any person who owns, harbors, or has custody or control of a dangerous wild animal.
Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, trust, estate, joint stock company, foundation, or association of individuals.
Primary enclosure. Any structure used to immediately restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, including a cage, pen, run, room, compartment, foundation, or
hutch.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.001)
Sec. 2.06.002 Applicability
This article does not apply to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/349
(1) A research facility, as that term is defined by section 2(e), Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section 2132), and its subsequent amendments, that is licensed
by the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States under that act;
(2) An organization that is an accredited member of the American Zoo and Aquarium Association;
(3) An injured, infirm, orphaned, or abandoned dangerous wild animal while being transported for care or treatment;
(4) An injured, infirm, orphaned, or abandoned dangerous wild animal while being rehabilitated, treated, or cared for by a licensed veterinarian, an
incorporated humane society or animal shelter, or a person who holds a rehabilitation permit issued under subchapter C, chapter 42 [43], Parks and Wildlife
Code;
(5) A dangerous wild animal owned by and in the custody and control of a transient circus company that is not based in this state if:
(A) The animal is used as an integral part of the circus performances; and
(B) The animal is kept within this state only during the time the circus is performing in this state or a period not to exceed 30 days while the circus is
performing outside the United States;
(6) A dangerous wild animal while in the temporary custody or control of a television or motion picture production company during the filming of a television
or motion picture production in this state;
(7) A dangerous wild animal owned by and in the possession, custody, or control of a college or university solely as a mascot for the college or university;
(8) A dangerous wild animal while being transported in interstate commerce through the state in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section
2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments and the regulations adopted under that act;
(9) A nonhuman primate owned by and in the control and custody of a person whose only business is supplying nonhuman primates directly and
exclusively to biomedical research facilities and who holds a class A or class B dealer's license issued by the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States
under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments; and
(10) A dangerous wild animal that is:
(A) Owned by or in the possession, control, or custody of a person who is a participant in a species survival plan of the American Zoo and Aquarium
Association for that species; and
(B) An integral part of that species' survival plan.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.002)
Sec. 2.06.003 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if the person violates section 2.06.007(a) or (b), section 2.06.031(a) or section 2.06.034. Each animal with respect to which there is a
violation and each day that a violation continues is a separate offense.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person knowingly sells or otherwise transfers ownership of a dangerous wild animal to a person who does not have a certificate
of registration for that animal as required by this article.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.003)
Sec. 2.06.004 Liability insurance
An owner of a dangerous wild animal shall maintain liability insurance coverage in an amount of not less than $100,000.00 for each occurrence for liability for damages
for destruction of or damage to property and death or bodily injury to a person caused by the dangerous animal. (Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec.
2.06.004)
Sec. 2.06.005 Inspections
An owner of a dangerous wild animal, at all reasonable times, shall allow the animal registration agency, its staff, its agents, or a designated licensed veterinarian to
enter the premises where the animal is kept and to inspect the animal, the primary enclosure for the animal, and the owner's records relating to the animal to ensure
compliance with this article. (Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.005)
Sec. 2.06.006 Relocation or disposition of animal
(a) An owner of a dangerous wild animal may not permanently relocate the animal unless the owner first notifies the animal registration agency in writing of the exact
location to which the animal will be relocated and provides the animal registration agency, with respect to the new location, the information required by section 2.06.032.
(b) Within 10 days after the death, sale, or other disposition of the animal, the owner of the animal shall notify the animal registration agency in writing of the death,
sale, or other disposition.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.006)
Sec. 2.06.007 Attack by animal; escape of animal; liability
(a) An owner of a dangerous wild animal shall notify the animal registration agency of any attack of a human by the animal within 48 hours of the attack.
(b) An owner of a dangerous wild animal shall immediately notify the animal registration agency and the local law enforcement agency of any escape of the animal.
(c) An owner of a dangerous wild animal that escapes is liable for all costs incurred in apprehending and confining the animal.
(d) An animal registration agency, a law enforcement agency, or an employee of an animal registration agency or law enforcement agency is not liable to an owner of
a dangerous wild animal for damages arising in connection with the escape of a dangerous wild animal, including liability for damage, injury, or death caused by the
animal during or after the animal's escape, or the injury to or death of the animal as a result of apprehension or confinement of the animal after escape.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.007)
Sec. 2.06.008 Powers and duties of board; caging requirements and standards
(a) The board by rule shall establish caging requirements and standards for the keeping and confinement of a dangerous wild animal to ensure that the animal is kept
in a manner and confined in a primary enclosure that:
(1) Protects and enhances the public's health and safety;
(2) Prevents escape by the animal; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/349
(3) Provides a safe, healthy, and humane environment for the animal.
(b) An owner of a dangerous wild animal shall keep and confine the animal in accordance with the caging requirements and standards established by the board.
(c) An animal registration agency may approve a deviation from the caging requirements and standards established by the board, only if:
(1) The animal registration agency has good cause for the deviation; and
(2) The deviation:
(A) Does not compromise the public's health and safety;
(B) Does not reduce the total area of the primary enclosure below that which is established by the board; and
(C) Does not otherwise adversely affect the overall welfare of the animal involved.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.008)
Sec. 2.06.009 Care, treatment and transportation
(a) For each dangerous wild animal, the owner shall comply with all applicable standards of the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent
amendments and the regulations adopted under that act relating to:
(1) Facilities and operations;
(2) Animal health and husbandry; and
(3) Veterinary care.
(b) An owner of a dangerous wild animal shall maintain a separate written log for each dangerous wild animal documenting the animal's veterinary care and shall
make the log available to the animal registration agency or its agent on request. The log must:
(1) Identify the animal treated;
(2) Provide the date of treatment;
(3) Describe the type or nature of treatment; or [and]
(4) Provide the name of the attending veterinarian, if applicable.
(c) When transporting a dangerous wild animal, the owner of the animal, or a designated carrier or intermediate handler of the animal, shall comply with all
transportation standards that apply to that animal under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments or the regulations
adopted under that act.
(d) A person is exempt from the requirements of this section if the person is caring for, treating, or transporting the animal for which the person holds a class A or class
B dealer's license or a class C exhibitor's license issued by the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section 2131 et
seq.) and its subsequent amendments.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.009)
Secs. 2.06.010–2.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Certificate of Registration
Sec. 2.06.031 Required; fees
(a) A person may not own, harbor, or have custody or control of a dangerous wild animal for any purpose unless the person holds a certificate of registration for that
animal issued by an animal registration agency.
(b) A certificate of registration issued under this article is not transferable and is valid for one year after its date of issuance or renewal unless revoked.
(c) The animal registration agency may establish and charge reasonable fees for application, issuance, and renewal of a certificate of registration in order to recover
the costs associated with the administration and enforcement of this article. A fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by
ordinance from time to time will be charged to an applicant. The fees collected under this section may be used only to administer and enforce this article.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.031; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 2.06.032 Application
(a) An applicant for an original or renewal certificate of registration for a dangerous wild animal must file an application with an animal registration agency on a form
provided by the animal registration agency.
(b) The application must include:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) A complete identification of each animal, including species, sex, age, if known, and any distinguishing marks or coloration that would aid in the
identification of the animal;
(3) The exact location where each animal is to be kept;
(4) A sworn statement that:
(A) All information in the application is complete and accurate; and
(B) The applicant has read this article and that all facilities used by the applicant to confine or enclose the animal comply with the requirements of this
article; and
(5) Any other information the animal registration agency may require.
(c) An applicant shall include with each application:
(1) The nonrefundable fee;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/349
(2) Proof, in a form acceptable by the animal registration agency, that the applicant has liability insurance, as required by section 2.06.004;
(3) A color photograph of each animal being registered taken not earlier than the 30th day before the date the application is filed;
(4) A photograph and a statement of the dimensions of the primary enclosure in which each animal is to be kept and a scale diagram of the premises
where each animal will be kept, including the location of any perimeter fencing and any residence on the premises; and
(5) If an applicant holds a class A or class B dealer's license or class C exhibitor's license issued by the Secretary of Agriculture of the United States under
the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments, a clear and legible photocopy of the license.
(d) In addition to the items required under subsection (c), an application for renewal must include a statement signed by a veterinarian licensed to practiced in this
state stating that the veterinarian:
(1) Inspected each animal being registered not earlier than the 30th day before the date of the filing of the renewal application; and
(2) Finds that the care and treatment of each animal by the owner meets or exceeds the standards prescribed under this article.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.032)
Sec. 2.06.033 Denial or revocation; appeals
(a) If the animal registration agency finds that an application for an original or renewal certificate of registration under this article does not meet the requirements of
section 2.06.032 or, after inspection, that an applicant has not complied with this article, the animal registration agency shall deny the applicant a certificate of
registration and give the applicant written notice of the denial and the reasons for the denial.
(b) If the animal registration agency finds, after inspection, that a registered owner provided false information in or in connection with the application or has not
complied with this article, the animal registration agency shall revoke the certificate of registration and give the owner written notice of the revocation and the reasons for
the revocation.
(c) A person may appeal the denial of an original or renewal certificate of registration or the revocation of a certificate of registration to the municipal court not later
than the 15th day after the date the certificate of registration is denied or revoked. Either party may appeal the decision of the municipal court to a county court or county
court at law in the county in which the municipal court is located. The decision of the county court or county court at law may not be appealed.
(d) The filing of an appeal of the denial or revocation of a certificate of registration under subsection (c) stays the denial or revocation until the court rules on the
appeal.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.033)
Sec. 2.06.034 Display; filing with department of state health services
(a) A holder of a certificate of registration shall prominently display the certificate at the premises where each animal that is the subject of the certificate of registration
is kept.
(b) Not later than the 10th day after the date a person receives a certificate of registration, the person shall file a clear and legible copy of the certificate of registration
with the department of state health services. The department shall establish a procedure for filing a certificate of registration and shall charge a reasonable fee in an
amount sufficient to recover the cost associated with filing a certificate of registration under this subsection.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.034)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Chemical toilets at construction sites
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any property owner, builder, contractor or other person to commence the construction of any residence, commercial building or
other structure in the city of valuation according to the application for a building permit in excess of $1,500.00 unless there is installed by such person, for the use of
workmen working upon such construction, a chemical toilet which shall include a sealed receptacle of at least 45-gallon capacity, unless plumbing facilities are already
installed on the premises and available to such workmen. Such chemical toilet shall be placed on each job before work commences, and the building permits hereafter
issued shall so state. Such chemical toilets shall be cleaned and serviced each week. These requirements are to be rigidly enforced by the building inspector, who shall
determine on each job that the toilet is a sealed chemical toilet of the capacity here required, and that it is serviced and cleaned as here required.
(b) Construction of multiple structures in same vicinity. In the event that construction of more than one residence, building or other structure is being carried on in the
same vicinity, it shall not be necessary for such a chemical toilet to be provided for each such residence, building or other structure under construction, provided that
such a chemical toilet available to the workmen on every such construction work is situated within three hundred feet (300') of each structure under construction.
(c) Penalty. Violations of this section are punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(1972 Code, secs. 6.300, 6.500; 2008 Code, sec. 3.01.001)
Sec. 3.01.002 Trench safety
(a) In the city, on construction projects in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five feet (5'), the bid documents and the contract must include detailed plans
and specifications for trench safety systems that meet Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards and [it is required] that these plans and specifications
include a pay item for these same safety systems.
(b) Violations of this section are punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2000.00).
(1972 Code, secs. 6.400, 6.500; 2008 Code, sec. 3.01.002)
State law reference–Trench safety requirements, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 756.021 et seq.
Sec. 3.01.003 Payment of prevailing wage rates on public works projects
(a) Adoption. The city hereby adopts as the prevailing wage rate of per diem wages to be paid workers on its public works projects the following prevailing wage rates,
terms and conditions.
(b) Definitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/349
Legal holiday. The holidays established by the city.
Maintenance. Work not involving substantial replacement or reconstruction. Maintenance is intended to extend the life of or protect an asset. The city solely shall
determine if the work performed is maintenance.
Overtime. As defined in the Copeland Act.
Per diem. The daily hourly rate wages and benefits paid to a worker.
Public work. A contract for a public work located within the geographical limits of the city awarded by the city for construction of an improvement, including a building,
highway, road, excavation, and repair work or other project development or improvement, paid for in whole or in part from public funds, without regard to whether the
work is done under public supervision or direction.
Worker. Includes a laborer or mechanic.
(c) Applicability.
(1) This section applies only to the construction of a public work, including a building, highway, road, excavation, and repair work or other project
development or improvement, paid for in whole or part from public funds, without regard to whether the work is done under public supervision or direction.
(2) This section does not apply to work done directly by a public utility company under an order of a public authority or to maintenance.
(d) Right to be paid prevailing wage rate.
(1) A worker employed on a public work by or on behalf of the city shall be paid:
(A) Not less than the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for work of a similar character in the city in which the work is performed; and
(B) Not less than the general prevailing rate of per diem wages for legal holiday and overtime work.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to maintenance work.
(3) A worker is employed on a public work for the purpose of this section if the worker is employed by a contractor or subcontractor in the execution of a
contract for a public work with the city.
(e) Determination of prevailing rates.
(1) The city council hereby elects to use the prevailing wage rates as determined by the U.S. Department of Labor in accordance with the Davis-Bacon Act
(40 U.S.C. section 276a, et seq.), and its subsequent amendments, in lieu of conducting wage rate surveys and compiling wage rate schedules.
(2) If and when the U.S. Department of Labor's wages rate schedule may be revised, updated, or amended, such revisions, updates and amendments
shall automatically apply for the construction of public works in the city, but shall not be applied or enforced retroactively to any public works project for which
a formal agreement has been executed prior to the revision, update or amendment.
(f) Rates to be paid by both contractor and subcontractors; exceptions.
(1) The contractor who is awarded a contract by the city or a subcontractor of the contractor shall pay not less than the rates determined under subsection
(e) of this section to a worker employed by it in the execution of the contract.
(2) This section does not apply to work done directly by a public utility company under an order of a public authority or to maintenance.
(g) Records.
(1) A contractor and subcontractor shall keep a record showing:
(A) The name and occupation of each worker employed by the contractor or subcontractor in the construction of the public work; and
(B) The actual per diem wages paid to each worker.
(2) The record shall be open at all reasonable hours to inspection by the officers and agents of the city.
(h) Payment greater than prevailing rate. This section does not prohibit the payment to a worker employed on a public work of an amount greater than the general
prevailing rate of per diem wage.
(i) Reliance on certificate of subcontractor. A contractor is entitled to rely on a certificate by a subcontractor regarding the payment of all sums due those working for
the subcontractor until the contrary has been determined.
(Ordinance 99-001 adopted 1/5/99; 2008 Code, sec. 3.01.003; Ordinance 2014-02-10-02 adopted 2/10/14; Ordinance 16-005 adopted 2/16/16)
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.02.001–3.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code, Residential Code and Existing Building Code*
Sec. 3.02.051 Building code adopted
The International Building Code, 2015 edition, together with all appendices, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as though it was copied herein fully, with the exception of section 113.3 which calls for a board of appeals, and all references to such in the IBC. Refer to
section 3.02.054 for appeals and variance processes. (Ordinance 07-008, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.051; Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14)
Sec. 3.02.052 Residential code adopted
The International Residential Code, 2015 edition, as adopted and published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
though it was copied herein fully. (Ordinance 07-008, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.051; Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14)
Sec. 3.02.053 Existing building code adopted
The International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, as adopted and published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
though it was copied herein fully. (Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/349
Sec. 3.02.054 Appeals and variances
(a) An appeal of the decision of the building official will be considered by the development director, fire chief, and city engineer and based on the joint recommendation
of said individuals; the appeal may be granted or denied with final discretion by the city manager.
(b) A variance from the provisions of certain sections of the currently adopted code may be granted administratively by the development director on the joint
recommendation of the building inspector, fire chief, and public works director, if alternative requirements are made which will give an equivalent amount of protection.
The variance shall specify the alternative measures.
(Ordinance 04-005, sec. 3, adopted 4/6/04; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.053; Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14)
Sec. 3.02.055 Conflicts between adopted codes and other regulations
To the extent of a conflict between any codes adopted herein and any locally adopted regulations regarding construction requirements, permitting, variances, and
appeals from any code requirements and local administrative decisions, the locally adopted regulations shall apply. (Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14)
Sec. 3.02.056 Penalty
Violations of this division are punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2000.00). (1972 Code, sec. 6.500;
2008 Code, sec. 3.02.054)
Sec. 3.02.057 Building permits
(a) Required. No building or accessory building shall hereafter be erected or constructed within the corporate limits of the city, and no existing building or accessory
building within the corporate limits shall hereafter be structurally altered or an addition added thereto, unless a building permit has first been issued.
(b) Floodplain management programs. The city will take into account floodplain management programs, if any, already in effect in neighboring areas.
(c) Areas affected. This section shall apply to all areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Association (FEMA) as floodplain areas having special flood
hazards and to other areas of the city as applicable.
(d) Construction in flood hazard area. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove or demolish any building or structure
within the special flood hazard area designated by the FEMA maps which are on file at city hall without first obtaining a separate building permit for each building or
structure from the city. Flood hazard requirements are addressed in article 3.03 of the city code. This section shall in no way override article 3.03, which shall also take
precedence over other conflicting ordinances.
(e) Jobs inspected by federal agencies. On those construction jobs within the city where the Federal Housing Administration, the Veterans Administration, or other
similar United States government agency is involved, then as to such construction jobs the building inspections provided herein may be waived by the city provided that
the building permit reflects that such federal agency will conduct inspections and further provided that copies of all such inspections made by such federal agency are
promptly forwarded to the city.
(f) Expiration. It is hereby provided that all building permits validly issued by the city shall expire automatically and irretrievably six months (6) from the date of the
issuance thereof unless prior thereto construction thereunder has been actually and substantially instituted in good faith, has continued without abatement, and is
continuing, good faith delays made necessary by climatic conditions, acts of God and acts of the city itself alone excepted.
(1972 Code, sec. 6.200; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.055)
Sec. 3.02.058 Accessory buildings adjacent to residential structures
Any accessory building erected contiguous or adjacent to an existing residential structure and visible from the front shall comply in construction with the building code
and shall be in conformance with applicable subdivision regulations. The exterior finish of such buildings shall be compatible in design and materials with the existing
residential structure. (1972 Code, sec. 6.104; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.056)
Secs. 3.02.059–3.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Air Conditioning and Heating*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.02.101 Contractor's license
All contractors wishing to do work in the city must hold a current license under V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1302. (1972 Code, sec. 3.103; 2008 Code, sec.
3.02.101)
Secs. 3.02.102–3.02.130 Reserved
Part II. Mechanical Code
Sec. 3.02.131 Adopted
The International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, as adopted and published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
though it was copied herein fully. (Ordinance 07-003 adopted 2/6/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.131; Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14)
Sec. 3.02.132 Amendments
Said 2015 edition is adopted in its entirety except as follows:
Section 106.5.2, Permit fees. Fees shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city code as amended or revised by ordinance from time
to time.
(Ordinance 04-004, sec. 2, adopted 4/6/04; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.132; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.02.133 Conflicting regulations
When this code comes in conflict with another code(s) adopted by the city, the most stringent code shall prevail. (1972 Code, sec. 3.104; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.133)
Secs. 3.02.134–3.02.190 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/349
Division 4. Electricity†
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.02.191 Electrician's license
No person, whether as a master or journeyman electrician, shall engage in the business of an electrician in the city without a current state electrical license or current
equivalent. (Ordinance 04-006 adopted 4/6/04; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.191)
State law reference–Texas Electrical Safety and Licensing Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1305.
Sec. 3.02.192 Permit fees
Fees for building permits (electrical) shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time-to-time.
(Ordinance 04-006 adopted 4/6/04; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.192; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code; Ordinance 2017-69, sec. 1, adopted 11/21/17)
Secs. 3.02.193–3.02.220 Reserved
Part II. Electrical Code
Sec. 3.02.221 Adopted
The National Electrical Code, 2017 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, Inc. is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though it
was copied herein fully. (Ordinance 07-005, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.221; Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14; Ordinance 2017-69, sec. 2, adopted
11/21/17)
Secs. 3.02.222–3.02.250 Reserved
Division 5. Energy Code*
Sec. 3.02.251 Commercial energy code adopted
The International Commercial Energy Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though it
was copied herein fully. (Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14)
Secs. 3.02.252–3.02.280 Reserved
Division 6. Plumbing†
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.02.281 Penalty
Each violation of this division shall be punishable by a penalty of a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. (1972 Code, sec. 19.410; 2008 Code, sec.
3.02.281; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.02.282 Contractor's license
All contractors doing business in the city must hold a current license from the appropriate state agency. Employees of contractors not licensed must be under direct
supervision of a licensed person holding a current state license. (1972 Code, sec. 19.200; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.282)
State law reference–Plumbing License Law, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1301.
Sec. 3.02.283 Permit fees
Fees for plumbing permits are found in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. (1972 Code, sec. 19.300;
2008 Code, sec. 3.02.283; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 3.02.284–3.02.320 Reserved
Part II. Plumbing Code
Sec. 3.02.321 Adopted
The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, together with all appendices, except A (permit schedule), B (rates of rainfall) and D (degree day and design
temperatures), as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as though it was copied herein fully. (Ordinance 07-006,
sec. 1, adopted 2/6/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.321; Ordinance 14-029 adopted 12/8/14)
Sec. 3.02.322 Amendments
Said 2015 edition is adopted in its entirety except as follows:
Section 106.5.3, Expiration. Every permit issued by the code official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work
authorized by such permit is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or
abandoned at any time after the work has commenced for a period of ninety (90) days. Before such work can be recommended [recommenced], a new permit shall be
obtained, and the fee therefor shall be one-half (1/2) the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided that no changes have been made or will be made in
the original construction documents for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
Section 106.5.4, Permit extension, is deleted in its entirety.
Section 106.6.2, Fee schedule. Fees for plumbing, gas, sewer and trench permits shall be as stated in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city code as amended or
revised by ordinance from time to time.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/349
Section 106.6.3, Fee refunds. The code official shall authorize the refunding of the full amount of any fee paid herein that was erroneously paid or collected.
Section 108.4, Violation penalties. ... shall be guilty of “violation of plumbing code,” and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $1000.00.
Each day the violation continues after due notice of said violation(s) has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 109.1, Means of appeal. Appeals from the literal enforcement of this code shall be directed to the director of community development. The director shall, after
conference with the state board of plumbing examiners and the building official, make a determination, which shall be final and binding.
(Ordinance 07-006, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.322; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 3.02.323–3.02.360 Reserved
Part III. Maximum Flow Rates for Indoor Fixtures
Sec. 3.02.361 Purpose
This part establishes maximum water flow or discharge rates for indoor plumbing fixtures in order to promote water conservation and greater efficiency in these fixtures.
(1972 Code, sec. 19.401; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.361)
Sec. 3.02.362 Definitions
New construction. A project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or
any use or extension of the use of land, any of which requires issuance of a building permit.
Person. An individual, public or private corporation, organization, government or government agency, political subdivision, business trust, partnership, association, or
other legal entity. This definition specifically includes either the property owners and/or agent, and/or anyone in control of installation under this section.
Renovation. Any building construction or remodeling involving plumbing fixtures, or replacement of plumbing fixtures, which shall include toilet, shower, tub, and/or
faucet fixtures, either lavatory, sink or other.
Ultra-low-flow water closet. Any toilet, either gravity, flushometer, or pressurized flush types, which uses a maximum average of 1.6 gallons per flush when tested over
the range of 20-80 psi.
(1972 Code, sec. 19.402; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.362)
Sec. 3.02.363 Violations; penalty
(a) It shall be a violation of this part to install, or cause to be installed, plumbing fixtures not in accordance with the provisions of this part.
(b) A person commits an offense and it shall be a violation of this part if a person knowingly or intentionally fails to comply with each and every of the provisions of this
part.
(c) Each day of a continuing violation is a separate offense.
(d) A single citation shall be issued for each noncompliant fixture installed within a building, regardless of the number of noncompliances. The owner of the building
and/or person who acquired the building permit and/or person who is responsible for installation of any fixture under this part shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$200.00 per citation.
(e) A violation of this part shall be a criminal offense, a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
(1972 Code, sec. 19.408; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.363)
Sec. 3.02.364 Applicability
The provisions of this part apply to all new construction and any renovation of plumbing facilities in an existing building within the corporate boundaries of the city and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. (1972 Code, sec. 19.404; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.364)
Sec. 3.02.365 Exceptions
The provisions of this part shall remain in effect for all applications cited in section 3.02.367, with the following exceptions:
(1) In replacement applications, ultra-low-flow water closets shall not be required if engineering calculations show that the reduced waste flow could cause
the building drainage system to function improperly. These calculations must be performed by, and carry the original seal of, a registered professional
engineer, and be approved by the city inspector.
(2) Special purpose safety showers, aspirator faucets, and clinical sinks in a hospital or medical office, wherein such fixtures are required per local, state,
or federal laws, are not required to comply with the maximum flow rate requirements prescribed by this part.
(1972 Code, sec. 19.407; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.365)
Sec. 3.02.366 Certification of fixtures
Indoor plumbing fixtures required to be installed pursuant to this part shall comply with all applicable standards promulgated by the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers (ASME) and the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). (1972 Code, sec. 19.403; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.366)
Sec. 3.02.367 Performance requirements
All new and/or replacement water closets, urinals, faucets, and shower heads shall meet the following standards for water flow or discharge rate:
(1) Faucets (lavatory). All lavatory faucets and replacement aerators shall be designed, manufactured, installed or equipped with a flow control device or
aerator which will not allow a water flow rate in excess of 2.0 gallons per minute, when tested at 60 psi (flowing) in accordance with ASME/ANSI A112.18.1.
(2) Faucets (other). All kitchen, bar, and other commercial sink faucets and replacement aerators shall be designed, manufactured, installed or equipped
with a flow control device or aerator which will not allow a water flow rate in excess of 2.5 gallons per minute, when tested at 60 psi (flowing) in accordance
with ASME/ANSI A112.18.1.
(3) Faucets (public restrooms). All lavatory faucets located in restrooms in any public building shall be of the hands-free, metering or self-closing type and
shall not allow a water flow rate in excess of 0.5 gallons per minute, when tested at 60 psi (flowing) in accordance with ASME/ANSI A112.18.1.
(4) Shower heads. All shower heads shall be designed, manufactured and installed with a flow limitation device which will not allow a water flow rate in
excess of 2.5 gallons per minute, when tested at 60 psi (flowing) in accordance with ASME/ANSI A112.18.1. The flow limitation device must be a permanent
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/349
and integral part of the shower head and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of 2.5 gallons per minute.
(5) Urinals. Urinals shall be designed, manufactured and installed so the average maximum flush will not exceed 1.0 gallon of water, and otherwise perform
in accordance with ASME/ANSI A112.19.2 and A112.19.6. Adjustable type flushometer valves may be used provided they are adjusted so the maximum flush
will not exceed 1.0 gallon of water.
(6) Water closets. All water closets, including two-piece closed coupled and flushometer valve types, shall be designed, manufactured, and installed so the
average maximum flush will not exceed 1.6 gallons of water, and otherwise perform in accordance with ASME/ANSI A112.19.2 and A112.19.6.
(1972 Code, sec. 19.405; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.367)
Sec. 3.02.368 Marking of fixtures
All faucets, shower heads and their packaging installed within the city limits or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be clearly marked by the manufacturer in
accordance with the provisions of ASME/ANSI A112.18.1. Water closets and urinals and their packaging shall be marked in accordance with the provisions contained in
ASME/ANSI A112.19.2. (1972 Code, sec. 19.406; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.368)
Secs. 3.02.369–3.02.400 Reserved
Part IV. Rainwater Harvesting Systems
Sec. 3.02.401 Generally
The city encourages all residential and business property owners to install rainwater collection systems for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation. These systems
may include, but are not limited to, rain barrels, roof water collection, cisterns, grey water plumbing fixtures, above-ground storage tanks and related pressure tanks and
pumps, and treatment and disinfection equipment. (Ordinance 07-042, sec. 1(A), adopted 9/11/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.401)
Sec. 3.02.402 Compliance with state standards
Said rainwater collection and storage containers and equipment must comply with the 2006 edition of the Texas Manual on Rainwater Harvesting, as published by the
state commission on environmental quality, in accordance with House Bill 2430, and all subsequent supplements and changes in and to said edition. (Ordinance 07-042,
sec. 1(B), adopted 9/11/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.402)
Sec. 3.02.403 Permit and inspections
All rainwater collection systems and related equipment must be permitted, inspected and approved by the city plumbing inspector. Fees for such permits and inspections
shall be as stated in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. (Ordinance 07-042, sec. 1(C), adopted 9/11/07;
2008 Code, sec. 3.02.403; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.02.404 Connection to city water system prohibited
Rainwater collection systems shall not be connected to any plumbing that connects with the city's water supply system. (Ordinance 07-042, sec. 1(D), adopted 9/11/07;
2008 Code, sec. 3.02.404)
Sec. 3.02.405 Location and maintenance of storage tanks
(a) Rainwater collection barrels and other water holding tanks or devices must be installed and maintained so as to prevent mosquito infestation and may not be
located within any easement.
(b) Above-ground water collection devices, with the exception of roof gutters and rain barrels, shall not be located in the front yard area. Above-ground cisterns and
water holding tanks must be located in the rear yard and must be screened from public view. Underground rainwater harvesting systems may be located in the front yard
area but may not rise more than two feet (2') above grade. All storage areas shall be secured to promote safety and sanitation. All rainwater harvesting systems and
related equipment must be situated at least five feet from any fence line.
(Ordinance 07-042, sec. 1(E), (F), adopted 9/11/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.405)
Secs. 3.02.406–3.02.430 Reserved
Part V. Sprinkler Systems
Sec. 3.02.431 Permit required; application
A plumbing permit shall hereafter be required before any lawn sprinkler system shall be installed anywhere in the city. An application shall be made to the development
department on a form or in the form prescribed by the plumbing inspector and shall be accompanied by a plat or drawing showing the plan of installation and giving all
specifications and showing the direction or directions of spray of each nozzle. (1972 Code, sec. 14.401; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.431)
Sec. 3.02.432 Permit fee; sprinklers not to spray into street
A fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time shall be paid before a permit is issued for the installation of any such
lawn sprinkling system, and such permit shall not be issued unless the plans therefor are such as to keep water from being sprinkled or sprayed directly into any city
street. Such installation shall comply strictly with the approved plan, and it shall be unlawful to operate any lawn sprinkling or sprinkler system which directly sprays any
quantity of water into any city street. (1972 Code, sec. 14.403; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.432; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.02.433 Backflow prevention
Lawn sprinkler systems shall be equipped with an approved vacuum breaker on the discharge side of each of the last valves. The vacuum breaker shall be at least six
inches (6") above the highest head and at no time less than six inches (6") above the surrounding ground. Where combination control valves and backflow preventers
are installed, the bottom of the valve shall constitute the bottom of the backflow preventer. (1972 Code, sec. 14.402; 2008 Code, sec. 3.02.433)
ARTICLE 3.03 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.03.001 Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods
(a) Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has, in the Flood Control and Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city sets forth the regulations that follow.
(b) Findings of fact.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/349
(1) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage.
(c) Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight
areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(d) Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ordinance 10-014 adopted 4/20/10; 2008 Code, sec. 3.03.001; Ordinance 15-011 adopted 8/18/15)
Sec. 3.03.002 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article
its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows;
active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding
can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the
principal structure.
Area of future flood conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1 percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions
hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow
may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. Is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be
designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE,
AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given
year, also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral
loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be
compromised.
Development. Any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before
January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/349
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination,
evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See “Flood elevation study.”
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain
ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or
improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed
specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in
conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodway. See “Regulatory floodway.”
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only
docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert
the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed
and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new
construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the
manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/349
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. see “Area of special flood hazard.”
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial
improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a
manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed
50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development
without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes
and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ordinance 10-014 adopted 4/20/10; 2008 Code, sec. 3.03.002; Ordinance 15-011 adopted 8/18/15)
Sec. 3.03.003 Penalty
(a) No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other
applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code for each violation and in addition shall pay all cost and expenses involved in the case.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(b) Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable by a penalty of a fine for each day in an amount as prescribed above.
(Ordinance 10-014 adopted 4/20/10; 2008 Code, sec. 3.03.003; Ordinance 15-011 adopted 8/18/15; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.03.004 General provisions
(a) Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(b) Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for The City of Leon Valley,” dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying flood insurance
rate maps and/or flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated September 29, 2010, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this article.
(c) Establishment of development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
(d) Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other
applicable regulations.
(e) Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(f) Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(g) Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ordinance 10-014 adopted 4/20/10; 2008 Code, sec. 3.03.004; Ordinance 15-011 adopted 8/18/15)
Sec. 3.03.005 Administration
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/349
(a) Designation of floodplain administrator. The community development director, or his/her designee, is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer
and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance, National Flood Insurance Program
regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(b) Duties of floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will
be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental
agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be
a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is the state water development board (TWDB) and also the
state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section Sec. 3.03.004(b), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
section 3.03.006.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect
of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in zones A1-30, AE, [and] AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1 foot,
provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(c) Permit procedures.
(1) Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed
structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the
following information is required:
(A) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
(B) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(C) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria
of section 3.03.006(b)(2);
(D) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
(E) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with subsection (b)(1) of this section.
(2) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the
following relevant factors:
(A) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(B) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(C) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(D) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
(E) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(F) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems.
(G) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site.
(H) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(I) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(d) Variance procedures.
(1) The city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article.
(2) The city council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article.
(3) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
(4) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state
inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/349
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to, and
surrounded by, lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection (c)(2) of this section have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article as stated in section 3.03.001(c).
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(A) Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(B) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(C) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(11) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
(A) The criteria outlined in subsections (d)(1) through (9) of this section are met; and
(B) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to
public safety.
(Ordinance 10-014 adopted 4/20/10; 2008 Code, sec. 3.03.005; Ordinance 15-011 adopted 8/18/15)
Sec. 3.03.006 Provisions for flood hazard reduction
(a) General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials that resist flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and
other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge
from the systems into floodwaters;
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and
(8) All new construction or addition shall have a finished floor elevation of minimum one (1) foot above base flood elevation and minimum of eight (8)
inches above adjacent grade.
(b) Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 3.03.004(b), section 3.03.005(b)
(8), or subsection (c)(3) of this section, the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 3.03.005(c)(1)(A), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so
that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having
the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or
review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level)
to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/349
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites
outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage”
as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood
elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that all manufactured homes being placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within
zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (b)(4) of this section be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.03.005(c) and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection (b)(4)
of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(c) Standards for subdivision plats.
(1) All subdivision plats, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with sections 3.03.001(b), (c) and (d) of
this article.
(2) All proposals for the development of subdivision plats, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall meet development
permit requirements set out in section 3.03.004(c), section 3.03.005(c), and this section.
(3) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision plats and other proposed development, including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions, which include more than 50 lots and/or more than five acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section
3.03.004(b) or section 3.03.005(b)(8) of this article.
(4) All subdivision plats, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
(5) All subdivision plats, including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(d) Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the area of special flood hazard established in section 3.03.004(b) are areas designated as
shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions
apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no
depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in AO zone, or below the base flood
elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed
in section 3.03.005(c)(1)(A), are satisfied.
(4) Require, within zone AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(e) Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.03.004(b) of this article are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (e)(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction
provisions of this section.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a
conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA.
(Ordinance 10-014 adopted 4/20/10; 2008 Code, sec. 3.03.006; Ordinance 15-011 adopted 8/18/15; Ordinance 16-015 adopted 4/19/16)
ARTICLE 3.04 SIGNS*
Sec. 3.04.001 Purpose
(a) The purposes of this article are the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/349
(1) To promote the public health, safety and welfare through reasonable, effective, consistent, content-neutral and nondiscriminatory sign standards and
requirements;
(2) To fulfill the city's vision statement, which says in part that: “The city will exhibit a distinctive, clear, physical and welcoming identity at all its boundaries
and throughout the community, using aesthetically pleasing, harmonious signage”;
(3) To improve pedestrian and traffic safety;
(4) To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication;
(5) To maintain and enhance the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth;
(6) To minimize the possible adverse effects of signs to nearby public and private property; and
(7) To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of community standards.
(b) This article is aimed at achieving the goals, objectives, and policies enumerated in the city master plan and is adopted pursuant to chapter 216 of the Texas Local
Government Code.
(c) Sign requirements and conditions contained in article 15.02, appendix C will supersede the requirements of this article where applicable.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; Ordinance 10-002 adopted 1/5/10; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.001)
Sec. 3.04.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Abandoned sign. A sign which no longer correctly directs or instructs any person or advertises a bona fide business, service, product, or person on the premises where
the sign is displayed. If the business, service, product, or person advertised or identified by an on-site sign ceases to be conducted at that site without being replaced by
a new business, service, product, or person, the nonconforming sign shall be classified an abandoned sign.
Advertising flag. Any commercial flag designed for or having the effect of attracting attention, promotion or advertising.
A-frame sign. Any two-sided, self-supporting portable sign.
Airborne sign. A sign on a balloon or inflatable sign.
Anchor tenant. The major store or stores in a shopping center. Anchor tenants are in excess of 100 business front feet and have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet.
Animated sign. Any sign which includes action or motion.
Awning sign. A sign composed of cloth or canvas supported by a rigid or metal framework attached to and extending from an exterior wall or any other portion of a
building.
Banner. A temporary sign made of fabric, plastic, paper, or other light, pliable or nonrigid material, not enclosed in a rigid frame (not including a fabric sign as defined
herein).
Beacon. Any light with one (1) or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one (1) or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any
light with one (1) or more beams that rotate or move.
Billboard. See “Off-premises sign.”
Building code. The International Building Code and the National Electrical Code, being whichever edition is adopted or as changed by city council periodically.
Building face or wall. A window and wall area of a building in one (1) plane or elevation.
Canopy/tent. A roof-like covering that is temporary or portable in nature and which does not project over a window, building entrance, or walkway.
Changeable copy sign. A sign on which copy is changed manually, such as reader boards with changeable letters or changeable pictorial panels.
Charitable project or benefit. Proceeds must be for a qualified 501C entity pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
Commercial message. Any sign wording, logo or other representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or
other commercial activity.
Conforming sign. Signs built and maintained in accordance with the terms of this article.
Construction sign. A sign located on a site which announces and identifies a construction project which has been scheduled or is underway.
Copy. The wording or graphics on a sign surface.
Directional sign. Signs used to indicate the direction to entrances, exits, parking areas, restrooms, or other related facilities on the site on which the sign is located.
Directory sign. A sign which gives the names of the businesses or individuals located in the building or complex where it is located. A directory sign shall be of unified
and common material, and shall allow for a uniform size sign for each business or unit of space in the development.
Display surface. The area made available by the sign structure for the purpose of displaying the advertising message.
Double-faced sign. Any sign having two faces which are no more than 12 inches apart at their closest point, and which describe an internal angle between face planes
extended no more than 30 degrees.
Electric sign. Any sign containing electrical wiring, but not including illumination by an exterior light source.
Electronic message board. A sign on which the copy/advertising changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means, also known as light emitting diode
(LED) or static electronic digital display.
Erected. Attached, altered, built, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or moved, and shall include the painting of wall signs.
Fabric sign. A sign made of fabric or other nonrigid material, enclosed in a permanent frame and erected as a permanent, on-site sign for a business, service, product, or
person.
Facade. The front or main part of a building facing a street.
Face of sign. The entire area of a sign on which copy could be placed. The area of a sign which is visible from one direction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/349
Flag. A fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, corporation or other similar
entity.
Flashing sign. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation or an
extremely [externally] mounted intermittent light source.
Freestanding sign. Any sign which is not attached to or on the walls, face or exterior of the building. Also see “Pole sign.”
Frontage. Total footage measured along the public right-of-way where the subject property abuts said right-of-way.
Government sign. Governmental signs for control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, street signs, danger signs, railroad crossing signs, and signs of public service
companies indicating danger and aids to service or safety which are erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his public duty. This includes
signs erected and maintained by the city. Signs required or specifically authorized for a public purpose by any law, statute or ordinance, which may be of any type,
number, area, height above grade, location, illumination, or animation, required by the law, statute or ordinance under which the signs are erected.
Grand opening. The initial opening of a new business.
Ground level. The immediate surrounding grade.
Height of sign. The vertical distance measured from the surrounding grade to the highest point on the sign or sign structure.
High-rise building. A structure of more than six (6) stories in height.
Illegal sign. Any sign not legally permitted prior to or after the adoption of this article.
Illuminated sign. Any sign that uses artificial light, either internal or external to the sign faces, to draw attention to the sign or otherwise increase its visibility.
Indirect lighting. A light source separated from the surface and illuminating the sign surface by means of spotlights or similar fixtures.
Instructional sign. A sign conveying non-advertising information relating to the use of the premises, including such signs as “No Parking,” “No Trespassing,” and “No
Skateboarding.”
Internally illuminated sign. A sign which uses artificial light from behind the sign face to increase its visibility.
Logo. A letter, character, or symbol used to represent a person, corporation or business enterprise.
Lot. A parcel, tract, plot or area of land accessible by means of a street or other permanently reserved principal means of access. It may be a single parcel separately
described in a deed or plat, or it may include parts of or a combination of such parcels when adjacent to one another and used as a whole.
Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure at the entry to a building, which projects beyond the building or extends along and projects beyond the wall of the building,
and which generally contains a commercial message(s), and is designed to provide protection from the weather.
Master sign plan. The master sign plan is the device employed by the city council to ensure an appropriate balance between architecture, signage and neighborhood
aesthetics. As projects grow in size, opportunities for effective signage other than as specified in the sign guidelines and ordinances increase. By reducing clutter,
effective master sign plans allow businesses to more readily offer goods and services. Master sign plans address the community's need for attractive unobtrusive
architecture and commercial graphics. Master sign plans are recommended for certain businesses. Refer to “Leon Valley Sign Guidelines” for additional information.
Menu board. A sign placed so as to be viewed from a drive-through lane and containing a listing of products and prices offered by the business. A menu board may
include a mechanism for ordering products while viewing the sign.
Monument sign. A ground-mounted sign with a low overall height.
Multi-tenant sign. A sign which consists of a composite of four (4) or more individual signs identifying the businesses located in a commercial or office complex.
Noncombustible.
(1) As applied to building construction material, means a material which, in the form in which it is used, is either one of the following:
(A) Material of which no part will ignite and burn when subjected to fire. Any material conforming to Uniform Building Code standards for
noncombustible materials shall be considered noncombustible within the meaning of this section.
(B) Material having a structural base of noncombustible material as defined in subsection (A) above, with a surfacing material not over 1/8 inch thick
which has a flame-spread rating of fifty (50) or less.
(2) Noncombustible does not apply to surface finish materials. Materials required to be noncombustible for reduced clearances to flues, heating appliances,
or other sources of high temperature shall refer to material conforming to subsection (1)(A) above. No material shall be classed as noncombustible which is
subject to increase in combustibility or flame-spread rating beyond the limits herein established through the effects of age, moisture, or other atmospheric
condition.
(3) Flame-spread rating as used herein refers to ratings obtained according to tests conducted as specified in UBC standards.
Nonconforming. A sign lawfully existing on the effective date of the adoption of this article which is not in conformance with the revised standards and regulations of this
article and/or could not be built under the terms of this article.
Official sign. Any sign erected by or at the direction of any governmental body.
Off-premises sign. A sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, or activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily
manufactured or sold on the premises where the sign is located.
On-premises sign. Signs that identify or advertise only goods, services, facilities, events or attractions available on the premises where the sign is located.
Outparcel/pad site. Lots platted or leased along the periphery of a shopping center project which are intended to be occupied by a single user. Typically, such lots are
less than two (2) acres in area; are subordinate in size to the parcel which contains a multi-tenant shopping center building; and share access, utilities, drainage, parking
and open space with the parcel containing the anchor tenant.
Owner. A person recorded as such on official records and including a duly authorized agent, notary, purchaser, lessee, devisee, or judiciary; anyone having a vested or
contingent interest in the property or business in question.
Painted wall sign. A sign painted on any outside wall or roof of any building.
Parapet. The extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series,
designed to move in the wind.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/349
Permanent sign. A sign structure which is intended to remain indefinitely.
Person. Any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind.
Pole sign. Any sign supported by poles, uprights, or braces which are not concealed in an enclosed base but are permanently placed on or in the ground and wholly
independent of any building for support, either single- or double-faced; a sign whose only structural support consists of exposed poles, posts, beams, or other devices
mounted in the ground.
Political sign. Any sign which by its contents supports or opposes any candidate for public office or any proposition to be voted upon at an election or which makes a
political or ideological statement in the nature of constitutionally protected noncommercial free speech.
Portable sign. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs
designed to be transported by means of wheels, signs converted to A- or T-frames, portable menu board signs, balloons used as signs, umbrellas used for advertising,
and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way.
Premises. The lot or lots, plots, portions or parcels of land considered a unit for a single development or activity.
Projecting sign. A sign mounted to the face of the building perpendicular to the face of the building, and extending more than twelve inches (12") from the wall surface.
Pylon sign. A freestanding sign with visible support structures or with a support structure with a pole cover or pylon cover.
Real estate sign. A temporary sign designating that the premises upon which it is erected are for sale, rent, or lease or that an open house is being held on the day on
which the sign is displayed.
Reflective surface. Any material or device which has the effect of intensifying reflected light, including but not limited to scotch light, day glow, glass beads and luminous
paint.
Required sign. Any sign required by law for the protection of the general health, safety and welfare of the public.
Residential lawn/yard sign. Any sign placed on the lawn or yard of a residential property.
Residential sign. Any sign located in a district zoned for residential use(s) that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or services legally offered
on the premises where the sign is located.
Roadways.
(1) Collector roadway. A street which primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, or to carry
traffic through or adjacent to commercial or industrial areas.
(2) Arterial roadway. A street with access control, channelized intersections, and restricted parking, and that collects and distributes traffic to and from
minor arterials.
(3) Expressway frontage road. A service road, usually parallel to a highway, designed to reduce the number of driveways that intersect the highway.
(4) State highway. Any highway owned by the state.
Roof line. The highest point of the coping on a flat roof, false mansard, or parapet wall; the deckline of a true mansard roof; the ridgeline between the upper and lower
slopes of a gambrel roof; or the mean height level between the eaves and the ridge of a gable or hip roof.
Roof sign. Any sign erected on or over the roof of a building.
Shall/will/may. “Shall/will” is mandatory. “May” is permissive.
Sign. Any device, fixture, display, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, attract
attention to, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information and/or a message of any kind to the public.
Sign area.
(1) The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle or a regular geometric shape of up to eight sides that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or
other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop
or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise
meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
(2) In every event, computation of allowable sign area includes all existing signs on the premises, whether those signs are conforming or nonconforming.
Sign structure. The sign and all parts associated with its construction.
Snipe/parasite sign. A sign which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to trees, utility poles, stakes, or fences or to other objects, and whose
message is not associated with the premises upon which such sign is located; any temporary sign which is attached to another sign.
Storefront. The side of a building that has display windows or a public entrance.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some
definite manner.
Subdivision identification/permanent multifamily sign. A sign which designates the name of a project, subdivision, or other residential district, and which is located at or in
close proximity to the main entrance.
Suspended sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
Temporary sign. Any sign, banner, valance or commercial display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other light materials, with or without
frames, and not permanently mounted.
Traffic-control sign. A permitted sign for the purpose of identifying parking areas and directing the flow of traffic on private property.
Vertical dimension. The height of the sign area/lettering.
Wall sign. Any sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of said wall.
Window sign. Any sign painted, drawn, or otherwise affixed to either the inside or outside of an exterior window or glass door of a commercial or office building.
Works of fine art. This article shall not apply to a sculpture, fountain or similar work of fine art which in no way identifies or advertises a product or business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/349
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; Ordinance 08-025, sec. 2, adopted 6/17/08; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.002; Ordinance 14-026 adopted 11/10/14)
Sec. 3.04.003 Penalty; civil actions; removal of signs in right-of-way
(a) Penalty. Violations of any provision of this article by action of omission or commission shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. Each day of violation under this article shall be a separate violation.
(b) Civil actions. In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed by this section, the city council may direct the city attorney to institute civil action or proceedings to
prevent violations or threatened violations of these regulations or to obtain civil damages or penalties against violators of these regulations.
(c) Removal of signs in right-of-way.
(1) In addition to the penalties prescribed in subsections (a) and (b) above, the code enforcement officer, or his designee, shall have the authority, and the
duty, to remove or cause to be removed and impounded any sign, poster, handbill, banner, streamer or other outdoor advertising erected, placed, altered,
maintained, or neglected in violation of this article, if the same is located on, in, or above any public street, right-of-way or sidewalk area, or other public
property.
(2) The cost of any such removal or impoundment shall be chargeable to the person or persons, jointly or severally, who were responsible for or who
caused the erection or placement of the offending sign or advertising, and their sureties.
(3) Any item impounded by authority of this section shall be held for period of 30 days and then disposed of in any manner designated by the code
enforcement officer. During the 30 days, the owner of such item, upon proof of same, may reclaim such item at the place of storage by paying to the city the
actual cost of removal and impounding. This charge shall in any event be not less than an amount as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or
revised by ordinance from time to time.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.04.004 Amendments
This article may be reviewed and amended by the city council as deemed necessary. (Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.004)
Sec. 3.04.005 Permit
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this code, it is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, reconstruct, change sign copy and/or a sign face, enlarge, extend,
expand, place or move any sign or sign structure or any portion thereof without first obtaining a sign permit for each sign.
(b) The owner or tenant of a business or commercial property upon which a sign is to be placed which is zoned O-1, B-1, B-2, B-3 or I-1 or a residential district zoned
R-3, R-3A, or R-5 must apply for a sign permit.
(c) All applications for sign permits will be submitted to the community development department for approval on a form prescribed by the city. Questions about sign
regulations should be addressed to the community development department. All signs which are electrically illuminated will require an electrical inspection, and all
installers of such signs shall hold a state or City of San Antonio electrical license.
(d) Upon submittal, the application will be reviewed for conformance with the standards of this article within thirty (30) days of a complete submittal. If the application is
not approved, such application will be deemed to have been administratively denied.
(e) The city manager or designee shall determine whether the proposed sign is acceptable under the conditions established in this article and applicable building
codes. Upon approval, the permit will be issued by the community development department upon payment of appropriate fees.
(f) All representations, whether oral or written, made by an applicant or his agent on behalf of the application for a sign permit under this article shall constitute a
material factor in granting a sign(s) permit. It is unlawful for the applicant to vary from such representations unless the applicant files an amended application.
(g) The primary responsibility for securing the necessary permit(s) shall rest with the property owner. However, if the property owner should contract part or all of the
proposed work, it shall become the responsibility of the person or firm hired to perform that work to ensure that all required permits and approvals have been secured
prior to any work being initiated. For the purposes of this article, through the acceptance of the contract to perform the work, the third party so contracted shall become
equally liable for all fees, fines, and penalties prescribed by this article arising from violations resulting from that work.
(h) Any permit may be revoked by the city manager or designee at any time prior to the completion of the sign for which the same was issued, when it shall appear to
the official that there is departure from the plans, specifications or conditions as required under the terms of the permit, that the permit was procured by false
representation, or that any provision of this article is being violated. Written notice of such revocation, [and] a stop-work order shall be served upon the owner and/or
upon the owner's agent, contractor, or upon any person employed in the building or structure for which such permit was issued, which shall be posted in a prominent
location, and thereafter no such construction shall proceed.
(i) All signs shall be erected within ninety (90) days of issuance of the permit; otherwise the permit shall become null and void. The applicant may request up to three
(3) thirty-day (30-day) extensions with the payment of additional permit fees.
(j) The building inspector or designated city official shall inspect the sign for which a permit has been issued. If the construction is substantially complete, but not in full
compliance with this article and applicable codes, the city manager or designated city official shall give the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and shall allow
an additional thirty (30) days from the date of inspection for the deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse and
the sign shall become illegal.
(k) Signs erected and maintained by the city shall not require a permit.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.005)
Sec. 3.04.006 Abatement of illegal or unsafe signs
(a) A sign which has been determined to be unsafe by the city must be repaired, made safe or removed immediately or within ten (10) working days after receipt of
notice from the city, at the discretion of the designated city official. Failure to make such repairs or remove the sign is unlawful.
(b) If the property owner or lessee fails to comply with such written notice to remove, the code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign,
and any expense incidental to such removal shall be charged to the owner of the property upon which the sign is located and shall constitute a lien upon the property.
For the purpose of this section, the word “remove” shall mean:
(1) The sign face, along with the posts, columns or supports of freestanding signs, shall be taken down and removed from the property.
(2) The sign face and supporting structures of the projecting, roof, or wall signs shall be taken down and removed from the property.
(c) Any existing sign not specifically listed as being allowed herein or classified as nonconforming is expressly prohibited and shall be illegal. Illegal signs must be
removed not later than ten (10) days following notification by the city manager or designee.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.006)
Sec. 3.04.007 Nonconforming signs
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/349
(a) Notice of nonconformity. Signs lawfully existing prior to enactment of this article which do not conform to the requirements of this code will be determined to be
nonconforming. Upon determination that a sign is nonconforming, the code enforcement officer will notify in writing the user or owner of the property on which the sign is
located of the following:
(1) The sign's nonconformity; and
(2) Whether the sign is eligible for characterization either as nonconforming or illegal. Notification procedures pertaining to code violations as adopted in
section 6.03.005 of the city code will apply.
(b) Appeals. Owners of signs determined to be nonconforming shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of notification of a sign's nonconformance to appeal the
determination per section 3.04.008 of this article.
(c) Continuation of use. Any existing nonconforming sign may continue to be maintained and used, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Enlargement. No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged, expanded, or extended to occupy a greater square footage or height than was occupied on the
date this article was enacted.
(2) Relocation. Nonconforming signs shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot, parcel, or building not so occupied on the date of
enactment of this article. Any nonconforming sign that is removed from its original location may not be reinstated at any other location within the city unless it
conforms with all of the requirements of this article.
(3) Discontinuance.
(A) If the business, service, product, or person advertised or identified by a legally nonconforming, on-premises sign ceases to be conducted at that
site, all signs shall be brought into conformity with this article or shall be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any new business,
service, product or person.
(B) The “discontinuance” provisions shall not trigger the conformance of multi-tenant sign structures. Existing nonconforming multi-tenant signs shall
be allowed to maintain their nonconforming status, provided that signage is maintained per this article and provided that sign panels pertaining to former
tenants shall be removed and replaced with blank panels.
(4) Abandonment. If the business, service, product, or person advertised or identified by a legally nonconforming on-premises sign ceases to be conducted
at that site, the nonconforming sign shall be classified as an abandoned sign. All abandoned signs must be removed within thirty (30) days of being
abandoned.
(5) Destruction. Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means to an extent of more than sixty percent (60%) of its replacement cost at time of
damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article.
(d) Maintenance. Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or user of a legal nonconforming sign or owner of the property on which the nonconforming sign is
located from the provisions of this code regarding safety, maintenance, and repair of signs contained in this code; provided, however, that any repainting, cleaning and
other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign structure in any way which makes it more nonconforming.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.007)
Sec. 3.04.008 Variances and appeals
(a) Persons wishing to erect signs not in conformance with this article or any person aggrieved by any decision of the city in the administration of this article may
appeal such decision to the city council. The city council shall only hear and decide the following:
(1) An appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this article; or
(2) A request for variance(s) from the strict enforcement of the requirements of this article due to special conditions wherein a literal enforcement of this
article would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this article is observed and substantial justice is done.
(b) The application must be accompanied by a drawing or other artistic representation to accurate scale showing the exact sign proposed, its size and message
(textural or pictorial), color, shape, whether lighted or unlighted, location on said property or business, materials of which it is to be made, how it is to be made and how it
is to be fastened. Granting of the variance requires approval from the designated city official(s), who shall determine whether the proposed sign is acceptable under the
conditions established in this article and applicable building codes. Upon approval from the designated city official(s), the variance request will be heard by the city
council.
(c) The city manager or designee is authorized to approve a variance to three specific types of regulations in this article: sign area, sign height, and distance between
signs. This authorization shall be restricted to variance of one (1) of type of regulation not to exceed 10% of the specified dimension for one (1) existing nonconforming
sign per platted property. This staff variance provision does not apply to any of the properties required to file a master sign plan.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.008)
Sec. 3.04.009 Fees
Fees are as stated in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. (Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code,
sec. 3.04.009; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.04.010 Allowable signage generally
Any sign not specifically listed as being allowed herein is expressly prohibited. (Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.010)
Sec. 3.04.011 On-premises signs
(a) General provisions.
(1) Single-tenant businesses shall be allowed up to a total of four (4) signs per storefront from the types of signs listed in this section, provided that all
applicable requirements have been met.
(2) Tenants of properties with four (4) or more tenants shall follow the multi-tenant guidelines in this section.
(3) The following signs shall be allowed under the provisions of this article with an approved sign permit.
(b) Building-mounted signs.
(1) Wall signs.
(A) Design. Wall signs shall not obscure windows, grillwork or pilasters of the building.
(B) Location. Wall signs shall be mounted flush and fixed securely to a building wall, projecting no more than 18 inches from the face of the wall, and
not extending sideways from the building face or above the roofline of a building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/349
(C) Total sign area.
(i) The maximum total wall sign area for each building occupant may not exceed 25% of the total square footage of the exterior wall, not to
exceed 200 square feet per occupancy.
(ii) Signs cannot be longer than 80% of the sign band length where the sign is to be located.
(2) Marquee signs.
(A) Design. See the city design guidelines.
(B) Number and location. Marquee signs shall be allowed in conjunction with wall signs.
(C) Total sign area.
(i) Marquee signs shall be allowed up to 25% of total marquee area, not to exceed 200 square feet for each occupancy.
(ii) Marquee signs shall not be longer than 80% of sign band length where the sign is to be located.
(3) Awning signs.
(A) Number and location.
(i) Awnings shall permanently attached to buildings.
(ii) Sign lettering and any graphics shall be comprised of no more than 80% of awning surface area.
(B) Sign height. Minimum height of awnings shall be eight (8) feet as measured from ground level.
(4) Roof signs.
(A) Number and location.
(i) Roof signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage up to three (3) signs total.
(ii) A roof sign will be allowed in place of a wall sign.
(B) Total sign area. Roof signs shall not exceed 80% of roof sign area, not to exceed 100 square feet.
(C) Sign height. No roof sign will be permitted which extends beyond the highest point of a pitched roof, a mansard roof or a parapet line of a building.
(c) Freestanding signs.
(1) Number and location.
(A) No freestanding on-premises sign shall be constructed within 100 feet of any existing freestanding on-premises or multi-tenant sign on the same
site, or within forty (40) feet of a freestanding or multi-tenant sign on a neighboring site.
(B) No freestanding sign, other than a multi-tenant sign, shall occupy the same frontage as a projecting sign.
(C) Electronic message centers will be allowed on freestanding signs, and will be included in the calculation of the area of freestanding signs.
(D) One freestanding sign shall be permitted on each street frontage, as follows:
(i) Less than 250 feet of frontage: One (1) sign.
(ii) 250 feet or more of frontage: One (1) sign per 250 feet of frontage when approved by a master sign plan.
(2) Total sign area.
(A) Each face of a freestanding sign may not exceed:
(i) 50 square feet if the sign pole is 32 feet tall;
(ii) 240 square feet if the pole is 50 feet high;
(iii) 375 square feet if the pole is 60 feet high.
(B) In the case of irregularly shaped signs, refer to the definition of “sign area” for method of calculation.
(3) Sign height. Sign height shall be restricted to:
(A) 32 feet on collector roadways;
(B) 50 feet on arterial roadways;
(C) 60 feet on a state highway;
(D) 60 feet on expressway frontage roads.
(4) Landscape buffer. Unless an alternate method of providing traffic and pedestrian safety is approved through the master sign plan, each freestanding
sign shall be placed within a landscaped area extending a minimum four (4) feet from the sign in each direction. Such measurements shall begin at the sign
base or at the edge of any overhang within 20 feet of the ground, whichever requires the greater barrier. Xeriscaping is encouraged.
(d) Multi-tenant signs.
(1) Use. Multi-tenant signs shall be required as part of a master sign plan for properties with four (4) or more tenants and must display the address of the
multi-tenant property.
(2) Number and location.
(A) No freestanding multi-tenant sign shall be constructed within 100 feet of any existing multi-tenant or freestanding sign on the same site, or within
40 feet of a multi-tenant or freestanding sign on a neighboring site.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/349
(B) A tenant may have one (1) building-mounted sign (such as a wall, awning, marquee, projecting or roof sign) and one (1) identification sign on a
directory sign for the shopping center, unless the tenant is leasing an end lease space, then the tenant shall be allowed two (2) signs, one (1) on each
storefront, as defined by this article.
(3) Total sign area.
(A) Multi-tenant signs shall be limited to not more than:
(i) 250 square feet if on a 32-foot-tall pole;
(ii) 500 square feet if on a 50-foot-tall pole;
(iii) 650 square feet if on a 60-foot-tall pole.
(B) The area of each tenant's building-mounted wall sign shall not exceed 25% of total wall area of each storefront, not to exceed a maximum of 200
square feet.
(4) Sign height. Multi-tenant sign height shall be restricted to:
(A) 32 feet on collector roadways;
(B) 50 feet on arterial roadways;
(C) 60 feet on state highways; and
(D) 60 feet on expressway frontage roads.
(e) Subdivision signs. Permanent monument-style subdivision signs shall be permitted upon private property in any zone to identify planned developments and will be
required to follow all applicable provisions of this article.
(f) Real estate signs.
(1) On-premises signs pertaining to the sale, rental, or lease of property zoned O-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1, R-3, R-3A, or R-5, not exceeding sixty-four (64)
square feet in area and ten (10) feet in height from ground level, and are permitted behind the property line.
(2) Such signs shall be removed by the agent or owner within ten (10) business days of sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
(3) Each property shall be permitted not more than one (1) sign per street frontage.
(4) A sign permit is required in all cases as prescribed in section 3.04.005 of this article.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; Ordinance 07-028, secs. 1, 2, adopted 6/19/07; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.011; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.04.012 Off-premises signs
(a) New off-premises signs prohibited. No permits for the construction of new off-premises signs will be issued after the effective date of this article.
(b) Existing signs. All existing off-premises signs will be permitted to remain, provided a sign is not subject to section 3.04.006. Permits for repair or reconstruction of
existing off-premises signs will be issued, provided that the sign does not increase in size or height and that the sign conforms with all applicable provisions of this
article.
(c) Annual renewal of permit. Off-premises sign permits issued under this section will expire annually at the end of each calendar year and must be renewed no later
than thirty (30) days after the start of the new calendar year. Failure to an renew an off-premises sign permit will cause the sign to be classified as abandoned. All
abandoned signs must be removed within thirty (30) days of being abandoned.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.012)
Sec. 3.04.013 Temporary signs
(a) Permits are required for temporary signs.
(b) Each business may be allowed a total of one (1) temporary sign per 6-month period for a time period of up to thirty (30) days. A permit is required and must be
obtained each time a sign is displayed. A seasonal business may apply for a variance to display temporary signs for up to 120 days in lieu of thirty (30) days per quarter.
(c) A deposit is required for each temporary sign permit issued. The deposit will be returned at the expiration of the permit time period provided that the temporary sign
has been moved within 24 hours of permit expiration.
(d) Special event temporary signs may be allowed within the flyover area and Loop 410 without a permit for a planned group of temporary signs to advertise special
events on a business property. Special event temporary signs shall be installed no earlier than Friday at 6:00 p.m. and shall be removed on Sunday by 8:00 p.m. If a
federal holiday falls on either the Friday or Monday of that weekend, the signs may be installed and removed to include the holiday.
(e) Maximum size for temporary sign banners is fifty (50) square feet for banner signs placed on the property and one hundred (100) square feet for banner signs
attached to the building.
(f) The following temporary signs are allowed:
(1) Banners. Banners must be wall mounted or attached with temporary stakes in the ground on the property. Banners must be kept in good condition and
stakes firmly anchored so as to prevent dilapidation.
(2) Airborne signs. Hot or cold air balloons may be either attached to the building or placed behind the property line. There are no size restrictions for hot or
cold air balloons. Balloons shall be allowed only as a part of a special event temporary sign event and as specified. Balloons must be kept in good condition
and firmly anchored so as to prevent dilapidation or from being astray.
(3) Grand opening signs. Grand opening signs shall be allowed under this section, except that such permit shall be valid for thirty (30) consecutive days
and shall not be renewable. One permit will be issued for each building occupant per certificate of occupancy.
(4) Street banners. Nonprofit organizations may erect street banners across collector and arterial roadways. The dimensions of the banner will not exceed
4' x 36' (144 square feet).
(5) Temporary weekend signs.
(A) Time period. Temporary weekend signs are permitted from Friday at 6:00 p.m. to Sunday at 8:00 p.m. Temporary signs including banners,
airborne/balloon signs, grand opening signs and street banners shall not be displayed simultaneously with temporary weekend signs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/349
(i) If a federally recognized holiday falls on a Friday, then the signs are permitted from the preceding Thursday to the following Monday.
(ii) If a federally recognized holiday falls on a Monday, then the signs are permitted from Friday until the following Tuesday.
(B) Size. Signs shall not exceed 24" by 32" in size. Irregular shaped signs shall fit in a 24" by 32" rectangle; the total height shall not exceed 36" in
height from ground level. Signs may be two-dimensional only and shall be of a nonreflective surface.
(C) Spacing between signs. A minimum of five-foot (5') spacing must be maintained between each temporary weekend sign of different advertisers.
The signs of each advertiser must be spaced so that no two (2) signs advertising the same good, service, product, business, political campaign, or
particular piece of real property (for sale or lease) are closer than one hundred feet (100') from each other measured in a straight line.
(D) Location. Signs must be self-supporting and placed into the ground by a single stake.
(i) No temporary weekend sign shall be permitted on a utility pole, streetlight pole, sign pole, fence, tree or other man-made [or] natural feature,
wooden frame or portable frame.
(ii) No sign may be placed closer than twenty-five feet (25') from a street intersection or median opening. Any temporary weekend sign
determined to be in a location that causes an immediate hazard to public safety will be immediately removed by the city.
(iii) Signs shall be no closer than three feet (3') from the edge of the sign to the street curb or, if no curb is present, to the edge of the pavement.
Signs shall not encroach on either sidewalks or streets.
(iv) No signs shall be placed in island medians or esplanades.
(v) Except for political signs, no signs shall be placed further than three (3) miles from the location of the sale of the good, product, service,
business or piece of real property being advertised.
(E) Permit.
(i) An annual permit fee, as stated in the schedule of fees in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time,
must be paid by the advertiser. Where an advertiser wishes to advertise multiple locations, a permit must be obtained for each location,
subdivision location, or service location to be advertised by temporary weekend signs.
(ii) A temporary weekend sign shall not be placed on the right-of-way of a road or highway unless an annual temporary sign permit has been
first obtained.
(F) Map of locations; placement on state roads prohibited. In addition to the payment of the appropriate fees, the advertiser shall provide an area
map, drawn to scale, and listing the street and block number where the signs shall be placed. No temporary weekend sign shall be placed along the
side of any road or highway belonging to the state department of transportation.
(Ordinance 11-031 adopted 12/6/11; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.013; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.04.014 Prohibited signs
The following signs shall be prohibited in the city:
(1) Any sign constructed or located in such a manner that it is or becomes an immediate hazard or danger to persons or property because of being in an
unsafe condition, or which obstructs any window, door, or fire escape of any building.
(2) Illegal signs or any other sign constructed after the enactment of this article which is not in compliance with the terms of this article.
(3) Illuminated, highly reflective signs or spotlights which hamper the vision of motorists or bicyclists.
(4) Any sign, banner or display placed on any public right-of-way, utility pole, traffic-control device, curb, sidewalk, post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, or other
surface located on, over, or across any public street or right-of-way (other than a government sign or allowed sign as per section 3.04.010).
(5) Any banner placed on stakes on a property, unless otherwise permitted.
(6) Portable signs. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, including those signs which may be transported to the
site on wheels, on skids or on a truck; signs constructed as or converted to a T-frame sign; or umbrellas used for advertising purposes. Such sign, whether or
not bolted or cemented to the ground, shall nonetheless be deemed to be a portable sign.
(7) Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic sign or signal, or which are of a size, location, movement, content, coloring, or manner of
illumination which may be confused with or construed as a traffic-control device, or which may hide from view any traffic or street sign or signal.
(8) Snipe/parasite signs.
(9) Temporary signage, except as permitted in section 3.04.013.
(10) Vehicle signs. Signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a public right-of-way, public property, or private property so as to
be visible from a public right-of-way where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product, or direct people to a business or activity located on the same or
nearby property, shall be prohibited. However, this is not intended in any way to prohibit signs placed on or affixed to vehicles and trailers where the sign is
incidental to the primary use of the vehicle or trailer and where the vehicle is being operated in the normal course of business, is in operable condition, and
carries a current and valid license plate and state inspection tag.
(11) Any sign placed on a property without the permission of the property owner.
(12) Light emitting diode (LED) and static electronic digital display signs, except as allowed on-premises for freestanding, multitenant, window and door
signs (only one per storefront) and government signs as regulated and defined in this article.
(13) Wind-waver flags.
(14) Portable or vehicle driven digital or LED signs.
(Ordinance 11-031 adopted 12/6/11; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.014)
Sec. 3.04.015 Signs exempt from permit requirements
The following signs are exempt from permit requirements. In no case shall a sign be placed in a public right-of-way, as per section 3.04.003(c) of this article.
(1) Required signs.
(2) Construction signs. One construction sign per construction project, provided that such signs shall not exceed the sign area allowed for a temporary sign
under section 3.04.013. Construction signs shall be erected no more than five (5) days prior to the beginning of construction for which a valid building permit
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/349
has been issued, shall be confined to the site of construction, and shall be removed within ten (10) days after completion or issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
(3) Directional or instructional signs. Directional signs are designed to provide directions to pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Signs directing to entrances,
exits and other non-business elements of a project shall be exempt from this article if they do not exceed four (4) square feet in area.
(4) Flags. The flags, emblems or insignia of any nation, state, county, city, and religious organization.
(5) Garage sale signs. Signs pertaining to garage sales in R-1, R-2, R-4, or R-6 zoned property, not exceeding four (4) square feet, as long as they shall be
removed by the agent or owner within twenty-four (24) hours after the sale. Garage sale signs shall not be placed in the right-of-way.
(6) Governmental signs are exempt, provided that the sign substantially complies with the provisions of this article.
(7) Residential signage. House numbers, nameplates and residential business signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area for each residential building.
Refer to article 15.02 (zoning ordinance) of the city code for more information about home occupations.
(8) Interior signs. Signs on the interior of buildings which are not visible from the exterior of the building.
(9) Memorial plaques or building identification signs when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building or when constructed of
other noncombustible material, provided that such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet.
(10) “No Trespassing” or “No Dumping” signs. “No Trespassing” or “No Dumping” signs not to exceed one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet in area per sign
and not to exceed four (4) in number per lot, except that special permission may be obtained from the city for additional signs under proven special
circumstances.
(11) Political signs. Political signs placed on private real property shall not:
(A) Have an effective area of greater than 36 feet;
(B) Be greater than eight feet high;
(C) Be illuminated; or
(D) Have any moving elements.
(12) Public notices. Official notices posted by public officers or employees in the performance of their duties.
(13) Public utility signs. Temporary or permanent signs erected by companies or construction companies to warn of danger or hazardous conditions,
including signs indicating the presence of underground cables, gas lines and similar devices.
(14) Real estate signs. One real estate “for sale” (including lease or rental) sign (single- or double-faced) on any lot or parcel zoned R-1, R-2, R-4, or R-6,
provided such sign is located entirely within the property to which the sign applies, is not illuminated, does not exceed four (4) square feet in area, and is
removed within ten (10) days after the sale, rental, or lease has been consummated. One (1) additional sign, as described above, is permitted where a parcel
has in excess of three hundred feet (300') of frontage or fronts on two (2) streets.
(15) Permanent menu boards. Menu boards shall not count in the total sign area for the type of sign erected, provided that the menu board is designed
specifically for drive-through ordering and does not exceed the sign area requirements for that sign type.
(16) Warning signs. Signs warning the public of the existence of danger, but containing no advertising material, of a size as may be necessary, to be
removed upon subsidence of danger.
(17) Works of fine art.
(18) Lawn/yard signs. Excluding political signs, there shall be no more than two (2) signs per yard. The signs shall be kept in good condition and shall not
be fallen, faded, and/or worn or torn. Signs advertising contractor services shall be removed within fourteen (14) working days after completion of the work.
(Ordinance 11-031 adopted 12/6/11; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.016; Ordinance 14-026 adopted 11/10/14)
Sec. 3.04.016 Design, construction and maintenance
All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards:
(1) All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the International Building Code and the National Electrical Code versions as currently adopted by the
city.
(2) Except for flags and temporary signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this article, all signs shall be constructed of permanent
materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure.
(3) All signs and sign supports shall be maintained in good condition. Broken or missing panels, missing letters, rust, flaking and peeling paint, significant
fading, sign lighting not maintained in operating condition, and all other visual damage to a sign shall be repaired and all dead or damaged landscaping
associated with the sign shall be replaced within thirty (30) days of notification by the code enforcement officer.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.017)
Sec. 3.04.017 Master sign plans
(a) Purpose. The master sign plan is the device employed by the city to respond to the special signage needs of proposed or existing nonresidential uses. The master
sign plan is recommended for projects on large sites and/or with many separate businesses represented, where opportunities for effective signage other than as
specified in this article increase. The master sign plan provides an opportunity to reduce sign clutter while allowing businesses to more effectively advertise goods and
services. The goal of the master sign plan is to address the community's need for attractive, proportional graphics and ensure an appropriate balance between
architecture, signage and neighborhood interests.
(b) Uses. A master sign plan is recommended, but not required, at such time as the owner of one of the following uses applies for a new sign permit:
(1) A nonresidential development having a single tenant with 30,000 or more square feet.
(2) Nonresidential developments with four (4) or more nonresidential occupants.
(3) Nonresidential development on sites of five (5) acres or more.
(4) Nonresidential development on property which has more than 300 feet of continuous street frontage on a public street.
(c) Required information. The following information is required for submission of a master sign plan:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/349
(1) An accurate plot plan of the site to scale. The plan shall show the location of buildings, easements, driveways, utilities, lighting, parking spaces, required
landscaping and an accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and proposed sign of any type, including temporary signage,
whether requiring a permit or not.
(2) Computation of the sign area, height, type and number of signs.
(3) A narrative description of any other information necessary to show how the project meets the master sign plan criteria.
(d) Review. The city manager or designee will review the master sign plan application within thirty (30) days of complete submittal. Master sign plans shall then be
reviewed by the zoning commission at their earliest regularly scheduled meeting following the completion of staff review.
(e) Approval and adoption. Master sign plans shall require approval by the city council and shall be adopted by ordinance.
(f) Criteria for evaluation. The zoning commission and city council shall consider the following criteria when evaluating master sign plans:
(1) Implementation will provide signage compatible with the surrounding development;
(2) Implementation will result in architecture and graphics of a scale appropriate for the surrounding neighborhood;
(3) Implementation will provide signage consistent with the architecture and site plan characteristics of the proposed development;
(4) Implementation of the master sign plan will result in a substantial reduction in the number and area of freestanding signs and general sign clutter
associated with the project as compared to strict compliance with this article;
(5) The proposed master sign plan does not pose a threat to the public safety;
(6) The master sign plan application is submitted in compliance with this section and not in order to circumvent the variance procedures set out in section
3.04.008; and
(7) Approval of the master sign plan does not cause the circumvention of either the spirit or intent of these sign regulations.
(g) Variances. Applicants for master sign plans may request a variance to the requirements of this article as part of the master sign plan application without paying an
additional fee. In addition to the provisions contained in section 3.04.008, the city council may grant a variance based on the following findings:
(1) That there are circumstances applicable to the property which, if strictly enforced, will deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other property of
the same zoning classification, and that this variance will not be a grant of special privilege to the applicant; and
(2) That it is also found:
(A) That, because of physical circumstances such as size, shape or topography, the visibility of signage is substantially impaired;
(B) That the conditions creating the need for a variance were not self-imposed;
(C) That there will be no adverse effect to surrounding property from the granting of this variance;
(D) That the amount of variance is the minimum needed to afford relief; and
(E) That the applicant complies with any special requirements imposed as a condition of granting the variance.
(3) Any business granted a variance under the master sign plan must demonstrate a plan to bring nonconforming signs into compliance, and the master
sign plan must provide benchmarks for incremental progress.
(h) Amendment. A master sign plan may be amended by filing a new master sign plan that conforms with all requirements of this article then in effect.
(Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.04.018)
ARTICLE 3.05 FENCES
Sec. 3.05.001 Definitions
Authorized official. The city manager or his designate.
Fence. A barrier or screening device constructed of metal, wood, brick, stone, block, or other materials, singly or in combination.
Vision-proof fence or wall. An artificially constructed barrier of masonry or wood erected to obstruct visibility.
(Ordinance 08-043 adopted 9/2/08; 2008 Code, sec. 3.05.001)
Sec. 3.05.002 Penalty
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each violation. (Ordinance 08-043 adopted 9/2/08; 2008 Code, sec. 3.05.005)
Sec. 3.05.003 Permit
No fence shall hereafter be erected within the city unless the person erecting the fence obtains a permit for construction of the fence. The cost of the permit is prescribed
in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. Such permit shall specify the approved height, length, material or materials, style and
location of the fence. (Ordinance 08-043 adopted 9/2/08; 2008 Code, sec. 3.05.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.05.004 Variances
(a) The city council may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a
variance, the council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings below required, the council shall
take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the probable effect of such variance on surrounding property,
and the probable effect of such variance on the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the council finds:
(1) There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive
the applicant of the reasonable use of this land;
(2) The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
(3) The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area.
(b) Such findings of the council, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the council
meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article so that the public health,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/349
safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the applicant, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(Ordinance 09-011 adopted 3/24/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.05.007)
Sec. 3.05.005 Dimensions and appearance
(a) Residential fences.
(1) Residential fences shall not exceed six (6) feet in the height in the side or rear yards or forty-four inches (44") in height in the required front yard. The
finished side shall face toward the public viewpoint or public right-of-way.
(2) At the time of development or change in use of any R-3 (multiple-family dwelling), R-3A (multiple-family retirement dwelling) or R-5 (manufactured
home) the developer shall have erected a vision-proof fence or wall eight (8) feet in height on the abutting property line with any other zoning district, unless
the properties are separated by a street of local access designation or higher then a six-foot fence may be used. The finished side shall face toward the public
viewpoint or public right-of-way.
(b) Retail, commercial and industrial or mixed use development fences. At the time of development or change in use of any O-1 (office), B-1 (small business), B-2
(retail), B-3 (commercial), I-1 (industrial) and MX-1 (mixed use) property which abuts any residential district the developer shall have erected a vision-proof fence or wall
eight (8) feet in height on the abutting property line with any other zoning district, unless the properties are separated by a street of local access designation or higher
then a six-foot fence may be used. The finished side shall face toward the public viewpoint or public right-of-way.
(c) Alley fences between residential and small business, retail, commercial, industrial and mixed use zoning districts. If the aforementioned zoning districts are
separated by an alley, the fence shall be required to be constructed on the developing property line. In those instances where an alley separates commercial and
residential districts, the city council may, at its discretion, allow the construction of the fence on the residential property line, but only after a petition signed by all affected
property owners, both residential and business, is submitted to the council. Said petition will be approved as to form by the city attorney.
(Ordinance 08-043 adopted 9/2/08; Ordinance 09-011 adopted 3/24/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.05.003; Ordinance 2017-50 adopted 9/5/17)
Sec. 3.05.006 Storage areas to be fenced
No land shall be used for or as a storage area for any material or storage units until a vision-proof fence is constructed and is sufficient height to conceal the storage
materials and/or storage units. The fence shall also meet the setback requirements of the zoning district and the percentage of storage allowed for that zoning district.
(Ordinance 08-043 adopted 9/2/08; 2008 Code, sec. 3.05.004)
Sec. 3.05.007 Nuisances
(a) Declaration of nuisance.
(1) Any fence that is in such a state of disrepair to reasonably cause injury, damage, or harm to any individual is hereby declared a public nuisance.
(2) Any fence that is in such a state of disrepair to reasonably cause injury, damage, or harm to a considerable portion of the community in the use and
enjoyment of property, materially interfering with the proper use and comfort and enjoyment of surrounding property, taking into consideration the nature and
use of the properties in the area, and the character of the community in which they are situated, and which condition would be substantially offensive and
annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities living in the community in which they are situated, is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
(b) Notice to abate. It shall be the duty of the authorized official of the city to notify the owner or occupant of the property on which the fence is located to repair,
remove, demolish any fence found to be a public nuisance under subsection (a) of this section, and specifying a period of thirty (30) days to complete such repair,
removal or demolition. This notice shall be in writing, and may be served by handing it to said individual in person, by certified mail, or by publication a minimum of two
(2) times within ten (10) consecutive days if personal service may not reasonably be had.
(c) Failure to comply with notice. Upon the failure of an owner or occupant of a property upon which a fence deemed to be a public nuisance is situated to repair,
remove or demolish under the terms of subsection (b) of this section, it shall become the responsibility of the city to repair, remove or demolish the fence or part of the
fence at the expense of the municipality on behalf of the owner of the property on which the fence is located.
(d) Abatement by city; assessment of city's costs.
(1) Upon action taken by the city under subsection (c) of this section, the owner of the property on which the fence is located shall be notified. This notice
shall be in writing, and may be served by handing it to said individual in person, by certified mail, or by publication a minimum of two (2) times within ten (10)
consecutive days if personal service may not reasonably be had. Notice shall be attempted to be served by certified mail or in person by the city, even if
service under subsection (b) if this section was through publication.
(2) The charge levied shall be actual costs plus twenty-five percent (25%) administrative costs for such repair, removal, or demolition and shall be levied,
assessed and collected against such property each time such repair, removal or demolition is performed. The charges provided for in this article shall be
levied, assessed and collected by the authorized official, and if any person shall fail to pay such charges so assessed within ten (10) days after proper notice,
the authorized official will file with the county clerk a statement by the mayor setting out the expenses that the city has incurred pursuant to the provisions of
this section, and the city shall thereby perfect a privileged lien on the property involved, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to secure
the expense to the city, together with ten percent (10%) per annum interest, compounded monthly from the date such payment is due. This subsection shall
be deemed an assessment on the property on which the fence is located in accordance with Texas Local Government Code section 214.002(a)(2).
(Ordinance 09-011 adopted 3/24/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.05.006)
ARTICLE 3.06 SWIMMING POOLS
Sec. 3.06.001 Definition
Swimming pool. Any natural pool, pond or lake having a depth at its point of greatest depth of more than eighteen inches (18") and having a width of six feet (6') or more
at its widest point, or any man-made or artificial pool, pond or lake of like depth and dimensions. (1972 Code, sec. 14.301; 2008 Code, sec. 3.06.001)
Sec. 3.06.002 Permit
No pool shall hereafter be constructed within the city unless the person constructing the pool shall first obtain from the city a permit for the construction of such pool. The
cost of such permit shall be as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. (1972 Code, sec. 14.302; Ordinance adopting
2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.06.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.06.003 Variances
(a) The city council may authorize a variance from this article when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance,
the council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings hereinbelow required, the council shall take
into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the probable effect of such variance upon surrounding property, and
the probable effect of such variance on the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the council finds:
(1) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would
deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of this land;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/349
(2) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
(3) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area.
(b) Such findings of the council, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the council
meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article so that the public health,
safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the applicant, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(Ordinance 96-045 adopted 11/19/96; 2008 Code, sec. 3.06.003)
Sec. 3.06.004 Fence
It shall be unlawful hereafter for any person to construct, use or maintain upon premises in his possession or under his control any swimming pool unless said pool or a
lot or lots upon which it is situated be enclosed within a permanent fence or wall not less than six feet (6') in height and unless the gates or entrances to said enclosure
be securely locked at all times other than when being actually used for purposes of ingress or egress. (1972 Code, sec. 14.303; 2008 Code, sec. 3.06.004)
State law references–Swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.101 et seq.; pool yard enclosure for multiunit rental complex, property owners'
association, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 757.
Sec. 3.06.005 Emptying water into street
(a) The owner, tenant or occupant of any property or residence whatsoever in the city on which is situated a swimming pool is hereby prohibited from emptying,
causing to be emptied, or permitting to be emptied said swimming pool in any manner whatsoever that causes or permits any amount of water therefrom to reach any
street, alley or public way in the city.
(b) Each violation of this section shall be punished by a penalty of a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $2000.00. Each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1972 Code, secs. 14.304, 14.304.1; 2008 Code, sec. 3.06.005)
ARTICLE 3.07 MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, certain terms, words and phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter ascribed thereto:
Agent. Any person authorized by the licensee of a manufactured home park to operate or maintain such park under the provisions of this article.
Building official. The legally designated inspection authority of the city, or his authorized representative.
Certificate of occupancy. A certificate issued by the building official for the use of a building, structure, and/or land, when it is determined by him that the building,
structure, and/or land complies with the provisions of all applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations.
City health officer. The legally designated city health officer or his authorized representative.
City official. The legally designated head of a city department or his authorized representative when acting in an official capacity.
Common access route. A private way which affords the principal means of access to individual manufactured home lots or auxiliary buildings.
Driveway. A minor entranceway off the common access route within the park into an off-street parking area serving one or more manufactured homes.
Fire chief. The legally designated chief of the fire department of the city, or his authorized representative.
Internal street. Same as “Common access route.”
License. A written license issued by the development department permitting a person to operate and maintain a manufactured home park under the provisions of this
article and regulations issued hereunder.
Licensee. Any person licensed to operate and maintain a manufactured home park under the provisions of this article.
Manufactured home. A HUD-code manufactured home is a structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, 40 body feet or more in length,
or, when erected on-site, is 320 square feet or more, and which is built on a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
Manufactured home park. A unified development of manufactured home spaces arranged on a tract of land under single ownership, meeting all requirements of this
article.
Parking space, off-street. A minimum space nine feet (9') in width by eighteen feet (18') in length, located within the boundary of a manufactured home space, or in a
common parking and storage area having unobstructed access to an internal street.
Permit. A written permit or certification issued by the city permitting the construction, alteration, or extension of a manufactured home park, under the provisions of this
article and regulations issued hereunder.
Person. Any natural individual, firm, trust, partnership, association or corporation.
Plot plan. A graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations,
accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also indicating the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property.
Police chief. The legally designated chief of the police department of the city, or his authorized representative.
Replacement. The act of moving one manufactured home from its existing stand and replacing it with another manufactured home.
Service building. A structure housing toilet, lavatory, and such other facilities as may be required by this article.
Sewer connection. The connection existing of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a manufactured home to the inlet of the corresponding sewer
service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the manufactured home park.
Sewer service riser pipe. That portion of a sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a manufactured home space.
Site plan. Same as “Plot plan.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/349
Space. A plot of ground within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home, together with such open spaces as required by
this article. This term also shall include the terms “lot,” “stand,” and “site.”
Tax assessor-collector. The legally designated tax assessor-collector of the city, or his authorized representative.
Water connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a
manufactured home.
Water riser pipe. That portion of the private water service system serving a manufactured home park which extends vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a
designated point at a manufactured home space.
Zoning ordinance. The zoning chapter of the city code.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.101; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.07.002 Inspections
(a) Generally. The building official, the fire chief, and the city engineer are hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are necessary to determine
compliance with this article.
(b) Entry on premises. The building official, the fire chief, and the city engineer shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon any private or public property
for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of this article.
(c) Inspection of register. The building official, the fire chief, and the city engineer shall have the power and authority in discharging their official duties to inspect the
register containing a record of all residents of the manufactured home park.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.301; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.002)
Sec. 3.07.003 Notices, hearings and orders
(a) Notice of violation. Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this article, the building official
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the licensee or agent, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of the act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the licensee or his agent; provided that such notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such licensee or
agent when a copy thereof has been sent by mail to his last known address, or when he has been served with such notice by any method authorized or
required by the laws of this state; and
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article.
(b) Appeal from denial of permit. Any person affected by the refusal of the city to issue a permit under the provisions of this article as set out in division 2 of this article
may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council, provided that such person shall file, within ten days after the day the permit was
refused, in the office of the city secretary, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor. Upon receipt of such
petition, the city secretary shall set a time and place for such hearing before the council and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner
shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such refusal should be modified or withdrawn.
(c) Appeal from notice issued by building official. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this
article applicable to such park, by the building official, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council, provided that such person shall
file, within ten days after the day the notice was served, in the office of the city secretary, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of
the grounds therefor. The filing of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and of the suspension, except in the case of an order issued under
subsection (e) of this section. Upon receipt of such petition, the city secretary shall set a time and place for such hearing before the council and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
(d) Order by building official after hearing. After such hearing, the building official shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying or withdrawing the refusal, which
order shall be served as provided in subsection (a) of this section. Upon failure to comply with an order by the building official sustaining or modifying a decision thereof,
the occupancy permit and the license of the park affected by the order shall be revoked.
(e) Order without notice.
(1) Procedure. Whenever the building official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may
without notice or hearing issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that action be taken as he may deem necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such an order is directed
shall comply therewith immediately, but upon written petition to the building official shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of
subsection (d) of this section shall be applicable to such hearing and the order issued thereafter.
(2) Failure to request hearing. If a hearing is not requested by the owner within the requisite time period, the license shall be deemed revoked without
further action by the city.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.302; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.003)
Sec. 3.07.004 Permit for placement of manufactured home
Any placement of a manufactured home will require a permit and be accompanied by an application and site plan, including a fee as set out in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. (Ordinance 99-020 adopted 4/20/99; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec.
3.07.004; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 3.07.005–3.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit for Construction, Alteration or Extension
Sec. 3.07.041 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any manufactured home park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid permit issued by the city
in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. (1972 Code, sec. 15.201(B); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.041)
Sec. 3.07.042 Application
All applications for permits shall be made upon standard forms provided by the city and shall contain the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/349
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Location and legal description of the manufactured home park. To this application shall be attached 6 copies of a site plan, at a minimum scale of 1" =
100'. The site plan shall include all data required under section 3.07.121 hereof. One print of the plot plan is to be circulated by the building official to each of
the city departments designated in section 3.07.121 of this article for approval prior to issuing the permit. This plot plan does not replace or supersede the
subdivision plat of the property required by state law to be recorded in the county records of the county in which the property is located after review and
approval of the city council.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.201(C); Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.042)
Sec. 3.07.043 Fee
All applications to the city shall be accompanied by a fee as set out in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.201(D); Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.043; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.07.044 Issuance
When, upon review of the application, the building official is satisfied that the proposed plan meets the requirements of this article, [and makes] a determination that the
site is properly platted, and any all other city regulations have been met, a permit shall be issued. (1972 Code, sec. 15.201(E); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.044)
Sec. 3.07.045 Appeal of denial
Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been denied may request a hearing on the matter under the procedure provided by section 3.07.003 of
this article. (1972 Code, sec. 15.201(F); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.045)
Sec. 3.07.046 Completion of construction
A license to operate the manufactured home park shall not be issued until the manufactured home park is properly constructed (i.e., roads, water, fire protection,
sidewalks, fence) in accordance with division 4 of this article. (1972 Code, sec. 15.201(G); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.046)
Sec. 3.07.047 Residential structures other than manufactured homes
No permit shall be issued for the construction or occupancy of a residence which is a non-manufactured home in any manufactured home park, with the following
exceptions:
(1) One existing residential structure may be retained or one new residential structure may be constructed for the occupancy of the owner or operator of
the park.
(2) An existing residence may be converted to a clubhouse, community center or service building for use by the residents of the manufactured home park.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.201(A); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.047)
Secs. 3.07.048–3.07.080 Reserved
Division 3. License
Sec. 3.07.081 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any manufactured home park within the limits of the city unless he holds a valid license issued annually by the development
department in the name of such person for the specific park. All applications for licenses shall be made in writing to the development department, which shall issue a
license upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this article and of this code. The development department shall not issue a license unless the applicant is
a valid holder of a certificate of occupancy. At any time a certificate of occupancy is revoked, the license is automatically void. (1972 Code, sec. 15.202(A); 2008 Code,
sec. 3.07.081)
Sec. 3.07.082 Application for original license
(a) Application for the original license shall be in writing by the applicant, accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the application and by the
deposit of the license fee hereinafter provided, and shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The location and legal description of the park; and
(3) A site plan of the park showing all manufactured home spaces, structures, roads, walkways, and other service facilities.
(b) After review of the documents submitted by the applicant, and a determination that the application meets the conditions of the city code, the city shall issue a
conditional approved license. After the facilities are constructed, the city will issue a license for operations after a determination that the facilities have been properly
installed.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.202(B); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.082)
Sec. 3.07.083 Appeal of denial
Any person whose application for a license under this article has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter under the procedure provided
by section 3.07.003 of this article. (1972 Code, sec. 15.202(C); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.083)
Sec. 3.07.084 Renewal
Application for renewal of a license shall be made in writing by the licensee on forms furnished by the development department on or before January 1st of each year.
Failure to renew a license within 10 days of written notification shall result in suspension of the license. Such application shall contain any change in the information
occurring after the original license was issued or the latest renewal granted. Before the renewal license is issued, the development department shall obtain the approval
of the fire chief on the firefighting appliances, water supply, accessways, or other applicable conditions as meeting fire safety requirements. (1972 Code, sec. 15.202(D);
2008 Code, sec. 3.07.084)
Sec. 3.07.085 Fee
All original license applications or renewals thereof shall be accompanied by a fee as set out in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by
ordinance from time to time. All renewal fees shall be due on January 1st of each year. (1972 Code, sec. 15.202(E); Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec.
3.07.085; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.07.086 Transfer
(a) Every person holding a license shall give notice in writing to the development department within ten days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise
disposed of interest in or control of any manufactured home park.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/349
(b) Application for transfer of license shall be made within twenty calendar days after notification of change covered in subsection (a) of this section. Within fifteen (15)
calendar days thereafter, the city shall act on the application for license transfer, and it shall be approved if the park is in compliance with the provisions of this article.
(c) All applications for license transfer shall be charged a fee as set out in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time
to time.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.202(F), (G); Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.086; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.07.087 Suspension
Whenever, upon inspection of any manufactured home park, the building official, after consultation with the city official or officials he deems competent to judge, finds
that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this article, or any other city code violation applicable to such park, he shall give notice in
writing in accordance with section 3.07.003 of this article to the licensee or his agent that, unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period of
time specified in such notice, the license shall be suspended. At the end of such period of time, the building official shall reinspect such park, requesting assistance from
other city departments as may be required, and, if such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall suspend the license and give notice in writing of such
suspension to the licensee or his agent. Upon receipt of notice of such suspension, the licensee shall cease operation of such park, except as provided in section
3.07.003 hereof. (1972 Code, sec. 15.202(H); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.087)
Secs. 3.07.088–3.07.120 Reserved
Division 4. Design, Facilities and Operation
Sec. 3.07.121 Site plan
The site plan shall be filed as required by section 3.07.042 of this article and shall show the following:
(1) The area and dimensions of the tract of land, with identification of location and boundaries;
(2) The number, location and size of all manufactured home spaces;
(3) The location, width, and specifications of driveways, roadways, and walkways;
(4) The location and specifications of water and sewer lines and riser pipes;
(5) The location and details of lighting, electrical, telephone, cable, and gas systems;
(6) The location and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the park;
(7) Existing and proposed topography of the manufactured home park;
(8) The location of fire mains, including the size, the hydrants, and any other equipment which may be provided; and
(9) Such other information as municipal reviewing officials may reasonably require. A print of the site or plot plan shall be circulated to the following city
departments and approval obtained from them prior to the issuance of a permit: building official, city engineer, fire and police.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(A); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.121)
Sec. 3.07.122 Site requirements; spaces; storage facilities
(a) Applicability. Any manufactured home park constructed after the adoption of this article, and any extension after the adoption of this article, and any extension or
addition to an existing manufactured home park in the city, shall be done in compliance with the following site requirements.
(b) Basic manufactured home minimum site requirements.
(1) Size of site. The total initial development of any manufactured home park shall be not less than four (4) acres, fully improved with served manufactured
home spaces.
(2) Area and dimensions of spaces. Each manufactured home space shall provide a minimum area of 4,000 square feet; however, no manufactured home
space shall have dimensions less than forty feet (40') on the narrow dimension nor eighty feet (80') on the long dimension.
(3) Setbacks; separation of manufactured homes.
(A) The minimum front yard setback shall be ten feet (10') from the nearest corner of the manufactured home to the front line of the manufactured
home space.
(B) No manufactured home shall be closer than ten feet (10') to any property line nor closer than twenty-five feet (25') to the property line adjoining a
public street.
(C) For other structures on each space, the minimum front yard setback shall be at least ten feet (10').
(D) The minimum distance between manufactured homes at any point shall be twenty feet (20').
(4) Soil and ground cover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other
solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust.
(5) Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of a park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, legal, efficient manner. The
drainage plan for the site must be prepared by a registered professional engineer in accordance with the provisions of state and local regulations, and
provisions for stormwater retention shall be addressed. The plan(s) must be approved by the city engineer.
(6) Storage facilities. Storage facilities with a minimum capacity of two hundred (200) cubic feet per manufactured home space may be provided on the
space, or in compounds located within one hundred feet (100') of each space. Where provided, storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will
enhance the appearance of the park and shall be faced with masonry, porcelainized steel, baked enamel or other material equal in fire resistance, durability
and appearance. Storage outside the perimeter walls of the manufactured home shall be permitted only if in such facilities.
(7) Stands. The area of the manufactured home stand or space shall provide adequate support and drainage for placement of the manufactured home.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(B); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.122)
Sec. 3.07.123 Access, traffic circulation and parking
(a) Generally. Internal streets, no parking area signs, and street name signs shall be privately owned, built, and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and
convenient access to all spaces and to facilities for common use of park residents. Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstruction in order that police and fire
vehicles may have access to any areas of the manufactured home park. The police department shall be authorized to issue citations for the violation of the provisions
hereof and to remove and impound vehicles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/349
(b) No parking signs. On all sections of internal streets on which parking is prohibited under this article or by the fire marshal, the owner or agent shall erect metal
signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size, height and location shall be approved by the city engineer prior to installation.
(c) Construction and maintenance of streets. All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications established by the city's subdivision regulations (article 10.02),
and shall be maintained by the owner or agent free of cracks, holes, and other hazards. Internal streets shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer in
accordance with good engineering design and shall be approved by the city engineer before issuance of a license for the park operations.
(d) Internal street dimensions and parking spaces.
(1) An internal street or common access route shall be provided to each manufactured home space. Such street shall have a minimum width of thirty feet
(30') if off-street parking is provided in the ratio of two (2) parking spaces for each manufactured home space. The internal streets shall be continuous and
connect with other internal streets or with public streets, or shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of one hundred feet (100'). No
internal street ending in a cul-de-sac shall exceed five hundred feet (500') in length.
(2) Each parking space shall be hard-surfaced with all-weather material (asphalt or concrete), and located to eliminate interference with access to parking
areas provided for other manufactured homes and for public parking in the park.
(e) Access to spaces. Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least two hundred feet (200') of any portion of each manufactured home.
(f) Street names and address numbers; street signs. Within each manufactured home park, all streets shall be named, and manufactured homes numbered, to
conform with block numbers on adjacent public streets. All street name signs and house numbers shall be of reflective material. These street signs shall be of a color
and size contrasting with those on public streets so that there is no confusion regarding which are private and which are public streets. These signs and numbers shall
be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency vehicles.
(g) Intersections with public streets. Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at approximately ninety degrees (90°) and at locations which will eliminate or
minimize interference with traffic on those public streets.
(h) Common parking area. An additional minimum parking area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per manufactured home space shall be provided in a common
area for storage of boats or vehicles and for visitors' vehicles, to minimize on-street parking and to facilitate movement of emergency vehicles into and through the park.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(C); Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.123)
Sec. 3.07.124 Street lighting
Street lighting within the manufactured home park shall be provided along all internal streets. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to insure an average
illumination level of not less than 0.2 footcandles. Such lighting shall be designed to preclude illumination of areas outside of the manufactured home park. (1972 Code,
sec. 15.401(D); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.124)
Sec. 3.07.125 Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be provided from manufactured home spaces to the service and community facility buildings and shall be provided along all community streets. (1972
Code, sec. 15.401(E); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.125)
Sec. 3.07.126 Fire safety
Both owner and tenant shall comply with all applicable codes and as follows:
(1) Storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gases. In parks in which liquefied petroleum gases are stored and dispensed, their handling and storage
shall comply with requirements of all applicable and governing codes.
(2) Storage and handling of flammable liquids. In parks in which gasoline, fuel oil, or other flammable liquids are stored and/or dispensed, their handling
and storage shall comply with all applicable and governing codes.
(3) Access to manufactured homes for firefighting. Approaches to all manufactured homes shall be kept clear for firefighting.
(4) Firefighting instruction. The manufactured home park owner or agent shall be responsible for the instruction of his staff in the use of the park fire
protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of fire.
(5) Water supply facilities for fire department operations.
(A) Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be connected to the city public water supply system.
(B) The park owner shall provide standard city fire hydrants located within five hundred feet (500') of all manufactured home spaces, measured along
the driveways or streets. Fire hydrants will be subject to periodic inspection by the city fire department. It shall be the responsibility of the park licensee
to insure that the fire hydrants in need of immediate repair shall be repaired in a satisfactory manner.
(6) Rubbish collection and disposal. The manufactured home park licensee or agent shall provide an adequate system of collection and safe disposal of
rubbish, approved by the city.
(7) Dry brush, leaves and weeds. The manufactured home park licensee and agent are each separately and equally responsible for maintaining the entire
area of the park free of dry brush, leaves and weeds.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(F); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.126)
Sec. 3.07.127 Recreation area
(a) Required. All manufactured home parks shall have at least one recreation area.
(b) Types of facilities. Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming pools, and community buildings, shall be provided which in the judgment of the
park licensee or agent will meet the anticipated needs of the clientele which the park is designed to service. Provision of separate adult and tot lot recreation areas is
encouraged.
(c) Size. Not less than five percent (5%) of the gross site area of the manufactured home park shall be devoted to recreational facilities, generally provided in a central
location. In large parks, this may be decentralized. Recreation areas include space for community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation and
child play areas, swimming pools, and drying yards, but do not include vehicle parking areas.
(d) Playgrounds. When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfares, and parking areas. Such space shall
be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of safety hazards.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(G); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.127)
Sec. 3.07.128 Water supply
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/349
(a) Generally. An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be provided in each manufactured home park. Connection shall be made to the public
supply of water.
(b) Water distribution system.
(1) The water supply system of the manufactured home park shall be connected by pipes to all manufactured homes, buildings, and other facilities
requiring water. Separate metering of each space by the city shall not be provided. The internal water distribution system shall be owned and maintained by
the park owner.
(2) All water piping, fixtures, and other equipment shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with state and city regulations and requirements.
(3) Individual water riser pipes and connections shall be in accordance with the requirements of article 3.02, division 6 (plumbing) of the city code.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(H); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.128)
Sec. 3.07.129 Sewage disposal
From and after the effective date of this code, the following shall apply:
(1) General requirements. An adequate and safe sewer system shall be provided in all manufactured home parks for conveying and disposing of all
sewage. The sewer system for a manufactured home park shall be constructed in accordance with article 3.02, division 6 (plumbing) of the city code. All
proposed sewage collection lines shall be approved by the city building official prior to construction, except that the use of septic tanks for the disposal of
sewage shall not be approved. All sewage collection systems shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer collection main.
(2) Sewer lines. All sewer lines shall be constructed and of materials in accordance with article 3.02, division 6 (plumbing) of the city code.
(3) Individual sewer connections.
(A) Each manufactured home stand shall be provided with at least a four-inch-diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located on
each stand that the sewer connection to the manufactured home drain outlet will approximate a vertical position.
(B) The sewer connection to the manufactured home from the sewer riser pipe and any other sewer connections shall be in accordance with the
requirements of article 3.02, division 6 (plumbing) of the city code.
(C) All materials used for sewer connections shall be in accordance with article 3.02, division 6 (plumbing) of the city code.
(D) Provision shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when no manufactured home occupies the space. Surface drainage shall be diverted
away from the riser.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(I); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.129)
Sec. 3.07.130 Perimeter fence
Each manufactured home park shall have a vision-proof fence of permanent type construction not less than six feet (6') in height, along the entire perimeter of the park.
The fence must be maintained by the park owner in good condition. (1972 Code, sec. 15.401(J); Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.130)
Sec. 3.07.131 Electrical, television cable, and telephone distribution systems
From and after the effective date of this code, the following shall apply:
(1) Installation. All electrical wiring in the manufactured home park shall be underground, and otherwise installed in accordance with the electrical
regulations of the city code. All telephone and television cable lines in the manufactured home park shall be installed underground.
(2) Electrical system. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations for such systems.
(3) Power distribution lines, individual electrical connections, and grounding. Power distribution lines shall be located underground. Otherwise, all power
distribution lines, individual electrical connections and grounding of the manufactured homes and equipment shall comply with article 3.02, division 4
(electricity) of the city code.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(K); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.131)
Sec. 3.07.132 Service building and other community service facilities
(a) Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to service buildings, recreation buildings, and other community service facilities such as:
(1) Management offices, repair shops and storage areas;
(2) Sanitary facilities;
(3) Laundry facilities;
(4) Indoor recreation areas; or
(5) Commercial uses supplying essential goods or services for the benefit and convenience of park occupants.
(b) Requirements for buildings.
(1) General standards; access for disabled persons. All portions of all structures shall be properly protected from damage by ordinary uses and by decay,
corrosion, termites, and other destructive elements. Exterior portions shall be of such materials and be so constructed and protected as to prevent entrance
or penetration of moisture and weather, and to comply with all applicable codes of the city. Each structure shall comply with the provisions of the Americans
With Disabilities Act.
(2) Rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities. All rooms containing sanitary or laundry facilities shall:
(A) Have sound-resistant walls extending to the ceiling between male and female sanitary facilities. Walls and partitions around showers, bathtubs,
lavatories and other plumbing fixtures shall be constructed of dense, nonabsorbent, waterproof materials or covered with moisture-resistant materials;
(B) Have at least one (1) window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate gross area of windows for each required room
shall not be less than ten percent (10%) of the floor area served by them; and
(C) Have at least one window which can be opened easily, or mechanical device which will adequately ventilate the room.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/349
(3) Toilets and showers. Toilets shall be located in separate compartments equipped with self-closing doors. Shower stalls shall be of the individual type.
The rooms shall be screened to prevent direct view of the interior when the exterior doors are open. Bathrooms shall be adequately vented.
(4) Illumination. Illumination levels shall be maintained as follows:
(A) General seeing tasks: Five (5) footcandles;
(B) Laundry room work area: Forty (40) footcandles; and
(C) Toilet room, in front of mirrors: Forty (40) footcandles.
(5) Hot and cold water. Hot and cold water shall be furnished in every lavatory, sink, bathtub, shower and laundry fixture, and cold water shall be furnished
to every water closet and urinal.
(6) Heating. Service buildings shall be maintained at a comfortable temperature by heating equipment permitted by city regulations, between October 1st
and May 1st.
(c) Barbecue pits, fireplaces and stoves. Cooking shelters, barbecue pits, fireplaces, and wood-burning stoves shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used
as to minimize fire hazards and smoke nuisance both on the property on which used and on neighboring property. No open fire shall be permitted except in facilities
provided. No open fire shall be left unattended. No fuel shall be used and no material burned which emits dense smoke or objectionable odors and [such facilities] shall
specifically comply with the requirements of section 5.05.004 of the city code.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(L); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.132)
Sec. 3.07.133 Refuse and garbage handling
(a) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the manufactured home park shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect
breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air pollution. One or both of the systems described in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be used in every park.
(b) If refuse is gathered at the individual sites, it shall be stored in flytight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, which shall be located at each manufactured home site.
Containers for this use shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to store properly all refuse.
(c) Centrally located refuse containers having a capacity of three cubic yards or larger may be provided. If provided, such containers shall be so designed as to
prevent spillage and container deterioration and to facilitate cleaning around them. Refuse and garbage shall be removed from the park at least twice each week. The
licensee must contract and use the city's franchised garbage disposal agent. All dumpster sites must be screened from view and the location shown on the site plan.
(d) The licensee or agent shall insure that containers at manufactured home spaces are emptied regularly and maintained in a useful, sanitary condition.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(M); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.133)
Sec. 3.07.134 Insect and rodent control
(a) Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insect and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and other measures to control
insects and rodents shall conform with the requirements of the city health officer.
(b) Parks shall be maintained free of accumulation of debris which may provide rodent harborage or breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests.
(c) The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled to prevent harborage of noxious insects or other pests. Parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the
growth of noxious weeds detrimental to health and safety. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any description.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(N); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.134)
Sec. 3.07.135 Fuel supply and storage
From and after the effective date of this article, the following shall apply:
(1) Natural gas systems.
(A) Natural gas piping systems shall be installed underground and maintained in accordance with applicable codes and regulations governing such
systems.
(B) Each manufactured home space provided with piped gas shall have a cap on the outlet when not in use to prevent accidental discharge of gas,
and shall be in accordance with article 3.02, division 6 (plumbing) of the city code.
(2) Liquefied petroleum gas systems. Liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be installed only if an available natural gas system is more than one thousand
feet (1,000') from the manufactured home park. The liquefied petroleum gas systems shall be maintained in accordance with applicable codes of the city
governing such systems and regulations of the state railroad commission pertaining thereto.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(O); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.135)
Sec. 3.07.136 Responsibilities of management and occupants
(a) Responsibilities of management. The responsibilities of the park management shall be as follows:
(1) All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article.
(2) The licensee or his agent shall operate the park in compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances and shall provide adequate supervision
to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3) The licensee or agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this article and inform them of their duties and responsibilities
hereunder.
(4) The licensee or agent shall maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain the following information:
(A) Name and address of park residents;
(B) Manufactured home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number;
(C) Location of each manufactured home within the park by space or lot number and street address; and
(D) Dates of arrival and departure.
(5) A new register shall be initiated January 1st of each year, and the old register be retired but shall be retained on the premises for at least three (3) years
following the retirement. Registers shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by an official of the city whose duties may necessitate access to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/349
the information contained therein.
(6) (A) The licensee or agent shall furnish to the tax assessor-collector for the city, within ten (10) days after the first day of January of each year, a
list of all manufactured homes resident in the park on the first day of January. The list shall contain the owner's name and address; the make, length,
width, year of manufacture and identification number of the manufactured home; and the address or location description of said manufactured home
within the park. Said lists shall be prepared using forms provided by the assessor-collector for the city.
(B) Within ten (10) days after the first day of July of each year, the licensee or agent shall furnish to the city tax assessor-collector the same data
required in the preceding subsection on all residents who have moved into the park after the first day of January, and information on manufactured
homes which have moved out of the park after the first day of January, including the foregoing data plus the date on which each manufactured home left
the park, and the destination of the manufactured home if this destination can be obtained.
(b) Responsibilities of occupants. The responsibilities of park occupants shall be as follows:
(1) All responsibilities set out elsewhere in this article.
(2) The park occupant shall comply with all requirements of this article and shall maintain his manufactured home space, its facilities and equipment in
good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3) The park occupant shall be responsible for proper placement of his manufactured home in its manufactured home stand and proper installation of all
utility connections in accordance with the instructions of the park management.
(4) Fire-resistant skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings shall be required on all manufactured homes in manufactured home parks and
shall be installed within five (5) days after placement of the manufactured homes.
(5) Skirting, porches, awnings, and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately underneath a
manufactured home for storage shall be permitted only under the following conditions:
(A) The storage area shall have a base of impervious material.
(B) Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the manufactured home.
(C) Landscaping: 35% of the overall area of the lot shall be landscaped, and 5% of the overall area of the lot shall be of plantings other than sod.
(c) Responsibility for compliance. When the provisions of this article place responsibility(s) on both the owner and the tenant, both may be held separately liable.
(1972 Code, sec. 15.401(P); 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.136)
Sec. 3.07.137 Flood hazard requirements
(a) Standards; evacuation plan.
(1) All manufactured homes to be placed with zone A on a community's FHBM shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors. Specific requirements shall be that over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the
manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') long requiring one (1)
additional tie per side. Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home, with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and manufactured
homes less than fifty feet (50') long requiring four additional ties per side. All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of
4,800 pounds. Any additions to the manufactured home shall be similarly anchored.
(2) An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed with appropriate disaster preparedness authorities for
manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions located within zone A on the FHBM.
(3) Within zones A1-30 on the community's FIRM for new manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions where the repair, reconstruction
or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair,
reconstruction or improvement has commenced:
(A) Stands or lots are to be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at or above the base
flood level;
(B) Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are to be provided; and
(C) In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots are to be large enough to permit steps, piling foundations are to be placed in stable soil no more than
ten feet (10') apart and reinforcement is to be provided for pilings more than six feet (6') above the ground level.
(4) For all manufactured homes to be placed within zones A1-30 on the community's firm, but not in a manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision:
(A) Stands or lots are to be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be no less than one foot
above the base flood level;
(B) Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler are to be provided; and
(C) In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots are large enough to permit steps, piling foundations are placed in stable soil no more than ten feet (10')
apart and reinforcement is to be provided for piers more than six feet (6') above ground level.
(5) The placement of any manufactured home is prohibited within the adopted regulatory floodway, except in an existing manufactured home park or
mobile subdivision.
(b) Conflicting regulations. The floodplain management ordinance shall take precedence over other conflicting ordinances.
(c) Area regulated. The flood insurance rate map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency will be used as the minimum area to be regulated under this
section.
(1972 Code, secs. 15.402, 15.405, 15.406; 2008 Code, sec. 3.07.137)
ARTICLE 3.08 MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Sec. 3.08.001 General requirements; permit
(a) Business or residence structures, either new or old, that are not originally constructed on the site of the premises upon which the same are to be located shall not
be moved into or within the limits of the city except as hereinafter permitted.
(b) Fees mentioned herein are as prescribed in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/349
(c) Business structures or structures proposed to be moved to other than R zoned property will obtain a special use permit as prescribed in article 15.02 of the city
code, prior to issuing a permit.
(d) To move any such structure into or within the city shall require the following:
(1) A preliminary inspection fee shall be paid to the city, and the building inspector shall then inspect both the structure to be moved and the lot or tract of
land upon which it is to be moved and determine whether or not the structure and its intended location and use thereon fully comply with the provisions of all
applicable code provisions;
(2) If thus preliminarily approved, a final permit fee shall be paid within sixty (60) days after granting of such preliminary approval, and security shall be
posted as hereinafter provided;
(3) Before such permit may be issued, the applicant shall furnish security in the amount of the estimated value shown on the building permit, plus ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), conditioned upon the completion of all work necessary to the construction of a foundation and the moving and installation
thereon of such structure within ninety (90) days of issuance of the final permit, such security to be filed with the building office;
(4) Such surety may be either in the form of a deposit in cash or of United States “bearer” bonds or a surety bond payable to the city. If a surety bond is
submitted, it shall be in the form approved by the city attorney issued by a company authorized to do such business in the state, and shall name an agent in
the county to receive notices and upon whom service may be had. Such security shall be furnished conditioned upon the completion of all work upon such
relocated building necessary to bring it into compliance with applicable codes and ordinances of the city within ninety (90) days of issuance of the permit
described in subsections (2) and (3);
(5) The amount of said security is the minimum liquidated damages payable to the city for failure to comply with this section, it being recognized that the
damages to the city and public occasioned by such failure will be difficult to determine and the sum named has been agreed to as the minimum amount of
such damages. The building official shall have periodic inspections made of the relocated building to determine whether the building has been brought into
compliance with applicable codes and ordinances. If this is done within the time prescribed, the building official shall release the security required hereby. If
such work is not completed within ninety (90) days after the permit was issued, said building official shall so notify the permittee and the surety, if any, by
United States mail (certified or registered mail). The building official shall notify the city attorney whenever any person shall have failed to perform the work,
performance of which is the condition of the security required hereinabove. Thereupon, the city attorney shall prepare an appropriate ordinance or resolution
for submission to the city council declaring forfeited the security furnished pursuant thereto; and
(6) If the requirements of subsections (1), (2), and (3) above are met within sixty (60) days from the date of original application and approved by a majority
vote of the city council, then the building official shall issue to the applicant a permit to move the structure into or within the limits of the city. Such moving
permit shall only be placed [issued] upon the condition that the improvements sought to be moved shall be placed upon the designated premises and
completed for occupancy, with final inspection and certificate of occupancy finished, all within ninety (90) days of the date of said permit. This time may only
be extended by majority vote of the city council upon showing good cause for such extension and after public hearing.
(e) Upon the issuance of the moving permit, the building official shall issue a building permit to the applicant to commence the foundation for the structure, and the
further work on said premises shall continue in the same manner as provided for all structures under the building code.
(f) In the event that the applicant fails to complete said improvements within the ninety-day period, or extension thereof, as provided above, or fails to comply with any
other provisions herein, then such failure shall constitute a violation of this article, punishable by fine. Each day such violation continues is hereby declared to be a
separate offense.
(g) Public entities are exempted from the aforementioned surety requirements as well as council approval of said permit.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1001; 2008 Code, sec. 3.08.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.08.002 Small structures
The provisions of this article contained in section 3.08.001 shall not apply to structures of one hundred (100) square feet or less in size. Structures of one hundred (100)
square feet or less shall not be moved into the city limits and relocated therein except upon compliance with the following regulations:
(1) A permit and inspection fee will be paid prior to the time the structure is moved into the city limits or the foundation is built, to cover inspection of the site
and foundation for relocation, issuance of permit (if approved), and inspection of the building and site after relocation.
(2) If such structure is approved for any use other than dry storage or the like, a building permit shall also be taken out in addition, as otherwise prescribed
in this code, and such additional fees shall be paid and such additional inspections made as thus required.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1002; 2008 Code, sec. 3.08.002)
ARTICLE 3.09 ADDRESS NUMBERS
Sec. 3.09.001 Required; annexed territory
All houses and buildings within the city limits whatsoever which abut on any public street or way shall be numbered. As territory is annexed to the city, the houses and
buildings therein shall be numbered, or, if already numbered, the numbering thereof shall be made to conform to the numbering system of the city, if not already in
compliance. (1972 Code, sec. 23.101; 2008 Code, sec. 3.09.001)
Sec. 3.09.002 Assignment of numbers
Numbers shall be assigned to all newly constructed houses and buildings at the time the building permit is issued therefor. All newly annexed houses and buildings shall
have the proper number assigned thereto (if not already in satisfactory compliance) within ninety (90) days after annexation, with notice thereof being given to the owner
or occupant by certified mail. All houses and buildings within the city which are not properly numbered shall be assigned a proper number and notice thereof given to the
owner or occupant within ten (10) days after discovery of the improper numbering or other deficiency with respect thereto. (1972 Code, sec. 23.102; 2008 Code, sec.
3.09.002)
Sec. 3.09.003 Numbering system
The city secretary shall be the official in charge of the enforcement of house number provisions, and numbers shall be assigned by the secretary or by the other city
employees under the direction thereof. Numbering shall be in accordance with the grid system of the City of San Antonio, as shown on the official map of the city and
future additions and amendments thereto as approved by the city secretary in keeping with the provisions of this article and of such grid system. The city secretary shall
reserve numbers for all vacant lots and tracts abutting on public streets and ways for future assignment in full keeping with the system and map referred to above. (1972
Code, sec. 23.103; 2008 Code, sec. 3.09.003)
Sec. 3.09.004 Removal of nonconforming numbers
Any displayed number which does not conform to the number assigned hereunder shall be removed within ten (10) days from receipt of notice from the city of the
assigned number, as prescribed herein, and the assigned number displayed in its stead. Failure to do either, or both, shall constitute an offense hereunder. (1972 Code,
sec. 23.104; 2008 Code, sec. 3.09.004)
Sec. 3.09.005 Display of number; location
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/349
The assigned number (or the number in use if the city has not assigned a number) shall be conspicuously displayed on the front of said houses and buildings; provided,
however, that where the house or building front sits too far back from the public street, or the same is obscured by vegetation or other objects, so that the number cannot
be easily seen from a point directly across said street therefrom by a person of normal eyesight, then the same shall be placed on a post or structure in the front part of
said premises so that same may thus be readily seen. Failure to display such number in accordance herewith shall be an offense hereunder. (1972 Code, sec. 23.105;
2008 Code, sec. 3.09.005)
Sec. 3.09.006 Material, color and size of numbers
Each such number shall be of any durable material, of a color visibly contrasting with the color of the background against which the same is displayed; provided that the
figures shall be not less than three inches in depth and the width shall be in proportion to the depth. Failure to comply with these regulations shall constitute an offense
hereunder. (1972 Code, sec. 23.106; 2008 Code, sec. 3.09.006)
ARTICLE 3.10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.10.001 Quality assurance program for highway construction adopted
The city council approves and adopts the state department of transportation's Quality Assurance Program for Construction. (Ordinance 13-024 adopted 6/4/13)
Sec. 3.10.002 Approval of street names
No new streets shall be opened within the limits of the city until the names designated for said streets have been approved by the city council. (1972 Code, sec. 23.200;
2008 Code, sec. 3.10.001)
Sec. 3.10.003 Permit for construction in right-of-way
It shall be unlawful for any person to modify, alter, adjust, remove, construct, repair or improve any street, curb, drainageway, sidewalk, driveway, culvert or any facility
within the public right-of-way without a permit, [and any such work done without a permit,] or not in exact compliance with any permit issued, shall alike constitute a
violation of this code. The permit applicant will provide the city with sufficient drawings, plans, and specifications as requested to insure that information on which the
permit is based is on file. (Ordinance 905 adopted 7/29/81; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.002)
Sec. 3.10.004 Driveway openings
Driveways (where permitted) shall be constructed of reinforced concrete six (6) inches thick from the street to the property line (the approach) where the street is
considered permanent. Asphalt and base driveways will be permitted only where the city does not consider the street section as permanent. Residential driveways will
normally be limited to one, 23 feet wide (measured at the property line), and shall be four (4) inches reinforced concrete. However, another driveway will be considered if
the curb frontage of this property is sufficient to accommodate street parking along the curb equal to the footage of driveway openings being requested. Commercial
driveway openings will be reviewed on an individual merit basis by the city engineer. (Ordinance 905 adopted 7/29/81; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.003)
Sec. 3.10.005 Sidewalk construction permit
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed a sidewalk within the city until a permit for such work has been issued by the building official or his designee.
Permit fees for sidewalk permits shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. Inspection of
work shall be performed prior to the pouring of concrete and after concrete has been set, to assure all building code requirements have been met. Permits shall expire
six (6) months from date of issuance. If work to be done was not completed within the six-month period of time, a new permit must be obtained along with payment of an
additional permit fee. If the work was begun without having first obtained a sidewalk permit, the permit fee will be double the set amount. (Ordinance 05-027, sec.
23.501, adopted 8/29/05; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.004; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 3.10.006–3.10.040 Reserved
Division 2. Curb Cuts
Sec. 3.10.041 Permit required
It shall be hereafter unlawful to cut, knock out, chip away, or in any manner break down, remove or destroy, in whole or in part, any curb on any street, highway, alley,
parkway or public right-of-way in the city unless a permit has been first obtained expressly authorizing the precise curb cut work done, and such curb cut work done
without a permit, or not in exact compliance with any permit issued, shall alike constitute a violation of this code. (1972 Code, sec. 23.301; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.041)
Sec. 3.10.042 Issuance of permit; fee; expiration
Applications for curb cut permits shall be made to the building inspector upon forms prescribed by said official and shall be accompanied by a permit fee. Said permit fee
shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. Inspection of work shall be performed prior to
the pouring of concrete and after concrete has been set, to assure all building code requirements have been met. Permits shall expire six (6) months from the date of
issuance. If work to be done was not completed within the six-month period of time, a new permit must be obtained along with payment of an additional permit fee. If the
work was begun without having first obtained a curb cut permit, the permit fee will be double the set amount. (Ordinance 05-027, sec. 23.302, adopted 8/29/05; 2008
Code, sec. 3.10.042; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.10.043 Removal and replacement of curb
No permit shall be issued for any curb cut which does not prescribe that it shall be made by removing all of the curb at any place in question, from expansion joint to
expansion joint, and provide for the replacement anew of that portion of the curb removed between such expansion joints as may be required in connection with the
construction work involved in each such case for which a permit has been obtained. (1972 Code, sec. 23.303; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.043)
Sec. 3.10.044 Driveway openings
Whenever any curb cut permit is applied for and granted for the purpose, in whole or in part, for the construction or opening up of any kind of a driveway, drive or
entrance whatever, such permit shall prescribe, and the permittee shall build, a solid concrete apron or entryway from the back of the curb removed or edge of the street
back to the property line of the lot or premises involved. (1972 Code, sec. 23.304; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.044)
Secs. 3.10.045–3.10.080 Reserved
Division 3. Trench Excavations*
Sec. 3.10.081 Barricades and lights
(a) Prior to the commencement of trench excavations in any public street, alley or easement, during the period of construction up to and including the completion of
the surface pavement, adequate, substantial barricades shall be placed by the utility board, firm, or contractor, for the protection of the traveling public. In all cases, such
barricades shall be lighted prior to nightfall and continuously lighted throughout the hours of darkness.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/349
(b) In instances where single barricades are used at terminal points of a utility trench, at least two lights shall be placed to insure lighting of the barricade and trench in
the event of failure of one light.
(c) In the case of utility trenches in which work is being performed by a utility board or by a contractor responsible for all trench work, including backfill and street
paving, barricades shall be maintained until pavement of the utility trench has been completed.
(d) In the case of utility trenches cut by others wherein the city agrees to perform the paving required, the utility board or contractor shall maintain barricades on the
trench until the street pavement has been completed by the city.
(e) In no case shall any utility trench be partially completed and barricades removed.
(1972 Code, sec. 23.601; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.081)
Sec. 3.10.082 Cutting of surface
(a) Asphalt or concrete. Cuts made in asphalt or concrete shall follow neat lines, and the surface cut shall be at least six inches wider than the proposed width of the
trench to be excavated. Such cuts shall be made along neat, straight lines in asphalt pavement with electricity-driven or pneumatic asphalt cutters, and the initial cut of at
least 1-1/2" depth in concrete with concrete saws. Only hand-held devices shall be used for breaking out the pavement material.
(b) Gravel. No special provisions with regard to surface cuts are required in gravel surfaced streets.
(c) Brick. Brick pavement shall be removed at least 6" wider than the proposed trench to be excavated.
(1972 Code, sec. 23.602; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.082)
Sec. 3.10.083 Backfill material and methods
(a) Backfill around pipe or conduit. After pipe or conduit has been placed in the trench, material obtained from the trench excavation or from other sources, as may be
specified by the agency installing the utility, shall be thoroughly compacted around the pipe. The material shall be placed in lifts not exceeding 8" loose measure and
thoroughly worked and compacted to a depth over the pipe specified by the agency involved, but not to exceed 12".
(b) Trench backfill materials. Trench backfill shall consist of material excavated from the trench, except that, should such material prove to be unsuitable for backfill as
determined by the city engineer or other designated city official, it shall be removed from the site and the trench shall be backfilled by one of the following:
(1) With flexible base material conforming to current state department of transportation specifications.
(2) With approved pit run sand free from roots, stone larger than three inches in any one dimension, vegetation, or other foreign matter.
(3) With caliche base material meeting the following specifications:
(A) The caliche base material shall be obtained from approved sources. It shall consist of argillaceous limestone, calcareous or calcareous clay
particles, with stone, conglomerate, gravel, sand or other granular materials. All the acceptable material shall be screened, and the oversize may be
crushed and returned to the screened material in such manner that a uniform product will be produced. The material shall have an abrasion of not more
than forty (40) when subjected to the Los Angeles Abrasion Test (AASHO T-96). The material shall be well-graded, and when properly slaked and tested
by standard laboratory methods shall meet the following requirements:
Retained on 2" screen: 0%.
Retained on 1" screen: 5% - 20%.
Retained on 1/2" screen: 15% - 35%.
Retained on 1/4" screen: 30% - 75%.
Retained on 40-mesh sieve: 60% - 85%.
(B) The material passing the 1/4-inch screen shall be known as “binder” and that portion of the binder material passing the 40-mesh sieve shall be
known as “soil binder” and shall meet the following requirements:
(i) The liquid limit shall not exceed 45.
(ii) The plasticity shrinkage shall not exceed 15.
(iii) The linear shrinkage shall not exceed 8.5%. (Note: The linear shrinkage shall be calculated from volumetric shrinkage of the liquid limit.)
(c) Compaction. Compaction of backfill is to be accomplished by one or more of the following methods:
(1) Backfill shall be introduced in lifts not exceeding twelve (12) inches loose measure, and if dry shall be wetted uniformly to the moisture content required
to obtain the density specified below, and compacted by means of pneumatic or mechanical tampers.
(2) Where the material is suitable for compacting with a ditch tamping machine, and the depth of the backfill to be tamped does not exceed five (5) feet,
then such a machine having a 500 lb. 12" square tamper capable of developing 4000 foot-pounds at full stroke may be used. The backfill material shall
contain adequate moisture to obtain the uniform density.
(3) Trenches requiring backfill material to a total depth in excess of five (5) feet shall be backfilled by use of the jetting method in combination with the use
of either pneumatic or mechanical tampers, or a ditch tamping machine.
(A) The portion of the backfill exceeding five (5) feet in depth from the surface shall be compacted by jetting with water introduced through a hose and
pipe at sufficient pressure and volume to cause complete subsidence of the backfill and develop freestanding water at the surface.
(B) The portion of the backfill within five (5) feet of the surface of the trench may be compacted by the same method and the final compaction to
specified density shall then be obtained by the use of the ditch tamping machine as described above.
(1972 Code, sec. 23.603; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.083)
Sec. 3.10.084 Backfill density
Test: Backfill shall be compacted to an apparent dry density of the total material of not less than 90% of the maximum dry density. (1972 Code, sec. 23.604; 2008 Code,
sec. 3.10.084)
Sec. 3.10.085 Base materials
(a) The replacement of base materials as described below shall not be started until the inspector assigned to the project or location of the trench cut has approved the
backfill on which it is to be placed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/349
(b) Base for asphalt, concrete or brick pavements shall consist of not less than twelve-inch compacted flexible crushed stone base conforming to state department of
transportation specification 242 or 248 and stabilized thoroughly throughout with two sacks of Portland cement per cubic yard. In lieu of the stabilized base, 1500 lb.
graded aggregate transit mix concrete having a thickness of not less than eight (8) inches may be used.
(c) Should the existing base consist of cement stabilized material of more than twelve (12) inches in depth, then the new base shall be of the same depth as that
existing.
(d) Should the existing base consist of graded aggregate concrete, then 2500 lb. graded aggregate transit mix concrete shall be placed to the same depth as the
existing pavement base or to a depth of eight (8) inches, whichever is greater.
(1972 Code, sec. 23.605; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.085)
Sec. 3.10.086 Replacement of asphalt pavement
(a) Asphalt surfacing material shall consist of material equal in type and depth to the existing street surface, but in no case less than one inch in thickness. Such
surfacing materials shall be placed and compacted in accordance with approved practice and in accordance with the number of layers and grading of asphaltic materials
to produce a thoroughly compacted surface and shall be finished to the same grade as the existing street. A tack coat of RC-2 oil of not more than 9.100 gallons per
square yard shall be used if necessary.
(b) Should the surface of the pavement adjacent to the cut be of a different type of asphalt from under courses of asphalt, then the required depth of the pavement for
the trench surfacing may be of the same type as the surface course of the abutting pavement, excluding, of course, seal coat or single course penetration surface.
(1972 Code, sec. 23.606; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.086)
Sec. 3.10.087 Replacement of concrete or brick pavement
The replacement of this pavement shall consist of 2500 lb. graded aggregate transit mix concrete to the same depth as existing pavement or to a depth of eight (8)
inches, whichever is greater, and shall be finished to the same grade as the existing street. (1972 Code, sec. 23.607; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.087)
Sec. 3.10.088 Surfacing of gravel streets
Trenches in gravel streets shall be surfaced with not less than eight (8) inches compacted flexible base conforming to state department of transportation specifications,
1961, item 242, compacted to density specified in paragraph 1-C-1, or current equivalent specifications, and finished off to the grade of the existing street by compaction
with a pneumatic or mechanical tamper, and a vibrating roller, or a flat wheel roller of not less than five (5) tons' capacity. (1972 Code, sec. 23.608; 2008 Code, sec.
3.10.088)
Sec. 3.10.089 Unimproved streets
(a) Trench backfill.
(1) Backfill around pipe or conduit. The requirements for backfill around pipe or conduit in trenches in unimproved streets shall be specified in paragraph VB-
1, 1961 specifications [of the state department of transportation], or current equivalent.
(2) Trench backfill materials. Trench backfill shall consist of material excavated from the trench.
(b) Compaction of backfill. Compaction of backfill in unimproved streets shall be accomplished by one or more of the methods set forth in section V-B-3, 1961
specifications, or current equivalent.
(c) Surface. The surface of the compacted backfill shall be worked and bladed to the adjacent street grade.
(1972 Code, sec. 23.609; 2008 Code, sec. 3.10.089)
ARTICLE 3.11 RESIDENTIAL TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS AND CONSTRUCTION WASTE RECEPTACLES
Sec. 3.11.001 Purpose
The following regulations have been adopted to ensure that placement of portable temporary storage units complies with the health, safety, and welfare objectives of the
city, and to preserve the aesthetic value of its residential neighborhoods. (Ordinance 09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.001)
Sec. 3.11.002 Definitions
Applicant. The person that owns, rents, occupies, or controls the residential property and obtains the required permit for a portable temporary storage unit.
Supplier. The company or vendor which supplies the temporary portable storage unit to the residential property.
Temporary portable storage unit. A transportable unit designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials, household goods, and other such
materials for use on a limited basis only on residential property. Job trailers sited in conjunction with a building project shall not be regulated by this article.
(Ordinance 09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.002)
Sec. 3.11.003 Penalty
Any person, persons, firm, or corporation violating any provision, amendment or supplement of this article, or failing to obey any lawful order of the building official or
designee issued in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a penalty of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every day during which such violation of any provision, amendment, or supplement of this article
occurs, or each and every day during which there is a failure to obey any lawful order of the building official or designee, may be deemed a separate offense. (Ordinance
09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.009)
Sec. 3.11.004 Permit required
(a) Prior to or within forty-eight (48) hours following the initial delivery of the portable temporary storage unit, the applicant or the supplier shall apply for a permit in the
community development office.
(b) The permit shall be obtained by:
(1) Completing the temporary portable storage unit permit application;
(2) Presenting an active permit for that property if the portable on-demand storage unit is to be used for the storage of building materials;
(3) Payment of a permit fee as established in the fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time;
and
(4) Obtaining written approval of the permit by the building official, or designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/349
(c) The application shall contain the name of the applicant to whom the portable temporary storage unit is supplied, whether the person owns, rents, occupies, or
controls the property; the address at which the unit will be placed; the delivery date and removal date; active building permit number, if applicable; and a sketch depicting
the location and placement of the unit.
(d) The effective date of the permit shall be the date of the building official's or designee's signature.
(Ordinance 09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 3.11.005 Duration of use of storage unit
(a) Permits shall be granted for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days including the days of delivery and removal. No more than two (2) permits shall be issued within
any 12-month period, and a minimum of fifteen (15) days shall elapse between the end of one (1) permit period and the beginning of another.
(b) In the event of fire, tornado, or natural disaster, or other extraordinary event causing substantial damage to the primary residential structure, the property owner
may apply to the city for permission to extend the time that a portable temporary storage unit may be located as a temporary structure on the property. Application for
such extended duration shall be made in writing and filed with the community development office, and shall give sufficient information to determine whether such
extended duration should be granted. The building official shall determine whether or not to grant such extended duration and the length of such extension. In the event
of an adverse decision by the building official, the applicant may appeal such decision to the board of adjustment.
(Ordinance 09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.004)
Sec. 3.11.006 Location of storage units
(a) Portable temporary storage units are prohibited from being placed on a public street, road, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way.
(b) The unit shall be placed only on a hard-surfaced driveway or parking area, and the required number of parking spaces in each single-family zoning district shall at
all times be maintained.
(c) Such unit shall not exceed eight feet six inches (8'6") in height, ten feet (10') in width, or twenty feet (20') in length.
(Ordinance 09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.005)
Sec. 3.11.007 Number of storage units
No more than one (1) portable temporary storage unit may be located on a residentially zoned property at one time. In the case of a two-family or multifamily dwelling, no
more than one unit per address shall be permitted. (Ordinance 09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.006)
Sec. 3.11.008 Use and maintenance of storage units
(a) No portable temporary storage unit shall be used as a dwelling unit, or to store solid waste, construction debris, demolition debris, recyclable materials, business
inventory, commercial goods, goods for property other than at the residential property where the unit is located (i.e., used for retail sales), or any illegal or hazardous
material. Upon reasonable notice to the applicant, the city may inspect the contents of any portable temporary storage unit at any reasonable time to ensure that it is not
being used to store said materials. At no time shall a portable temporary storage unit be used for any of these purposes.
(b) The applicant, as well as the supplier, shall be responsible for ensuring that the unit is maintained in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration,
weathering, discoloration, graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing, or other holes or breaks at all times.
(c) All portable temporary storage units must be brought into compliance with this article by October 31, 2009.
(Ordinance 09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.007)
Sec. 3.11.009 Construction waste receptacles
Construction waste receptacles may be located on residential property in conjunction with a valid building permit for a building or site improvement project, or for home
improvement projects that do not require a building permit such as roof, siding, or window replacement. No more than one (1) construction waste receptacle may be
located on a single-family residential property at one time. In the case of a two-family or multifamily dwelling, no more than one unit per address shall be permitted. The
receptacle may be placed on a hard-surfaced drive or parking area, and may remain on-site only during active construction or improvements. All portable temporary
storage units must be brought into compliance with this article by October 31, 2009. (Ordinance 09-051, sec. 1, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 3.11.008)
ARTICLE 3.12 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS
Sec. 3.12.001 Definitions
Applicable building codes. Any and all building codes which are applicable to the particular condition or component of a structure or building which is being addressed.
Building. Any structure used, or intended for, supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy and shall include:
(1) Any structure classified as a “building” pursuant to section 202 of the International Building Code, adopted by section 3.02.051 of this code; and
(2) A dwelling.
Building codes. The technical building codes adopted pursuant to article 3.02 technical and construction codes and standards of this code.
Dwelling. A building designed or intended for human habitation and shall include those structures that are classified as a “dwelling” under section 202 of the International
Building Code adopted by section 3.02.051 of this code and all structures described in, and referred to, in section 310.1 of the International Building Code adopted by
section 3.02.051 of this code.
Owner. The person or firm that owns a building or structure shall include any person that has legal or equitable interest in the building or structure. Each owner of a
building or structure shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with all provisions of this article. It shall not be a defense to prosecution or any other
sanctions or the use of the city's remedies under this article if a joint owner is not prosecuted, sanctioned or required to perform remediation or assessed penalties
and/or expenses.
Structure. Any improvement which is built, constructed or located on real property other than a dwelling or building and shall include any fence, shed, or awning.
Sec. 3.12.002 Buildings and structures regulated
The following buildings or structures, regardless of their date of construction, are subject to the regulations in this article and may be referred to in this article by the titles
set forth in subsection (1), (2) and (3) below:
(1) Substandard building or structure. Any building or structure that is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation or a hazard to public health,
safety, or welfare. A building or structure is presumed to be a substandard building or structure if it does not meet the following minimum standards:
(A) A dwelling must have an adequate water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower, kitchen sink, hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures, as
required by the applicable building codes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/349
(B) A dwelling must have adequate heating facilities and ventilating equipment.
(C) A dwelling must have lighting that is properly installed and that is operating in accordance with any applicable building codes.
(D) All electrical wiring in any building or structure must be installed and operating in accordance with all applicable building codes.
(E) A dwelling must not have dampness in any portion used, or constructed for use, as a human habitation.
(F) Buildings and structures must be free of hazardous or unsanitary items or conditions including any accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead
organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, stagnant water or conditions likely to harbor or promote the breeding or infestation of insects, snakes, vermin or
rodents.
(G) Buildings and structures and components thereof must be maintained in accordance with all applicable building codes, including, without
limitation, the following codes adopted under article 3.02 technical and construction codes and standards of this code: the International Building Code,
the International Residential Code, the International Existing Building Code, the International Mechanical Code, the National Electrical Code, the
International Commercial Energy Code, the International Plumbing Code, the International Property Maintenance Code; and the International Fire Code
as adopted under article 5.04 fire code of this code.
(H) Dwellings must be properly connected to the city's sanitary sewer system unless they are connected to an on-site sewer system which has been
approved by the city's health department.
(I) A building or structure with a water closet, lavatory, bathtub, shower, or clothes washer or dishwasher must be properly connected to the city's
sanitary sewer system unless they are connected to an on-site sewer system which has been approved by the city's health inspector.
(J) A building must not have garbage, rubbish or other unsightly material in or around its location.
(K) A building must have a foundation which is adequate to support the building and loads imposed on the foundation in a safe manner.
(L) A building must have flooring and floor supports of sufficient size, structure and condition to carry loads imposed in a safe manner.
(M) The walls, partitions or other vertical support members of a building or structure must be adequate to carry the imposed loads in a safe manner
and support the roof of the building or structure; and must not be split, must not lean, must not list or must not buckle.
(N) The ceilings, roofs, and ceiling and roof supports of a building or structure must be of sufficient size, structure and condition to carry imposed
loads in a safe manner and must not sag, split or buckle.
(O) Chimneys and ventilation systems for fireplaces and stoves must be of sufficient size, structure and condition to effectively remove smoke and
other gases created from combustion in the fireplace or stove in a safe manner and must be sufficiently insulated so that they do not create a risk or
hazard of fire to adjacent structures within the building in which they are installed.
(P) Chimneys and ventilation systems for fireplaces and stoves and fireplaces must have sufficient strength, structure and condition to carry the
structural loads imposed on them in a safe manner.
(Q) All plumbing in any building or structure shall be installed and in a condition that complies with the International Plumbing Code adopted pursuant
to article 3.02 technical and construction codes and standards of this code.
(R) All mechanical systems in a building or structure shall be installed in a condition that complies with the International Mechanical Code adopted
pursuant to article 3.02 technical and construction codes and standards of this code.
(S) All buildings shall have effective waterproofing on exterior walls, roofs, foundations or floors. The following are examples of ineffective
waterproofing: deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster on exterior walls or foundations, broken or missing exterior windows or doors, lack of paint on
exterior walls, broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings.
(T) All buildings and structures shall be free of combustible waste or vegetation or from any substance which could be an accelerant to a fire or likely
to cause an explosion unless the substance which could accelerate a fire or cause an explosion is properly stored in accordance with applicable law.
(U) All buildings must have adequate exits as required by applicable building codes.
(V) When any portion of a building is used as a living or sleeping quarters or a place where food is cooked for human consumption, such building
shall comply with the building codes applicable to dwellings with respect to its plumbing, electrical and heating systems.
(W) A building that is damaged by fire, windstorm, hail, or acts of vandalism shall be immediately secured to avoid it being an unsecured building or
structure or a dangerous building or structure and work to bring the building or structure into compliance with the regulations of this article must be
commenced within 30 days unless a longer time period is permitted by the building official, code enforcement official or fire code official.
(2) Unsecured building or structure. Any building or structure that, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other
invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of
harborage or could be entered or used by children.
(3) Dangerous building or structure. Any building or structure that is boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(A) The building or structure constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building or structure is inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building in the manner described in
subsection (2) unsecured building or structure.
Sec. 3.12.003 Offenses; penalty
(a) Maintaining a nuisance. A substandard building or structure, an unsecured building or structure or a dangerous building or structure, as defined by section
3.12.002 is hereby declared a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a building or a structure to allow it to exist in a condition in which it is a substandard building
or structure, an unsecured building or structure or a dangerous building or structure, as defined by section 3.12.002.
(b) Failure to comply with city council order. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to timely comply with an order of the city council entered pursuant to section
3.12.007, requiring the vacation, relocation of occupants, securing, repair, removal or demolition of a substandard building or structure, an unsecured building or
structure or a dangerous building or structure as defined by section 3.12.002.
(c) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of section 3.12.002 commits an offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
Sec. 3.12.004 City authority to require remediation
The city may require the vacation, relocation or occupants, securing, repair, removal or demolition of a substandard building or structure, an unsecured building or
structure or a dangerous building or structure as defined by section 3.12.002.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/349
Sec. 3.12.005 Complaint and notice
(a) Complaint. The building official, code enforcement official or fire code official of the city shall prepare a written complaint with respect to any building or structure
that is a substandard building or structure, an unsecured building or structure or a dangerous building or structure, as defined by section 3.12.002. The complaint shall
contain the following:
(1) Identification of the building or structure (which shall not require a legal description of the property);
(2) A description of the manner in which the building or structure is a substandard building or structure, an unsecured building or structure or a dangerous
building or structure, as defined by section 3.12.002;
(3) The name, office address and phone number of the building official, code enforcement official or fire code official that can be contacted during regular
office hours to discuss the complaint;
(4) Direction to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee that they must by either: (A) remedy the violations in the complaint by a date certain; or (B) present the
building official, code enforcement official or fire code official with a detailed plan stating the manner in which each violation will be remedied and the time by
which all work necessary to remedy the violations will be completed, which plan shall be presented to the city manager or code enforcement officer by a date
certain specified in the complaint;
(5) A statement that a public hearing will be held in accordance with section 3.12.006 herein, if the owner fails to comply with subsection (4) above, on or
before the deadlines stated therein or if the owner or lienholder or mortgagee desires to contest the allegations in the complaint;
(6) The date, time and place of the public hearing.
(b) Notice of the complaint and hearing. The complaint shall be mailed to the owner and any lienholder or mortgagee of the building or structure. The following
procedures shall govern the mailing of such notice.
(1) Method of mailing. The complaint and notice of hearing shall be mailed to the owner and any lienholder or mortgagee of the building or structure by
certified mail with return receipt requested, delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service or by personal delivery to the
owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building or structure. If a notice or complaint is mailed in accordance with this subsection to a property owner,
lienholder, mortgagee, or registered agent and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not
affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
Sec. 3.12.006 Public hearing; procedure
(a) Hearing before city council. The public hearing on the complaint may be held before the city council.
(b) Evidence; burden of proof. At the public hearing on a complaint, the city council shall consider any verbal or written evidence presented by the building official,
code enforcement official, or fire code official and by the owner, lienholder or mortgagee; however, the presentation of evidence shall be subject to any procedural rules
applicable to public hearings or proceedings before the city council. In the public hearing the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the
scope of any work that may be required to comply with the ordinance and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
Sec. 3.12.007 Notice of city council's order
Notice of the city council's order shall be given as follows:
(1) It shall be promptly mailed to the owner and any lienholder or mortgagee of the building or structure by certified mail with return receipt requested,
delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service or by personal delivery to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the
building or structure.
(2) A copy of the order shall be filed with the city secretary within 10 days after the date the order is issued.
(3) A notice shall be published in a newspaper of record in the city within 10 days after the date the order is issued. The published notice shall state the
street address or legal description of the property, the date of the public hearing, a brief statement of the results of the order and instructions on where a
complete copy of the order may be obtained.
Sec. 3.12.008 Remediation by the city; civil penalty
(a) Securing the building or structure. If the building or structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within
the allotted time in the city council's order, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or relocate the occupants at its own expense.
(b) Repairing the certain buildings. If the building is a residential building with 10 or fewer dwelling units and is not repaired within the allotted time in the city council's
order, the city may repair the building and assess the expenses on the land on which the building or structure stands or to which it is attached. The city may repair the
building only to the extent necessary to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards set forth in this article. The repairs may not improve the building to the
extent that the building exceeds those minimum housing standards.
(c) Civil penalty. If the building or structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the allotted time in the
city council's order, the city may assess a civil penalty against the property owner for failure to repair, remove, or demolish the building or structure and provide for that
assessment, the mode and manner of giving notice, and the means of recovering the assessment. The civil penalty shall only be imposed if the owner does not
complete the action required by the city council's order within the time period specified in such order. Any civil penalty shall be specified in the city council's order but
shall not to exceed $1,000.00 a day for each violation or, if the owner shows that the property is the owner's lawful homestead, in an amount not to exceed $10.00 a day
for each violation, if the city council finds:
(1) That the property owner was notified of the requirements of this article and the owner's need to comply with the requirements; and
(2) After notification, the property owner committed an act in violation of this article or failed to take an action necessary for compliance with this article.
Sec. 3.12.009 Additional authority to secure certain buildings or structures
(a) Authority to secure. The city may secure a substandard building or structure, an unsecured building or structure or a dangerous building or structure, as defined by
section 3.12.002 and the building or structure is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building or structure.
(b) Notice to owner. Before the 11th day after the date the building or structure is secured, the city will give notice to the owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-day period in a newspaper of record in the city if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's
post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building or structure if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is
unknown.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/349
(c) Contents of notice. The notice will contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building or structure and the property on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the city standards that is present at the building or structure;
(3) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building or structure; and
(4) An explanation of the owner's right to request a hearing before the city council about any matter relating to the municipality's securing of the building or
structure.
(d) Hearing. The city will conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter relating to the city's securing of
the building or structure if, within 30 days after the date the city secures the building or structure, the owner files with the city secretary a written request for the hearing.
The city shall conduct the hearing within 20 days after the date the request is filed.
(e) Assessment of expenses as lien. The city shall have the authority to assess expenses under this section.
(f) Authority to secure is cumulative. The authority granted to the city by this section is in addition to the city's authority to require remediation by the owner, lienholder
or mortgagee pursuant to other provisions of this article or its authority to impose civil penalties or criminal sanctions.
(Ordinance 2017-74 adopted 12/5/17)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 FRANCHISES
Sec. 4.02.001 Inalienability of public property
The ownership, right of control and use of the streets, highways, alleyways, parks, public places and all other real property of the city is hereby declared to be inalienable
by the city, except by ordinances passed by vote of a majority of the council as hereinafter provided, and no franchise or easement involving the right to use the same,
either along, across, over or under the same, shall ever be valid, unless expressly granted and exercised in compliance with the terms hereof, and of the ordinances
granting such use. No act or omission of the city, its council, officers or agents shall be construed to confer or extend by estoppel or indirection any right, franchise or
easement not expressly granted by ordinance. (1972 Code, sec. 28.101; 2008 Code, sec. 4.02.001)
Sec. 4.02.002 Statutory powers of city as to public utilities
The statutory powers as to public utilities granted by Vernon's Annotated Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, title 28, Cities, Towns and Villages, chapter 10, Public Utilities,
articles 1106 through 1132, inclusive, are hereby recognized and expressly declared to embody the policy and power of the city with respect to public utilities, in addition
to the other powers adopted by this article. (1972 Code, sec. 28.102; 2008 Code, sec. 4.02.002)
Sec. 4.02.003 Power to grant franchises for use and occupancy of public property
The city shall have the power, subject to the terms and provisions hereof, by ordinance, to confer upon a person, firm, or corporation the franchise or right to use the
property of the city, as defined in section 4.02.001, for the purpose of furnishing to the public any general public service, including, without limitation, however, heat, light,
power, telephone service, refrigeration, steam, and the carrying of passengers for hire whether over designated routes or not, within the city, over the streets, highway
and property of the city, or for any other purpose, whereby a general service is to be furnished to the public for compensation or hire, to be paid to the franchise holder,
whereby a right to, in part, appropriate or use the streets, highways or other property of the city is necessary or proper. The provisions hereof with reference to public
utilities shall not apply to those owned by the city. (1972 Code, sec. 28.201; 2008 Code, sec. 4.02.003)
Sec. 4.02.004 Limitations
(a) No perpetual, exclusive franchise or privilege shall ever be granted, nor a franchise nor a privilege to commence at any time after six months subsequent to the
taking effect of the ordinance granting the same. No franchise or privilege shall be extended directly or indirectly beyond the term originally fixed by the ordinance
granting the same.
(b) An application for the renewal of a franchise or the granting of a new one may be considered and acted upon prior to the expiration date of the current franchise so
that the new franchise may take effect upon the expiration date of the other; provided, however, that the procedure prescribed herein for the original granting of such
franchise is followed in all particulars.
(1972 Code, sec. 28.202; 2008 Code, sec. 4.02.004)
Sec. 4.02.005 Power of city to regulate charges and service
The city shall have the right and power, acting through the council, to determine, fix and regulate the charges, fares or rates of any person, firm or corporation enjoying
or that may enjoy a franchise or exercise any other public privilege in the city and to prescribe the kind of service to be furnished by such person, firm or corporation, and
the manner in which it shall be rendered, and from time to time to alter or change such rules, regulations and compensation. The city shall have the power and authority
to require extensions, betterments and improvements of the service that may be rendered by the holder of a franchise and shall likewise have the power to prevent the
making of unnecessary or unprofitable extensions. (1972 Code, sec. 28.203; 2008 Code, sec. 4.02.005)
Sec. 4.02.006 Conditions
Each franchise granted by the council shall provide:
(1) For the compensation to be paid to the city for the use and occupancy of the public property, which said compensation may be a fixed fee, or may be
measured by gross receipts or some other method mutually agreeable to the parties. Such compensation may be changed from time to time by mutual
consent;
(2) For the length of time that such franchise shall continue in effect; provided, however, that no perpetual franchise shall be granted;
(3) That no franchise shall be assigned without the written consent of the council, which consent shall be evidenced by a resolution or an ordinance;
(4) That the procedure to be followed in ordering the making of extensions, betterments, or permanent improvements of the service by the city or
considering applications by the grantee for permission to make extensions, enlargement or betterments be prescribed;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/349
(5) That no rate of return shall exceed a fair return upon the fair value of the property used and useful in rendering the public service;
(6) Each franchise shall provide for a method of accounting applicable to the particular business conducted by the grantee;
(7) Adequate provision shall be made in each franchise for the maintenance of sufficient depreciation reserves so that the integrity of the property used and
useful in rendering the public service may be maintained. Each franchise shall specify the purposes for which the depreciation reserves may be used. In
determining the amount and character of reserves required, it shall be proper to resort to current common practices applicable to the particular utility
concerned;
(8) Each franchise shall provide for a recapture provision whereby the city shall have the right to cancel the franchise and purchase the property of the
franchise holder at a price to be determined according to the formula or method agreed to be determined according to the formula or method agreed upon in
the franchise when granted [sic];
(9) That the grantee may be required, at the grantee's expense, to conform its installations in the streets, alleys, and public ways to any changes of grade
made by the city.
(1972 Code, sec. 28.204; 2008 Code, sec. 4.02.006)
Sec. 4.02.007 Investigations and hearings
(a) The council shall have full power to examine or cause to be examined at any time, and at all times, the books, papers and records of franchise holders, and to take
testimony and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, and records and to examine witnesses under oath and under such rules and
regulations as it may adopt, and should any franchise holder refuse to permit the inspection of such books, papers or records by the council or by any one designated by
it to make such inspection, or fail to produce the same when notified to do so by the council, or should any officer, agent or employee of such franchise holder refuse to
give testimony before the council, the council shall have the power by ordinance to declare the franchise or privilege enjoyed by such person, firm or corporation in
default, and terminated.
(b) The council shall have the power to call a public hearing, giving reasonable notice to the holder of a franchise, to determine whether or not an application to
increase rates shall be granted or to determine whether or not the rates currently charged by any holder of a franchise for the service rendered are excessive. In that
connection the council shall have full power to examine the books, papers and records of the franchise holder, and to compel the attendance of all witnesses deemed
necessary for the ascertainment of the facts in connection with said inquiry. Failure to obey any subpoena to appear as a witness shall be punishable by the council for
contempt by any appropriate proceedings permitted by law.
(1972 Code, sec. 28.205; 2008 Code, sec. 4.02.007)
ARTICLE 4.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.03.001 Penalty
Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day shall constitute a separate offense. (1972 Code,
sec. 13.302; 2008 Code, sec. 4.03.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 4.03.002–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. License and Permit Fees*
Sec. 4.03.031 Package stores and wine and beer retailers
A permit fee equal in amount to exactly one-half of that levied by the state is hereby levied upon all package stores and upon all wine and beer retailers located within
the limits of the city. The permit fee shall be levied pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code, 11.01, 11.31, 11.38, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated
(V.T.C.A.). (This section does not apply to wine and beer retailer's permits, except those for railway cars or excursion boats, or to wine and beer retailer's off-premises
permits.) (1972 Code, sec. 13.101; 2008 Code, sec. 4.03.031)
Sec. 4.03.032 Mixed beverage on-premises permit
An annual permit renewal fee equal in an amount of exactly one-half of that levied by the state is hereby levied upon all mixed beverage permits (which includes the sale
of wine, beer, ale, and malt liquor for consumption on the licensed premises) after the three-year period following the issuance of the permit. This fee is levied pursuant
to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code, 11.38, 28.01 and 28.02, V.T.C.A. (1972 Code, sec. 13.102; 2008 Code, sec. 4.03.032)
Sec. 4.03.033 Manufacture, distribution or sale of beer
A license fee and annual license renewal fee in the amount of exactly one-half of that levied by the state is hereby levied upon all licensed by the state to manufacture,
distribute or sell beer (except a temporary or agent's beer license) within the city. These fees are levied pursuant to the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code,
61.31, 61.36, V.T.C.A. (1972 Code, sec. 13.103; 2008 Code, sec. 4.03.033)
Sec. 4.03.034 Place and time of payment
All original permit fees and license fees shall be paid to the development department at city hall. All renewal fees shall be due to the development department at city hall
on or before the expiration of the anniversary date of issuance. (1972 Code, sec. 13.104; 2008 Code, sec. 4.03.034)
Sec. 4.03.035 Other fees and taxes
The city shall not levy or collect any other fees or taxes from the above except general ad valorem taxes, the hotel occupancy tax levied under chapter 63, Acts of the
59th Legislature, Regular Session, 1965, as amended (V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 351), and the local sales and use tax levied under the Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act
(title 3 of the Tax Code). (1972 Code, sec. 13.201; 2008 Code, sec. 4.03.035)
Sec. 4.03.036 Failure to pay fee
It shall be an offense of this article to sell an alcoholic beverage without having first paid the permit fee or license fee set out above. (1972 Code, sec. 13.301; 2008
Code, sec. 4.03.036)
ARTICLE 4.04 BURGLAR ALARMS*
Sec. 4.04.001 Purpose
The city council hereby legislatively finds that there have been a great number of false burglar alarms in the city each year, which not only costs the city thousands of
dollars in needless expense but greatly jeopardizes the public safety by frequently taking one or more police patrol units out of the general service. (1972 Code, sec.
27.101; 2008 Code, sec. 4.04.001)
Sec. 4.04.002 Fee for excessive false alarms
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/349
(a) The owner or occupant of any dwelling, business, or professional establishment shall incur a fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by
ordinance from time to time for any and all false alarms requiring response by a police officer, provided there have been at least five (5) prior false alarms within the
preceding consecutive twelve (12) months requiring a response by a police officer.
(b) No owner or occupant shall be assessed such a fee unless a response was actually made by a police officer of the city within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm
notification and it was determined from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false.
(1972 Code, sec. 27.102; Ordinance 95-05 adopted 1/3/95; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 4.04.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.04.003 Negligent false alarms
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any dwelling, business, or professional establishment in the city equipped with a burglar alarm system to sound a
false alarm thereon either knowingly or by negligence, or to permit a false alarm thereon to be sounded thereon by a spouse, companion, child, employee, customer,
invitee, or guest of such owner or occupant, either deliberately or through any negligent act or omission.
(b) “Negligence” is hereby defined to be the failure to exercise that degree of care that would be exercised by a person of ordinary prudence under the same or similar
circumstances. Failure to keep such system in proper repair and to keep same properly protected and supervised is included in this definition of “negligence.” No
negligence shall be found unless a response was actually made by a police officer of the city within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm notification and it was determined
from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false, and there have been at least five (5) prior false alarms within the preceding twelve
(12) months.
(c) Each violation hereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). Any such penalty assessed shall be in addition to any fees assessed under
this article.
(1972 Code, sec. 27.103; 2008 Code, sec. 4.04.003)
ARTICLE 4.05 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Definitions
Canvasser or solicitor. Any individual, whether a resident of the city or [not], traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or other type of conveyance, from place to
place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of personal property of any nature whatsoever to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or advertising matter as to such service or
whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, providing that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or
corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, vehicle or other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and/or advertising
matter and taking orders for such services or sales for future performance or delivery, and providing further that such definition shall include distributors of advertising
handbills, leaflets and similar papers.
Cause. Shall mean aid, direct, hire, encourage, permit, or allow.
Peddler. Any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to
house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting [any] goods, wares and merchandise whatever, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making
sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from any vehicle or conveyance, and further
provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article
shall be deemed a peddler, subject to the provisions of this article.
Person. Includes the singular and plural, and shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association, club, co-partnership or society, or any other
organization.
(1972 Code, sec. 22.102; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.001; Ordinance 2013-11-18-01 adopted 11/18/13)
Sec. 4.05.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this article or failing to observe any provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be fined in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code, and each and every day or fraction of a day during which this article, or any [part] thereof, shall
be violated, shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable as such. (1972 Code, sec. 22.114; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.003 Restrictions
(a) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any solicitors or canvassers of orders for services or merchandise, or for peddlers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of
merchandise to go in or upon the premises of any private residence in the city without a valid permit issued by the city, or go thereon with a permit prior to 10:00 a.m. or
after 6:00 p.m., or at any time on Sundays, unless previously requested to do so by the owner or occupant of said private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders
for the furnishing of any service or for the sale of goods, services, wares and merchandise, or for the purpose of disposing of, contracting for, or peddling the same, or to
distribute any printed or written advertising handbills, leaflets, or papers.
(b) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person engaged in any of the businesses described above to engage in such business in defiance of any notice exhibited by a
residence or business indicating that solicitors are not welcome or not invited.
(1972 Code, sec. 22.101; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.003; Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 1(b), adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.05.004 Soliciting and peddling from occupants of vehicles
(a) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for a person to stand on a traffic median, shoulder, improved shoulder, roadway, or sidewalk and solicit, peddle, or attempt to solicit
or peddle employment, business or charitable contributions from the occupants of any vehicle on a roadway, or to cause a person to stand on a traffic median, shoulder,
improved shoulder, roadway, or sidewalk and solicit, peddle, or attempt to solicit or peddle employment, business, or charitable contributions from the occupants of any
vehicle on a roadway, unless the solicitation is done in accordance with this section.
(b) Exemptions.
(1) A person seventeen (17) years of age or older may solicit or peddle employment, business or charitable contributions while standing on a traffic median,
shoulder, improved shoulder, roadway, or sidewalk from occupants of any vehicle on a roadway provided said person wears a florescent orange visibility vest,
does not impede traffic, enters or remains in a roadway only while the controlling traffic signal prohibits vehicle movement, and has obtained a permit to do
so, or who is a member of an organization which has obtained a permit to do so from the chief of police.
(2) Owners or publishers of newspapers will be responsible for periodically monitoring the activity of any such solicitors under the age of eighteen (18) who
solicit for the purpose of selling newspapers for that owner or publisher. Such monitoring shall be done by an agent or employee of the newspaper who is at
least twenty-one (21) years of age.
(3) The owner or publisher of any newspaper distributed pursuant to this subsection shall maintain at is sole expense insurance coverage:
(A) That is written by an insurance company with a A- or better rating by AM Best and that is submitted and licensed to do business in the state;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/349
(B) That is in full force and effect at any time sales and distributions are being conducted pursuant to this article;
(C) That provides one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of liability coverage per occurrence;
(D) That insures the newspaper and all persons who will be selling and distributing on its behalf;
(E) That names the city, its officers, employees, and elected representatives as additional insured;
(F) That provides that any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city shall apply in excess of and not contribute with it; and
(G) That is written on an occurrence basis.
The owner and publisher shall file and keep current a certificate of insurance signed by an agent authorized to bind covered indicating that the
owner and publisher has obtained the aforementioned insurance coverage, with the chief of police
(c) Parental consent. Any solicitor under the age of eighteen (18) who solicits for the purpose of selling newspapers for that owner or publisher must have the consent
of a parent or adult having custody of the child.
(Ordinance 02-002, secs. 1, 2, adopted 12/18/01; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.004; Ordinance 2013-11-18-01 adopted 11/18/13)
State law reference–Solicitation by pedestrians, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.007.
Secs. 4.05.005–4.05.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.05.041 Application
Applicants for permits and licenses under this article shall make written application to the secretary of the police chief of the city for a license or permit. Such application
shall show the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, and the description of the activity sought to be
licensed. Further information may be required, as determined by the chief of police, in order to investigate the applicant's business moral character. Two recent
photographs of the applicants shall be provided, one to be attached to the license or permit issued by the chief of police and one to remain in the files of the police
department. (1972 Code, sec. 22.103; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.041)
Sec. 4.05.042 Investigation
Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business moral character to be
made as he deems necessary, if any, for the protection of the public good. (1972 Code, sec. 22.104; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.042)
Sec. 4.05.043 Fee
The fees for a permit or license shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time, to cover the
cost of investigation. (1972 Code, sec. 22.105; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.043; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.044 Permit card
The chief of police shall issue to each licensee, at the time of delivery of his license, a card which shall contain the words “City of Leon Valley, Peddler or Solicitor Permit”
and the period for which the license is issued and the number of the license, in letters and figures easily discernable. Such permit shall, during the time such licensee is
engaged in soliciting, canvassing or peddling, be worn constantly by the licensee in front of his outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous. (1972 Code, sec.
22.106; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.044; Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 1(c), adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.05.045 Exhibition
Solicitors, canvassers, and peddlers of merchandise are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. (1972 Code, sec. 22.107; 2008 Code, sec.
4.05.045)
Sec. 4.05.046 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen soliciting, canvassing orders for services or merchandise, peddling, engaging as an
itinerant merchant or transient vendor of merchandise going upon the premises of any private residence in the city without a valid permit, and who is not known by such
officer to be duly licensed, or who is not wearing the required permit card, to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's license and to enforce the provisions of this article
against any person found to be violating the same. (1972 Code, sec. 22.108; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.046; Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 1(d), adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.05.047 Record of violations
The chief of police shall report to the city manager all convictions of violations of this article. The chief of police shall maintain a record of each license issued and record
the reports of violations therein. (1972 Code, sec. 22.109; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.047)
Sec. 4.05.048 Revocation or denial
(a) Permits and licenses shall be issued by the chief of police, provided the applicant has provided all necessary information under this article, even if the same is
immediately revoked under subsection (b) hereunder.
(b) Any permit or license issued under provisions of this article may be revoked by the chief of police, after notice, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser, or peddler, or itinerant
merchant, or transient vendor of merchandise;
(3) Any violation of this article;
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
(5) Conducting the business of soliciting, or canvassing, or peddling, in an unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
(1972 Code, sec. 22.110; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.048)
Sec. 4.05.049 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business nor sales under authority
and by order of law. Further, the license fee shall not apply to charitable, religious or nonprofit organizations which would otherwise be regulated by this article. (1972
Code, sec. 22.111; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.049; Ordinance 2013-11-18-01 adopted 11/18/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/349
Sec. 4.05.050 Registration of persons engaged in interstate commerce
(a) The provisions of this article pertaining to license fees shall not apply to persons engaged in interstate commerce as that term is herein defined; provided, however
that it shall be unlawful for persons engaged in interstate commerce to go from house to house or place to place in the city without having first registered with the city
secretary giving the following information:
(1) Name, home address and local address, if any, of the registrant.
(2) Name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, that he or she represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or
cleared.
(3) Nature of the articles or things which are to be sold or for which orders are to be solicited.
(4) Whether the registrant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or receive or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
(5) Period of time which the registrant wishes to solicit or sell in the city.
(b) The registrant, at the time of the registration, as herein provided for, shall submit for inspection of the police department written proof of his identity, which may be
in the form of an automobile operator's license or identification letter or card issued to the registrant by the person, firm or corporation for whom or through whom orders
are to be solicited or cleared, and pay a registration fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(c) The term “interstate commerce” means soliciting, selling, or taking orders for or offering to take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, photographs,
newspapers or magazines, or subscriptions of newspapers or magazines, which, at the time the order is taken, are in any foreign country, any federal territory or district,
or any state other than Texas, or will be produced in any foreign country, any federal territory or district, or any state other than Texas, and shipped or introduced into this
city in the fulfillment of such orders.
(1972 Code, sec. 22.112; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.050; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.05.051 Expiration; limitations on permit for soliciting from occupants of vehicles
(a) Expiration generally. All permits, with the exception of those issued under section 4.05.004, shall expire at 6:00 p.m. on the 120th day following the date of
issuance.
(b) Permit for soliciting from occupants of vehicles. Permits issued under section 4.05.004 may be issued to no person or organization more than once per calendar
year for a period of no more than two (2) consecutive days and for no hours other than those between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and one (1) hour before sunset.
(1972 Code, sec. 22.113; 2008 Code, sec. 4.05.051; Ordinance 2013-11-18-01 adopted 11/18/13)
ARTICLE 4.06 GARAGE SALES
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
Address. The street address, and for multifamily or duplex residences shall specify and be limited to the unit number.
Garage sale. The sale of personal property by the owner(s) thereof at his/her/their residence.
Resident. Someone actually residing at the address.
(1972 Code, sec. 27.201; 2008 Code, sec. 4.06.001)
Sec. 4.06.002 Penalty
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. (1972 Code, sec. 27.205; 2008 Code, sec. 4.06.002; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.06.003 Permit required; application; posting
Any person desiring to conduct a garage sale shall first obtain a permit from the police department. The applicant for such permit shall complete the form to be provided
by the police department. The application shall include the name and residence address of the applicant(s), the day or days of the sale, the hours of the sale, the street
address of the sale, and the last date that a garage sale was conducted at the same location and/or by the applicant(s). The permit shall be posted by the applicant in a
conspicuous place within the garage where the sale is being conducted or otherwise available for inspection by a city representative. (1972 Code, sec. 27.202; 2008
Code, sec. 4.06.003)
Sec. 4.06.004 Limitation on number of sales; hours of operation; permit fee
No more than two (2) garage sales may be conducted by the same applicant or at the same address during any consecutive twelve-month period. Sale hours are limited
to not earlier than 8:00 a.m. and not later than 6:00 p.m. All sale items must be owned by the applicants or residents and displayed within the yard. No items may be
placed on the sidewalk or front yard easement. A garage sale may not extend over more than three (3) consecutive days. Whether of one (1), two (2), or three (3) days'
duration, the sale shall constitute one sale. A nonrefundable permit fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time
shall be assessed at the time of application for the garage sale permit. (1972 Code, sec. 27.203; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 4.06.004; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.06.005 Signs
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to post or place any sign advertising a garage sale of any kind or character, at any time, on public property, whether belonging to
the city or any other agency or branch of government, whether owned in fee or easement therein, or by prescription or limitation.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private property, or any person acting for him or with his knowledge or permission, or consent, express or implied, to post
or place any sign advertising a garage sale in or on his property unless such sign or advertisement is of a size of four (4) square feet or less in area, or to place the same
within two (2) feet or less of the boundary of his property, or within two (2) feet or less of any public or private property, including public easements. No sign permit is
required.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private property, or any person acting for him or with his knowledge or permission, or consent, express or implied, to allow
to remain, for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours past the end of the permit period, any sign advertising a garage sale.
(1972 Code, sec. 27.204; 2008 Code, sec. 4.06.005)
ARTICLE 4.07 CARWASHES
Sec. 4.07.001 Definition
Carwash. Any event in which automobiles are washed and any money is collected, whether through donations or fees, regardless of whether the sponsor of the event is
a for-profit or nonprofit organization. (1972 Code, sec. 27.301; 2008 Code, sec. 4.07.001)
Sec. 4.07.002 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/349
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. (1972 Code, sec. 27.303; 2008 Code, sec. 4.07.002; Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.07.003 Location
No carwash shall be held within the city limits except on the premises of a business which has first obtained all appropriate permits from the city, including but not limited
to a certificate of occupancy for an automobile or vehicle laundry. (1972 Code, sec. 27.302; 2008 Code, sec. 4.07.003)
ARTICLE 4.08 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.08.001 Findings
The findings contained in the preamble of Ordinance 1483 are determined to be true and correct and are adopted as a part of this article. (1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 1.01;
2008 Code, sec. 4.08.001)
Sec. 4.08.002 Purpose and intent
It is the purpose of this article to regulate adult entertainment establishments to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult entertainment establishments within the city. The provisions of this article have neither
the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. (1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 1.02; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.002)
Sec. 4.08.003 Definitions
(a) For purposes of this article, the word “he” shall be defined to include the word “she.”
(b) Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section:
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where
the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment which as its principal business purpose offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or
more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other
visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. This does not include items used for
birth control or for prevention of sexually transmitted diseases.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult entertainment establishment.
(1) (A) An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult theater, adult motion picture theater, escort agency,
nude model business or sexual encounter center; and/or
(B) Any establishment whose principal business is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended
to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or whose employees or customers appear in a state of nudity.
(2) The term “adult entertainment” shall not be construed to include:
(A) Any business operated by or employing licensed psychologists, licensed physical therapists, registered nurses, or licensed athletic trainers;
(B) Any business operated by or employing licensed physicians or licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts;
(C) Any retail establishment whose principal business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customers and that does not exhibit merchandise
on live models; or
(D) Any activity conducted or sponsored by any state independent school district, licensed or accredited private school, or public or private college or
university.
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less
than ten (10) hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the business is an adult motel.
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depicting or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/349
Church. A building, whether situated within the city or not, in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with
such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
Customer. Any person who:
(1) Is allowed to enter an adult entertainment establishment in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity;
(2) Enters an adult entertainment establishment and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services
offered therein; or
(3) Is a member of and on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment operating as a private club.
Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of an adult entertainment establishment or who works in or about an adult entertainment
establishment and who receives compensation for such service or work from the operator or owner of the adult entertainment establishment or from the customers
therein.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to
privately perform a striptease for another person.
Escort agency. A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as its principal business purpose, for a fee, tip, or other
consideration.
Licensed day care center. A facility licensed by the state, whether situated with [within] the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or
supervision for more than six (6) children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator
of the facility, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment has been issued, as well as any and all individuals listed as applicants on
the application for a license.
Nude model business. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided or allowed to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or state of nudity.
(1) The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or
(2) A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast.
Operated or causes to be operated. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated an adult
entertainment establishment whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, licensee or manager of the establishment.
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
Principal. Over fifty percent (50%) of customers, volume of sales, stock in trade, display areas or presentation time in any three-month increment period beginning from
the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Stock in trade shall be measured with all titles or objects available on the premises for sale or rental, including those
that are identical, considered a separate title or object.
Regularly. Featuring, promoting or advertising a happening or occurrence on a recurring basis.
Residential district. A residentially zoned district as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city.
Residential use. A single-family, townhouse, duplex, mobile home or multiple-family use as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as its principal business purpose, offers, for any form of consideration, specified sexual activities.
Specified anatomical areas. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy or bestiality;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 2.01; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.003)
Secs. 4.08.004–4.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Enforcement
Sec. 4.08.031 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation, or agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense. (1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 6.01; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.031)
Sec. 4.08.032 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under sections 4.08.061, 4.08.101 and 4.08.133 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school licensed by the state; or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) Which has no sign or other advertising visible from the exterior of the structure indicating a nude person is available for viewing;
(B) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/349
(C) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under sections 4.08.061 and 4.08.101 that said item of descriptive, printed, film or video material offered for sale or rental:
(1) Taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value; and
(2) When taken as a whole does not appeal to the prurient interest in sex.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 6.02; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.032)
Secs. 4.08.033–4.08.060 Reserved
Division 3. License
Sec. 4.08.061 Required; fee; posting of sign
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to operate an adult entertainment establishment without a valid license issued by the city for the particular
type of business.
(b) All applications for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or
revised by ordinance from time to time. An application shall not be considered to have been filed until the fee is paid and all information required by the application form
has been submitted.
(c) Each applicant for a sexually oriented business license for a location not previously licensed or permitted shall, not later than the 60th day before the date the
application is filed for the license, place at the proposed location an outdoor sign (at least 24 inches x 36 inches in size) which provides notification and information
specifically stating that a sexually oriented business is intended to be located on the premises and providing the name and business address of the applicant. All
lettering on the sign must be at least two (2) inches in size.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.01; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.061; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.08.062 Issuance; qualifications; posting
(a) The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one
(1) or more of the following to be true:
(1) The location of the adult entertainment establishment is or would be in violation of division 4 of this article.
(2) The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application.
(3) The applicant gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application.
(4) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(5) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to an adult entertainment establishment.
(6) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating an adult
entertainment establishment without a license, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect.
(7) The license fee required by this division has not been paid.
(8) The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the adult entertainment establishment owns or holds a lease for the property or the applicable
portion thereof upon which the adult entertainment establishment will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the same.
(9) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance section 4.08.063 or 4.08.068 of this article.
(10) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime:
(A) Involving:
(i) Any of the following offenses as described in chapter [43] of the Texas Penal Code:
a. Prostitution;
b. Promotion of prostitution;
c. Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
d. Compelling prostitution;
e. Obscenity;
f. Sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor;
g. Sexual performance by a child;
h. Possession of child pornography;
(ii) Any of the following offenses as described in chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code:
a. Public lewdness;
b. Indecent exposure;
c. Indecency with a child;
(iii) Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code;
(iv) Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child as described in chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or
(v) Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses;
(B) For which:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/349
(i) Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or the date of release from the terms of probation, parole or deferred
adjudication, or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense;
(ii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction, or the date of release from the terms of probation, parole or deferred
adjudication, or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(iii) Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any twenty-four-month period.
(b) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse.
(c) An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(10)(A) of this section may qualify for an adult
entertainment establishment license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(10)(B) of this section has elapsed.
(d) The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the adult
entertainment establishment.
(e) The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult entertainment establishment so that it may be easily read at any time.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.03; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.062)
Sec. 4.08.063 Inspection and maintenance of records
(a) An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department and building inspections division to inspect the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(b) A person who operates an adult entertainment establishment or his agent or employee commits an offense if he operates the establishment without maintaining a
current list of all employees employed by the business, along with a complete updated application. A valid driver's license, state identification card, or passport, all with a
photo, shall be required for all employment applications.
(c) A person who operates an adult entertainment establishment or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the
premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(d) The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary
habitation.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.04; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.063)
Sec. 4.08.064 Expiration
(a) Each license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance.
(b) A license may be renewed by submission to the chief of police or his designee of an application on the form prescribed by such official and payment of a
nonrefundable renewal processing fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(c) Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.05; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.064; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.08.065 Suspension
(a) The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with section 4.08.063(b), 4.08.068 or 4.08.101 of this article;
(2) Engaged in public intoxication while on the adult entertainment establishment premises;
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the adult entertainment establishment premises as authorized by this article; or
(4) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult entertainment establishment premises.
(b) When the chief of police is authorized to suspend a license under this section, he shall give the licensee the opportunity to pay a reinstatement fee as provided in
appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time, rather than have the license suspended.
(1) Payment of this reinstatement fee shall be considered an administrative admission of the violation. However, this shall not be used as a admission of
guilt in a criminal prosecution under this article.
(2) If the licensee does not pay the reinstatement fee before the expiration of the third working day after notification, he loses the opportunity to pay it and
the chief of police shall impose the suspension.
(3) Each day in which a violation is permitted to continue shall constitute a separate cause for suspension.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.06; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.065; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 4.08.066 Revocation
(a) The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 4.08.065 occurs and the license has been suspended or a reinstatement fee paid
within the preceding twelve (12) months.
(b) The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process;
(2) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the adult entertainment establishment during a period of time when the licensee's license was
suspended;
(5) A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 4.08.062(a)(10) for which the time period required has not elapsed;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/349
(6) On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, an employee of the establishment committed in or on the licensed premises an offense
listed in section 4.08.062(a)(10) for which a conviction has been obtained;
(7) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in or
on the licensed premises. The term “sexual contact” shall have the same meaning as defined in section 21.02 [21.01], Texas Penal Code; or
(8) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city of hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the adult entertainment
establishment.
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
(d) Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
(e) When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult entertainment establishment
license for one (1) year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was
revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section
4.08.062(a)(10) has elapsed.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.07; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.066)
Sec. 4.08.067 Appeals
(a) If the chief of police is authorized to deny the issuance of a license, or suspend or revoke a license, the chief of police shall give written notice to the applicant or
licensee of such intention.
(1) The notice shall provide that the denial of issuance, suspension, or revocation shall take effect at the expiration of the third working day after notification
unless the licensee provides a written response to the chief of police before the expiration of the third working day.
(2) If a written response from the applicant or licensee is received by the chief of police before the expiration of the third working day, the suspension,
denial of issuance or revocation will be stayed pending a decision by the chief of police. The chief of police shall review the response before the rendering of
a decision.
(3) The chief of police shall give written notice of this decision to the applicant or licensee.
(4) The decision by the chief of police is effective immediately and final pending any appeal.
(5) Notice shall be deemed delivered by hand delivery to a licensee, owner or employee of the establishment or by a posting of the notice at the usual
business entrance of the establishment. Notice may also be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice shall be mailed to the address listed
in the license application for receipt of notice.
(b) Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension or revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been
suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to an appropriate court.
(c) An appeal to the appropriate court must be filed within thirty (30) days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the chief of police or decision of the city council,
as applicable.
(d) The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.08; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.067)
Sec. 4.08.068 Transfer; altering or forging license
(a) A person commits an offense if he transfers his license to another person or operates an adult entertainment establishment under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
(b) A person commits an offense if he counterfeits, forges, changes, defaces or alters a license.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.09; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.068)
Secs. 4.08.069–4.08.100 Reserved
Division 4. Location
Sec. 4.08.101 Restrictions
(a) An adult entertainment establishment shall be located within a specific zoning district as set forth in the city zoning code.
(b) A person commits an offense if he establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment within 1,000 feet of:
(1) A church;
(2) A public or private elementary or secondary school;
(3) A boundary of a residential district;
(4) A licensed day care center;
(5) A public park; and/or
(6) The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this section.
However, if there is a controlled access highway between the district boundary/property line and the adult entertainment establishment, the adult entertainment
establishment must be at least five hundred (500) feet from such district boundary/property line.
(c) A person commits an offense if he establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment within 1,000 feet of any other
adult entertainment establishment.
(d) A person commits an offense if he establishes, operates or causes to be operated or expanded an adult entertainment establishment in any building, structure or
portion thereof containing another adult entertainment establishment.
(e) For the purposes of subsection (b), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of
the building or structure used as tenant space occupied for an adult entertainment establishment to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, public or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/349
private elementary or secondary school, or licensed day care center, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot.
(f) For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two adult entertainment establishments shall be measured in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located or from the wall of the tenant space occupied, as
applicable.
(g) By virtue of differences in degree of impact upon adjacent and nearby properties which are inherent in uses regulated under this article, but which do not involve
the depiction, display, performance, or other activity on the premises, an adult bookstore or adult video store shall be permitted to locate within 1,000 but not less than
500 feet of any other permitted adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this article.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 3.01; Ordinance 97-006, sec. 1, adopted 2/4/97; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.101)
Sec. 4.08.102 Nonconforming uses
(a) Any adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this article that is in violation of section 4.08.101 shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the effective date of this article, unless sooner
terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or
altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more adult entertainment establishments are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in
a permissible location, the adult entertainment establishment which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the
later established business is nonconforming.
(b) Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the city council may extend the amortization period hereinabove provided to a reasonable period of time
for any nonconforming adult entertainment establishment upon a showing by a particular business that without an extension it will be unable to recoup its investment in
the nonconforming structure.
(1) Any nonconforming adult entertainment establishment which desires an extension must register with the city council as a nonconforming use no later
than December 1, 1995, and must file an application for an extension of the amortization period not later than August 1, 1996. Requests for an extension of
the amortization period shall be limited to one application with the city council.
(2) Subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to any establishment which has undergone a change in ownership since the effective date of this article.
(c) An adult entertainment establishment lawfully operating as a conforming use after the effective date of this article is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
location, subsequent to the commencement of operation of the adult entertainment establishment, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public
park, licensed day care center, another adult entertainment establishment, residential use or residential zoning district within one thousand (1,000) feet of the adult
entertainment establishment.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 3.02; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.102)
Sec. 4.08.103 Granting of exemptions
(a) If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the adult entertainment establishment is in violation of section
4.08.101, and such establishment was in operation on the effective date of this article, then the applicant may, not later than ten (10) calendar days after receiving notice
of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions.
(b) If the written request is filed with the city secretary within the ten-day limit, the city council shall consider the request. The city secretary shall set a date for the
hearing within sixty (60) days from the date the written request is received. If a timely request is so filed, the existing license is deemed not to have expired until the
decision of the city council on such request.
(c) The city council may grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 4.08.101 if it makes the following findings:
(1) That the location of the adult entertainment establishment will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or
welfare;
(2) That the location of the adult entertainment establishment will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage
the development of urban blight;
(3) That the location of the adult entertainment establishment in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it
interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and
(4) That all other applicable provisions of this article will be observed.
(d) In making the findings specified in subsection (c) of this section, the city council shall take into account, among other things:
(1) Crime statistics of the location and its 1,000-foot radius maintained by the appropriate law enforcement agency for the previous six-month period;
(2) County appraisal district appraisals for the location and its 1,000-foot radius, taking into account any decline or increase in property values;
(3) Vacancy rates of residential, commercial, or office space within the surrounding 1,000-foot radius; and
(4) Any evidence regarding the award or denial of any public or private grants for neighborhood conservation, urban renewal or restoration for any property
located within a 1,000-foot radius.
(e) The city council may grant an exemption under this section for an establishment which was in operation on the effective date of this article, if such establishment is
to be operated within the same commercial site plan, and within 250 feet of the nonconforming location, provided that all other terms and conditions of this article are
complied with.
(f) The city council shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote approving the exemption shall result in denial of the
exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city council is final.
(g) If the council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of council action. In the following year, the chief of police may grant the
exemption to the adult entertainment establishment, provided there is no proof that the adult entertainment establishment has had a negative impact on the quality of life
or value of property, as defined herein, within the 1,000-foot radius or in the city at large. If there is proof that the adult entertainment establishment has created a
negative impact, then the chief of police must deny the issuance of the license. The chief of police may only grant two (2) consecutive exemptions. After those two (2)
years, or if the chief of police finds a negative impact, the issuance of the license shall be denied, and the adult entertainment establishment may use the appeal process
as set forth in section 4.08.067(a) of this article. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the adult entertainment establishment is in violation of the locational restrictions of
section 4.08.101 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption.
(h) If the council denies the exemption, the applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the council's
action.
(i) The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any provisions of this article other than the locational restrictions.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 4.10; Ordinance 97-006, sec. 2, adopted 2/4/97; Ordinance 09-021 adopted 5/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.103)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/349
Secs. 4.08.104–4.08.130 Reserved
Division 5. Operation
Sec. 4.08.131 Adult cabarets
(a) An employee of an adult cabaret, while appearing in a state of nudity, commits an offense if he touches a customer or the clothing of a customer.
(b) A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if he touches an employee appearing in a state of nudity or clothing of the employee.
(c) A licensee or employee commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a
walk-through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding restrooms.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 5.01; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.131)
Sec. 4.08.132 Escort agencies
(a) A person commits an offense if he employs at an escort agency any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 5.02; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.132)
Sec. 4.08.133 Nude model businesses
(a) A person commits an offense if he employs at a nude model business any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model business. It is a defense to
prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
(c) A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model business
premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
(d) A person commits an offense if he places or permits a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises of a nude model business, except that a sofa may be
placed in a reception room open to the public.
(e) A licensee or employee commits an offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a
walk-through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding restrooms.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 5.03; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.133)
Sec. 4.08.134 Adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters
(a) A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or
adult motion picture theater.
(b) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture
theater.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the
opposite sex.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 5.04; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.134)
Sec. 4.08.135 Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult entertainment establishment, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of
less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises
in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which
the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be
required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with
marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee.
(4) The licensee commits an offense if he permits a manager's station to be unattended by an employee at any time a customer is present on the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises have two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The
view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(6) The licensee commits an offense if he permits access to a customer of any area of the premises that is not visible from the manager's station, for any
purpose, excluding restrooms.
(7) The owners, operator and any agents and employees present on the premises shall ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other material at all times that any customer is present in the premises and ensure that no
customer is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which customers will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access
at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle as measured at the floor level.
(9) The licensee commits an offense if he permits illumination of any area of the premises to which customers have access to be less than one (1.0)
footcandle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/349
(1972 Code, ch. 34, sec. 5.05; 2008 Code, sec. 4.08.135)
ARTICLE 4.09 HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION
Sec. 4.09.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this section:
Business day. Any calendar day except Saturday, Sunday or any state or national holiday.
Charitable purpose. Philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any
church or religious society, sect, group or order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civil organization,
or the benefit of any educational institution. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include the direct benefit of the individual making the solicitation. “Charitable
purpose” shall not be construed to include the benefit of any political group or political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
Consumer. An individual who seeks or acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for personal, family or household purposes.
Consumer transaction. A sales transaction in which one (1) or more of the parties is a consumer.
Deposit or depositing a handbill. To place, distribute, handout, or circulate any type of handbill.
Handbill, commercial. Includes any printed or written matter, any sample or devise, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original copies of any matter or literature, which:
(1) Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, service, or thing;
(2) Directs attention to any business, mercantile, commercial establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the
interest thereof;
(3) Directs attention or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, group, fundraiser, or other event whether the purpose of directing
attention and advertising is for private gain or for raising funds for a charitable purpose; or
(4) Contains information that is of a noncommercial nature, but remains predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for
advertisement purposes, for private gain, or for raising funds for a charitable purpose.
Handbill, noncommercial. Includes any printed or written matter, any sample or devise, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original copies of any matter or literature, pertaining to any speech not included in the definition of commercial handbill. Noncommercial handbills
include, but are not limited to, handbills containing exclusively political and religious speech.
Handbill distributor. Includes any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing commercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to
subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such commercial handbills.
Handbill sponsor. Includes the person, firm, or corporation who is utilizing commercial handbills as a medium of advertising or spreading a message.
Individual or person. An individual, a person, a group of two (2) or more individuals, a proprietorship, a partnership, a corporation, a limited liability company, an
association, or other legal entity.
Job placement activities. Any request, offer, enticement, or action which announces the availability for or of employment or seeks to secure employment. As defined
herein, “job placement activities” shall be deemed complete when made whether or not an actual employment relationship is created.
Merchant. A party to a consumer transaction other than a consumer.
Residence. Any living unit, occupied for residential purposes by one (1) or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 3, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.002 Distribution on or in private property
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, distribute, deposit, scatter, pass out, give away, circulate or deliver any handbill, dodger, circular,
paper, booklet, poster or any printed matter or literature, in the yard or grounds of any house, building, structure, or on any porch or doorstep or vestibule, or in any
public hallway thereof, or upon any vacant lot, or other private property, without having first obtained permission of the owner, or of an adult resident or occupant thereof.
(b) Samples, devices, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, cast, distribute, deposit, scatter, pass out, give away, circulate or deliver any advertising
literature of any kind, or any advertising sample or device, in the yard or grounds of any house, building, structure, or on any porch or doorstep, or vestibule, or in any
public hallway thereof, or upon any vacant lot, or other private property, without having first obtained permission of the owner, or of an adult resident or occupant thereof.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 4, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.003 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1) The distribution of mail by the United States Postal Service and newspapers for which the premise's occupant has subscribed are hereby exempt,
except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property;
(2) Persons or organizations engaged in the distribution or dissemination of information by the city or of political or religious information;
(3) The interruption of service notices by utility companies;
(4) The service of any lien foreclosure;
(5) Governmental notices of any character distributed by the city or any other governmental entity; or
(6) Any exceptions authorized by state law.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 5, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.004 Alternatives for distribution
Distribution of free magazines to public libraries, retail stores, grocery stores, convenience stores, clothing stores, restaurants, gyms, yoga studios, small markets, health
food stores, community resource centers, music stores, record stores, coffee houses, internet cafes, pharmacies, night clubs, outdoor racks, spas, movie theaters, etc. if
permitted by owner or authorized manager, is not prohibited. (Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 6, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.005 Permits required for commercial handbill distribution
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/349
(a) Except as otherwise provided, a permit is required for an individual to personally, or through an agent or employee:
(1) Distribute any commercial handbill in or upon another's property.
(b) A permit is not required for:
(1) The distribution of noncommercial handbills.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 7, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.006 Application for permit
(a) Permit application must be submitted in writing to the City of Leon Valley Community Development Department (“community development department”) and shall
include the following:
(1) The name of the person applying, their residence and business addresses and their residence and business telephone numbers.
(2) If different from the person applying, the name of the handbill sponsor if the permit is for the purpose of distributing commercial handbills.
(3) In regards to any handbill sponsor and/or merchant, the following:
(A) If a natural person, the business and residence addresses and telephone numbers.
(B) If a partnership:
(i) The names of all partners;
(ii) The name, principal business address;
(iii) Telephone number of the partnership and the agent for service of process; and
(iv) The state of formation.
(C) If a corporation or limited liability company, the person applying must state:
(i) The mailing address and telephone number of the principal place of business and the registered agent;
(ii) The mailing address, business location, telephone number and name of the individual in charge of the local office of such entity, if any;
(iii) The names of all officers and directors or trustees of such corporation, or of all members (if member managed), managers and officers of
such limited liability company; and
(iv) The state of incorporation or formation.
(D) If an association or any other entity, the person applying must state:
(i) The mailing address and telephone number of the principal place of business and the agent for process of service;
(ii) The names of all members/owners of the association unless they exceed ten (10) in number, in which case the application shall so state and
the person registering may alternatively list the names and business addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and directors or trustees of
the association; and
(iii) If the association is part of a multi-state organization or association, the mailing address and business location of its central office shall be
given, in addition to the mailing address and business location of its local office.
(E) The community development department may request satisfactory documentation of an individual's authority to represent the partnership,
corporation, association or business entity.
(4) The names, mailing address, and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct charge or control of the distribution of commercial handbills
and responsible for ensuring compliance with this article.
(5) The time period within which the distribution of commercial handbills is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of distribution, and its concluding
date.
(6) A description of the methods and means by which the distribution of commercial handbills is to be accomplished.
(7) The names of other communities in which the applicant has distributed commercial handbills in the past six (6) months.
(8) A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, such permit will not be used or represented to be an endorsement or approval by the city or any of
its officers or employees.
(9) Any other information which the city deems necessary for the administration of this article.
(b) Each applicant shall appear in person and provide proof of identification through submission of a valid driver's license or other valid, official photo identification
deemed acceptable by the community development department.
(c) Information provided by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be subject to verification by the community development department.
(d) All applications, whether or not permit is issued, shall be considered public record and shall be available for inspection by members of the public during regular
business hours and copies may be obtained at a cost in accordance with the Texas Public Information Act. Redactions of personal identification numbers may be
required under state law.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 8, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.007 Permit fee and exemptions
(a) Except as otherwise provided, every application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars
($100.00) and such fee will not be refunded if a permit is not issued. No permit provided for by this article shall be issued until such fee has been paid by the applicant,
unless an exemption applies.
(b) The following applicants are not required to pay a permit fee:
(1) Individuals operating under licenses granted by a state agency.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/349
(2) A duly authorized, nonprofit, “charitable organization,” as defined in section 84.003(1) of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, as it exists or
may be amended, and registered as such with the Secretary of State or the Internal Revenue Service, seeking to use such permit for charitable purposes
only. Proof of such registration status must be provided to the city upon application.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 9, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.008 Permit issuance, denial, duration, and form
(a) When an application is filed with the community development department, the community development department shall review the application.
(b) The community development department shall approve the application and issue the permit unless:
(1) The application fails to comply with a provision of this article;
(2) A previous permit issued under this article was revoked within the past twelve months;
(3) The community development department determines that the applicant has been convicted of a felony;
(4) The community development department determines that the applicant has furnished false information or identification; or
(5) The applicant has a warrant issued for their arrest.
(c) The community development department shall notify the applicant of its decision to approve or deny a permit application within ten (10) business days of the
receipt of the application. Notification of the decision shall be given in writing and either sent via U.S. mail to the applicant's address as listed on the permit application or
delivered to the applicant in person.
(d) If the application was turned in as incomplete, the community development department shall not grant or deny the application but shall return the application with
an explanation of what additional information/documentation is necessary to process the application. The incomplete application and explanation shall be sent within ten
(10) business days of the receipt of the application to the applicant's address as listed on the permit application or it shall be delivered to the applicant in person.
(e) A permit requested under this section shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed six (6) months. Upon expiration of a permit, no extensions
shall be granted. To be issued a new permit, the applicant must reapply with the community development department and pay the application fee.
(f) The city shall prescribe the form of the permit. The permit may contain a photo of the applicant. The following shall be printed prominently on each permit: “The
issuance of this permit is not an endorsement by the City of Leon Valley or any of its officers or employees.” Each permit shall bear a permit number that corresponds
with the city's files containing the application filed by the applicant.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 10, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.009 Permit suspension or revocation
(a) If a permit holder fails to comply with this article, the community development department will take the following action:
(1) For a first offense under this article, any permit issued hereunder to the offender shall be suspended for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. The
chief of police, or his/her designee, shall determine the number of days of the suspension.
(2) For a second offense under this article within a twelve (12) month period, any permit issued hereunder to the offender shall be revoked, and such
offender shall not be eligible to apply for another permit for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of revocation.
(b) If a permit holder is arrested and charged with a felony, the permit shall be suspended until final disposition of the criminal charges.
(1) Upon conviction or acceptance of deferred adjudication by the court, the permit shall be revoked.
(2) If the permit holder is found innocent or the charges dismissed, the suspension of the permit shall be lifted.
(c) Upon suspension or revocation, the permit holder shall tender the permit to the city's police department until completion of the suspension or successful appeal of
the suspension or revocation.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 11, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.010 Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation
Should an applicant be denied a permit or have a permit suspended or revoked, he/she may appeal that action to the city manager by submitting a letter within ten (10)
business days of the denial, suspension or revocation. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall review the appeal at a staff level and make a determination within ten
(10) business days of receiving the appeal request and shall have the authority to uphold or reject the action complained of and order that the permit be granted or
reinstated. However, should the city manager uphold the denial, suspension or revocation, he/she shall schedule a hearing before the city council at a regular or special
meeting within thirty (30) days of the denial, unless the applicant withdraws the appeal in writing. Such hearing shall be an administrative hearing, and adherence to
formal rules of evidence shall not be required. The decision of the city council may be appealed as allowed by law to any court with jurisdiction. (Ordinance 2017-42, sec.
12, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.011 Handbill distributor's identification
Each handbill distributor shall carry with him/her and produce upon the request of any citizen, city employee, or city official, the following information and identification.
(1) The permit issued by the city pursuant to this article;
(2) A copy of the valid state sales tax certificate, if applicable; and
(3) A valid driver's license or other valid, official photo identification.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 13, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.012 Distribution
(a) Except as otherwise prohibited, the distribution of any handbill, including noncommercial and commercial handbills may only be distributed by:
(1) Handing the noncommercial handbill or commercial handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such premises;
(2) Depositing the noncommercial handbill or commercial handbill in a secure manner to prevent such handbill from being blown or drifting about the
premises, except that mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.
(b) An individual, directly or through an agent or employee, may not:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/349
(1) Throw, cast or scatter any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill, or leave any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill unattended that
is not securely affixed to the place of deposit.
(2) Distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills at a place of residence during the following hours unless invited to do so by the occupant or owner of
the residence:
(A) Monday–Friday: Before 9:00 a.m. (daylight saving time), after 7:00 p.m.
(B) Monday–Friday: Before 9:00 a.m. (standard time), after 6:00 p.m.
(C) Saturday and Sunday: Before 10:00 a.m., after 5:00 p.m.
(3) Distribute commercial handbills after the revocation or expiration of any permit issued or during the suspension of any permit issued, as hereinafter
provided.
(4) Distribute commercial handbills for a purpose other than what was represented in the application upon which the permit was issued.
(5) Represent that the issuance of a permit by the city constitutes an endorsement or approval of the distribution by the city or its officers or employees.
(6) Distribute any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill in or upon any premises which is temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
(7) Distribute any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill upon any premises if requested not to do so by the owner, occupant, or any other person
then present in or upon such premises, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance of the residence or
premises, a card as provided in section 4.09.013 (exhibiting card prohibiting handbills of any type).
(8) Distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place, under any circumstances, which does not have printed on the cover, front or back
thereof, the name, address and telephone number of the handbill sponsor who caused the same to be distributed; provided, however, that in the case of a
fictitious person or club, in addition to such fictitious name, the true name and addresses of the owners, managers, or agents for the fictitious person or club
sponsoring such commercial handbill shall also appear thereon.
(9) Employ, hire, request, direct or cause, directly or indirectly, another person who does not have a permit to distribute commercial handbills within the city.
(10) Distribute commercial handbills under the direction of another and not have a supervisor who can arrive at the location where the person is distributing
the handbills within ten (10) minutes of being requested to appear, by the police or otherwise.
(11) Direct someone else to distribute commercial handbills and not provide a supervisor who can arrive at the location where the person is distributing the
handbills within ten (10) minutes of being requested to appear, by the police or otherwise.
(12) Allow a person or use a permit issued in another person's name or to use a permit issued in another person's name.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 14, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.013 Exhibiting card prohibiting handbills of any type
(a) A person desiring that no merchant or other person engage in distribution of commercial handbills, noncommercial handbills at his/her premises shall exhibit, in a
conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the premises (including but not limited to entrances to: an apartment unit, building or complex; a single- or multifamily
residential structure; private sidewalks; a development with private streets; or areas maintained by a property owner's association) a weatherproof card, not less
than three (3) inches by four (4) inches in size bearing the words, “no advertisements,” “no trespassing” or “no handbills,” to indicate that the occupants of such premises
do not desire to have a handbill of any type left upon the premises. The letters on such cards shall not be less than two-thirds (2/3) of an inch in height.
(b) Every person upon going onto any premises shall first examine the premises to determine if any notice prohibiting distribution of commercial handbill or
noncommercial handbill distribution is exhibited upon or near the main entrance to the premises. If notice prohibiting commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill
distribution is exhibited, the person shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing, placing, or depositing any type of handbill or disturbing the occupant,
unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant.
(c) No person shall go upon any premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of
the occupant of the premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a distribution transaction, if a card,
as described in this section, is exhibited in compliance with this section, unless the visit is the result of a request made by the occupant.
(d) No person, other than the owner or occupant of the premises, shall remove, deface, or render illegible, a card placed by the occupant pursuant to this section.
(e) Any merchant or person who has gained entrance to a premises, or audience with the occupant, whether invited or not, shall immediately depart from the premises
without disturbing the occupant further when requested to leave by the occupant.
(Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 15, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 4.09.014 Penalty
Any owner, person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor as defined in the Texas Penal Code, and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not less than fifty and no/100 dollars ($50.00) and not more five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00). Each continuing
day's violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the
violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 16, adopted 8/1/17)
ARTICLE 4.10 FORTUNE TELLER ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. 4.10.001 Definitions
Fortune telling business. Any business or individual person whose business it is to practice astrology, palm reading, fortune telling, clairvoyant, or character reading for a
fee or as a business practice. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.002 Penalty
Any person who shall intentionally violate any provision of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not
exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.003 Fortune telling business institution regulations
Fortune telling business institutions shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) May not be located within a radius of 1,000 feet from the nearest existing fortune telling business institution.
(2) May not be located within 1,000 feet from the following land uses: residentially zoned parcels, religious institutions, apartment complex, school or daycare
facility, school bus stop, child entertainment establishment, bar or liquor store, and pawnshops.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/349
(3) Store fronts shall have glass or transparent glazing in the window and doors, and as prescribed by article 3.04 herein, shall have no more than 10
percent of any window or door area covered by signs, banners or opaque coverings of any kind.
(4) Animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving or similar type on-premises signs are prohibited.
(5) May only operate within a freestanding building and may not operate in the same structure as any other use of the same type.
(Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.004 City permit
Any person who chooses to practice astrology, palm reading, fortune telling, clairvoyant, or character reading in the city must apply for and maintain a valid city permit to
engage in said practice of astrology, palm reading, fortune telling, clairvoyant, or character reading. Operation of a business for any of the listed purposes is not
authorized without a valid city permit. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.005 Application for fortune telling business permit
Any person desiring a fortune telling business permit shall file a written application with the chief of police or his/her designee, on a form to be furnished by the city. The
applicant shall accompany the application with tender of the permit fee required by this article, and shall, in addition, furnish the following:
(1) The type of ownership of the business, i.e. whether individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise;
(2) The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted;
(3) The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted;
(4) A complete list of the names and the residence addresses of all owners, partners and employees in the business and the name and residence address
of the manager, supervisor or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business;
(5) The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a
partnership; and the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein; and concerning the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business:
(A) The names, complete residence addresses and residence telephone numbers;
(B) The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;
(C) Proof of age from a state or federally issued identification card;
(D) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex;
(E) Two (2) front face portrait photographs of the applicant(s) and any partners taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application and at least two
(2) by two (2) inches in size;
(F) The business history and experience ten (10) years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to whether or not such person in
previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended and the reason
therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation;
(G) A list of all criminal arrests other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction where arrested and the disposition thereof;
(H) A complete set of fingerprints for all owners, partners, and managers taken and to be retained on file by the chief of police or his authorized
representatives;
(6) Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the chief of police;
(7) A statement providing written authorization for the city, its agents and employees to verify the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the
qualifications of the applicant for the permit;
(8) The names and addresses of three (3) adult residents of the county who will serve as references. The references must be persons other than relatives
and business associates;
(9) Written declaration by the applicant and all partners, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and
correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city.
(Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.006 Approval and investigation by the chief of police
(a) Upon receiving the application for a fortune telling business permit, the chief of police shall order an investigation into the applicant's moral character and personal
and criminal history. The chief of police may in his discretion require a personal interview of the applicant(s), and such further information, identification and physical
examination of the person as shall bear on the investigation.
(b) In the case of applications for fortune telling business permit the chief of police shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises where the fortune
telling business is to be conducted, for the purposes of assuring that such premises comply with all requirements as set forth in this code, this article and the state.
(c) Before any permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued under this article, the chief of police shall first sign his approval for the application.
(Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.007 Issuance or denial of permit
The chief of police shall authorize issuance of a fortune telling business permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application unless he finds that:
(1) The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and in the case of check or bank draft, has not been honored with payment upon presentation;
(2) The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to, the city's building,
zoning and health regulations;
(3) The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any lien of any
nature on the business and/or equipment used therein; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude unless such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/349
(4) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the
city for the application;
(5) The applicant has had a fortune telling business permit, or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city, any other city or any
state, federal or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of application;
(6) The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant is a partnership, and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over the age of eighteen (18) years.
(Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.008 Display of permits
The fortune telling business permittee shall display the city's fortune telling business permit, tax identification and certificate of occupancy in an open and conspicuous
place near the entrance of the fortune telling business. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.009 Permit fees generally
The permit fee for a fortune telling business permit shall be as listed in appendix A. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.010 Return of permit fee
No portion of any fee collected under this article shall be returned after a permit has been issued. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.011 Suspension and revocation of permits
(a) A fortune telling business permit may be revoked or suspended in any case where any of the provisions of this article are violated, or where any employee of the
permittee is engaged in any conduct which violates any state laws or local law at the permittee's place of business and the permittee has actual or constructive
knowledge. Constructive knowledge shall be established by the day-to-day operation of the business. The revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed by subsection
(b) of this section.
(b) A fortune telling business permit may be revoked or suspended by the city council after notice and hearing for any cause set forth in this section. The chief of
police or his authorized agent shall initiate such proceedings by petition to the city council in writing setting forth specifically the grounds for revocation or suspension,
and if a suspension, the length of time for which such suspension is requested. A copy of such petition shall be mailed to the last known address of the permit holder.
Proper notice of the time and date of the hearing, setting forth the specific grounds upon which the chief of police's petition is based, shall be given in writing by the city
at least five (5) days prior to the date set for such hearing through (1) first class United States mail, postage prepaid, registered or certified with return receipt requested,
(2) delivering same in person to the intended addressee, (3) delivery to an independent third-party commercial delivery service for same day or next day delivery and
providing for evidence of receipt at the office of the intended addressee, or (4) prepaid telegram, telex, or facsimile to the addressee. Notice so mailed shall be effective
upon its deposit with the United States Postal Service or any successor thereto; notice sent by such a commercial delivery service shall be effective upon delivery to
such commercial delivery service; notice given by personal delivery service shall be effective only if and when received by the addressee; and notice given by other
means shall be effective only if and when received at the office or designated place or machine of the intended addressee. The city council shall, by a majority vote,
determine whether or not such permit shall be revoked or suspended, and such action shall be final and conclusive.
(c) Any applicant denied a permit shall have the right of appeal to city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city within ten (10) days after notice of the
denial has been mailed to such person's address as set forth in the application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city shall provide for
a council hearing on such appeal at the earliest convenient regular city council meeting, and shall notify the appellant and chief of police of the date and time of such
hearing in the same manner as provided in subsection (b). The council shall by a majority vote either sustain the action of the chief of police or issue the permit.
(d) Nothing in this section prevents the city from revoking any existing certificate of occupancy, permit or license if found to be issued in error, in violation of a law,
when issued under a false application, or when in violation of the current certificate of occupancy. An existing business whose certificate of occupancy is revoked under
this section must meet all current permitting requirements for a fortune teller establishment in the city before it is allowed to reopen for business.
(e) Nothing in this section precludes the city from revoking any existing certificate of occupancy, permit or license if the fortune telling establishment is found to be in
violation of a health and safety code or fire code adopted by the city which warrants closing the business until all violations are rectified to the city's sole satisfaction that
no violations exist.
(Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.012 Transfer of permit prohibited
No fortune telling business permit is transferable, severable or divisible, and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only upon the permittee named
therein. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.013 Hours
No fortune telling business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.014 Alcoholic beverages prohibited
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any fortune
telling business. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.015 Entrances and exits
No fortune telling business shall have any entrance or any exitway providing a direct passageway to any other type of business, residence or living quarters. (Ordinance
2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.016 Access
All fortune telling business establishments operating under the authority of this article are declared to be public places, and shall not, during business hours, have the
doors to the entrances or exits of such establishments locked or obstructed in any way so as to prevent free ingress and egress of persons; provided, however, such
doors may be closed. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.10.017 Sanitation
By applying for a fortune telling business permit, the owners, agents, and managers agree that all premises used pursuant to this article shall be regularly inspected by
the chief of police or his authorized representative for safety of structure and adequacy of plumbing ventilation, heating and illumination. (Ordinance 2018-4 adopted
2/6/18)
ARTICLE 4.11 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/349
Sec. 4.11.001 Definitions
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and
application of words and phrases used in this article.
Applicant. A person who submits an application to the city. The term includes: owner, owner's agent, operator, principal, officer, or general manager of the applicant.
Client. A person or organization using the services of a massage therapist.
Compensation. Any and all forms of payment as remuneration for the provision of massage therapy or other massage therapy services, including but not limited to, fees,
tips, memberships, goods, services, barter, or any other exchange or any value made to or on behalf of a licensed massage therapist, an unlicensed person, or an
unlicensed business. Compensation includes discounted, reduced, or waived student fees for tuition, books, supplies, or other educational expenses.
Consultation document. A document provided by a massage establishment at an initial consultation before the first massage therapy session and signed by both the
client and massage therapist, which includes the following indications and statements:
(1) The type of massage therapy services or techniques the licensee anticipates using during the massage therapy session;
(2) The parts of the client's body that will be massaged or the areas of the client's body that will be avoided during the session, including indications and
contraindications;
(3) A statement that the licensee shall not engage in breast massage of female clients without the written consent of the client;
(4) A statement that draping will be used during the session, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by both the client and the licensee;
(5) A statement that if uncomfortable for any reason, the client may ask the licensee to cease the massage and the licensee will end the massage session.
Employee. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, other than a masseur, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage establishment
and who receives compensation from the operator of the business or from patrons. No one under the age of 18 may be allowed to work at a massage establishment in
the city.
Massage. The manipulation of soft tissue by hand or through a mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body massage. The term includes effleurage
(stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics. Massage therapy may include the
use of oil, lubricant, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, or tub, shower, jacuzzi, sauna, steam or cabinet baths.
Massage establishment. A place of business that advertises or offers massage therapy or other massage services and is required to be licensed by the Texas
Department of Licensing and Regulations as a massage establishment.
Massage therapist. A person who practices or administers massage therapy or other massage services to a client for compensation. The term includes a licensed
massage therapist, therapeutic massage practitioner, massage technician, masseur, masseuse, myotherapist, body massager, body rubber, or any derivation of those
titles.
Nude. A person who is entirely unclothed; or clothed in a manner that leaves uncovered or visible through less than fully opaque clothing any portion of the breasts
below the top of the areola of the breasts or any portion of the genitals or buttocks.
Patron. Any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money or give any other compensation
therefor.
Sexual contact.
(1) Any touching of any part of the genitalia or anus;
(2) Any touching of the breasts of a female client, unless the touching is breast massage that is specifically authorized by a client through a signed
consultation document referenced in the administrative rules of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation;
(3) Any offer or agreement to engage in any activity described in subsection (1) or (2) above;
(4) Kissing;
(5) Any sexual intercourse, indecent exposure, sexual assault, prostitution, and promotions of prostitution as described in Penal Code, chapters 21, 22, and
43, or any offer or agreement to engage in such activities;
(6) Any behavior, gesture, or expression that may reasonably be interpreted as inappropriately seductive or sexual; or
(7) Inappropriate sexual comments about or to a client, including sexual comments about a person's body.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.002 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums or persons holding a valid certificate to practice the healing arts or persons working
under the direction of any such person or in any such establishment, nor shall this article apply to barbers, cosmetologists, physical therapists, assistant physical
therapists or athletic trainers, lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and holding a valid license or certificate of registration issued by the state.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.003 Penalty
Any person who shall intentionally violate any provision of this article shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not
exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.004 General regulations
Massage establishments shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) May not be located within a radius of 1,000 feet from the nearest existing massage establishment.
(2) May not be located within 1,000 feet from the following land uses: residentially zoned parcels, religious institutions, apartment complex, school or daycare
facility, school bus stop, child entertainment establishment, bar or liquor store, and pawnshops.
(3) Store fronts shall have glass or transparent glazing in the window and doors and as prescribed under article 3.04 shall have no more than 10 percent of
any window or door area covered by signs, banners or opaque coverings of any kind.
(4) Animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving or similar type on-premises signs are prohibited at, on, or advertising a massage
establishment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/349
(5) May only operate within a freestanding building and may not operate in the same structure as any other massage establishment.
(6) Shall provide client with a consultation document to be filled out and signed by both the client and massage therapist prior to rendering services.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Secs. 4.11.005–4.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permits
Sec. 4.11.031 Required
(a) No person shall engage in or carry out the business of massage unless they have a valid massage establishment license issued by the state, and a massage
establishment permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article for each and every separate office or place of business conducted by such person.
(b) No massage therapist shall practice or administer massage therapy or other massage services to a client for compensation unless they have a valid massage
license issued by the state, and a massage therapist permit issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.032 Application
(a) Establishment permit. An applicant desiring a massage establishment permit shall file a written application with the chief of police or his/her designee, on a form to
be furnished by the city. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the permit fee required by this article, and shall, in addition, furnish the following:
(1) The type of ownership of the business, i.e. whether individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise;
(2) The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted;
(3) The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted;
(4) A complete list of the names and the residence addresses of all owners, masseurs and employees in the business and the name and residence
address of the manager, supervisor or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business. Failure to notify the chief of police or his/her
designee of any changes in owners, masseurs and/or employees shall be cause to revoke a permit to operate in the city;
(5) A copy of the massage establishment license and all individual massage licenses issued by the state for each masseur to be employed at the location;
(6) The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a
partnership; and the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein; and concerning the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business:
(A) The names, complete residence addresses and, residence and mobile telephone numbers;
(B) The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;
(C) Proof of age from a state or federally issued identification card;
(D) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex;
(E) Two (2) front face portrait photographs of the applicant(s) and any partners taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application and at least two
(2) by two (2) inches in size;
(F) The massage or similar business history and experience ten (10) years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to, whether such
person previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, and
the reason therefore. Applicant shall also provide written evidence of any business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial,
suspension or revocation;
(G) A listing of all criminal arrests other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which arrested and the disposition
thereof;
(H) A complete set of fingerprints for all owners, partners, and managers taken and to be retained on file by the chief of police or his/her designee or
authorized representative;
(7) Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the chief of police;
(8) Signed authorization for the city, its agents and employees to verify the information in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit;
(9) The names and addresses of three (3) adult residents of the county who will serve as references. The references must be persons other than relatives
and business associates;
(10) Written declaration by the applicant and all partners, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and
correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city.
(b) Individual permit. An applicant desiring an individual massage therapist permit shall file a written application with the chief of police on a form to be furnished by the
city. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the permit fee required by this article, and shall, in addition, furnish the following:
(1) A copy of the individual massage license issued by the state;
(2) Proof of age from a state or federally issued identification card;
(3) Two (2) front face portrait photographs of the applicant taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application and at least two (2) by two (2) inches in
size;
(4) The massage or similar business history and experience ten (10) years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to, whether such person
previously operating in this or another city or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, and the reason
therefore. Applicant shall also provide written evidence of any business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or
revocation;
(5) A listing of all criminal arrests other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which arrested and the disposition thereof;
(6) A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the chief of police or his/her designee or authorized representative;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/349
(7) Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the chief of police;
(8) Signed authorization for the city, its agents and employees to verify the information in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit;
(9) The names and addresses of three (3) adult residents of the county who will serve as references. The references must be persons other than relatives
and business associates;
(10) Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said
declaration being duly dated and signed in the city.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.033 Approval and investigation by the chief of police
(a) Upon receiving the application for a massage establishment or individual massage therapist permit, the chief of police shall order an investigation into the
applicant(s) moral character and personal and criminal history. The chief of police may in his discretion require a personal interview of the applicant(s), and such further
information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall bear on the investigation.
(b) In the case of applications for a massage establishment permit, the chief of police shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises where the
massage establishment is to be conducted, for the purposes of assuring that such premises comply with all sanitation requirements as set forth in this article and by the
state, and with the regulations of public health, safety and welfare.
(c) Before any permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued under this article, the chief of police shall first sign his approval for the application.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.034 Issuance or denial of massage establishment permits
The chief of police shall authorize issuance of a massage establishment permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application unless he finds that:
(1) The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and in the case of check or bank draft, has not been honored with payment upon presentation;
(2) The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the city's building,
zoning and health regulations;
(3) The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any lien of any
nature on the business and/or equipment used therein; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude unless such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application;
(4) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the
city in conjunction therewith;
(5) The applicant has had a massage establishment, masseur or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city or any other city,
state, federal or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of application;
(6) The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant is a partnership, and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment, is not over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.035 Issuance or denial of individual massage therapist permits
The chief of police shall authorize issuance of an individual massage therapist permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application unless he finds that:
(1) The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and in the case of check or bank draft, has not been honored with payment upon presentation;
(2) The individual has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude unless such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to
the date of the application;
(3) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the
city in conjunction therewith;
(4) The applicant has had a massage establishment, masseur or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city, other city or any
other state, federal or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of application; and
(5) If the applicant is not over the age of eighteen (18) years.
(6) Failure to pay all required permit fees upon application.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.036 Display of permits
The massage establishment permittee shall display the city's massage establishment permit, state massage establishment permit, tax identification certificate, and
certificate of occupancy in an open and conspicuous place near the entrance of the massage establishment. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.037 Fees generally
There is a massage establishment permit fee and an individual massage therapist permit fee for each therapist employed at the massage establishment. All fees
assessed shall be renewed annually. Failure to pay all required fees at the time of application shall cause the application to be rejected. Failure to renew all fees in a
timely manner shall cause the permit and/or certificate of occupancy to be revoked. The permit fees shall be as listed in appendix A. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.038 Return of fee
No portion of any fee collected under this article shall be returned after a permit has been issued. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.039 Suspension and revocation of permits
(a) A massage establishment permit may be revoked or suspended in any case where any of the provisions of this article are violated, or where any employee of the
licensee is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state laws or city ordinances at the permittee's place of business and the permittee has actual or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/349
constructive knowledge thereof. Constructive knowledge shall be established by the day-to-day operation of the business. The revocation proceedings shall be as
prescribed by subsection (c) of this section.
(b) A massage therapist permit may be revoked or suspended in any case where any of the provisions of this article are violated, or where the permittee is engaged in
any conduct which violates any of the state laws or city ordinances at the massage establishment. The revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed by subsection (c)
of this section.
(c) A massage establishment or massage therapist permit may be revoked or suspended by the city council after notice and hearing for any cause set forth in this
section. The chief of police or his authorized agent shall initiate such proceedings by petition to the city council in writing setting forth specifically the grounds for
revocation or suspension, and if a suspension, the length of time for which such suspension is requested. A copy of such petition shall be mailed to the last known
address of the permit holder. Proper notice of the time and date of the hearing, setting forth the specific grounds upon which the chief of police's petition is based, shall
be given in writing by the city at least five (5) days prior to the date set for such hearing through (1) first class United States mail, postage prepaid, registered or certified
with return receipt requested, (2) delivering same in person to the intended addressee, (3) delivery to an independent third-party commercial delivery service for same
day or next day delivery and providing for evidence of receipt at the office of the intended addressee, or (4) prepaid telegram, telex, or facsimile to the addressee. Notice
so mailed shall be effective upon its deposit with the United States Postal Service or any successor thereto; notice sent by such a commercial delivery service shall be
effective upon delivery to such commercial delivery service; notice given by personal delivery service shall be effective only if and when received by the addressee; and
notice given by other means shall be effective only if and when received at the office or designated place or machine of the intended addressee. The city council shall,
by a majority vote, determine whether or not such permit shall be revoked or suspended, and such action shall be final and conclusive.
(d) Any applicant denied a massage establishment permit or massage therapist permit shall have the right of appeal to city council. Such appeal shall be taken by
filing with the city within ten (10) days after proper notice (as described in subsection (c) above) of the denial has been mailed to such person's address as set forth in
the application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city shall provide for a council hearing on such appeal at the earliest convenient
regular city council meeting, and shall provide proper notice to the appellant and chief of police of the date and time of such hearing in the same manner as provided in
subsection (c). The council shall by a majority vote either sustain the action of the chief of police or issue the permit.
(e) Nothing in this section prevents the city from revoking any existing certificate of occupancy, permit or license if found to be issued in error, in violation of a law,
when issued under a false application, or when issued to an establishment that does not meet the state licensing requirements for a massage establishment or massage
therapist. An existing business whose certificate of occupancy is revoked under this section must meet all current licensing and permitting requirements for a massage
establishment in the city before it is allowed to reopen for business.
(f) Nothing in this section precludes the city from revoking any existing certificate of occupancy, permit or license if the massage establishment is found to be in
violation of a health and safety code or fire code adopted by the city which warrants closing said business until all violations are rectified to the city's sole satisfaction that
no violations exist.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.040 Transfer of permit prohibited
No massage establishment permit or massage therapist permit is transferable, severable or divisible, and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only upon
the permittee named therein. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Secs. 4.11.041–4.11.060 Reserved
Division 3. Operation Regulations
Sec. 4.11.061 Hours
No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.062 Alcoholic beverages prohibited
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage
business. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.063 Entrances and exits
No massage establishment shall have any entrance or any exitway providing a direct passageway to any other type of business, residence or living quarters. (Ordinance
2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.064 Access
All massage establishments operating under the authority of this article are declared to be public places, and shall not, during business hours, have the doors to the
entrances or exits of such establishments, or to any massage room locked or obstructed in any way so as to prevent free ingress and egress of persons; provided,
however, such doors may be closed. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.065 Sanitation
(a) By applying for a massage establishment permit, the owners, agents, and managers agree that all premises used pursuant to this article shall be regularly
inspected by the chief of police or his/her designee or authorized representative for health and sanitation, safety of structure and adequacy of plumbing ventilation,
heating and illumination.
(b) Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt and refuse. Well-marked toilet and handwashing facilities for permittees, employees and patrons shall be
provided. All walls, ceilings, windows and doors shall be free of dust, dirt, refuse and mold. In high humidity areas, including toilet rooms, shower rooms, steam rooms,
locker rooms, and other such rooms, the walls, ceilings and floors shall be constructed or covered with a material that is smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleaned.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.066 Sheets, towels, and other linen
Towels, cloths and sheets shall not be used for more than one (1) patron. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is changed for
every patron. Soiled linens and towels shall be stored in a clearly marked receptacle and shall not be reused prior to laundering. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.067 Animals prohibited
No animals shall be permitted within a massage establishment at any time. Service dogs brought by a patron shall be the only exception. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted
2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.068 Equipment
All equipment used for the treatment of patrons at establishments regulated by this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and the equipment shall be
kept in a good and safe state of repair at all times. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.069 Sexual misconduct
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/349
(a) A massage establishment employee or individual massage therapist shall not engage in sexual contact during a session with a client.
(b) A massage establishment employee or individual massage therapist shall not allow any individual, including a client, student, licensee, employee, participant in a
continuing education program, or one's self to engage in sexual contact on the premises of the massage establishment.
(c) A massage establishment employee or individual massage therapist shall not allow any individual, including a student, licensee, employee, or one's self to practice
massage therapy or provide other massage therapy services in the nude, while partially nude, or in clothing designed to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any
individual.
(d) A massage establishment employee or individual massage therapist shall not perform massage therapy, whether or not for compensation, at or for a sexually
oriented business.
(e) A massage establishment employee or individual massage therapist shall immediately discontinue the massage therapy session, activity or the professional
relationship when a client initiates any verbal or physical contact with the licensee that is intended to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of either person.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.070 Nudity or clothing designed to arouse
No massage establishment shall allow any employee to practice massage therapy in the nude or in clothing designed to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any
individual. (Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 4.11.071 Required documentation
A massage establishment shall:
(1) Properly maintain and secure for each client the initial consultation documents, all session notes, and related billing records for a period of no less than
365 days from the date of the consultation; and
(2) Maintain a current list of all establishment employees and/or contractors at all times which includes full name and their massage license number and
expiration date (if licensed as a massage therapist).
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
ARTICLE 4.12 GAME ROOM ESTABLISHMENTS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.12.001 Definitions
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and
application of words and phrases used in this article.
Amusement redemption machine. Any electronic, electro mechanical, or mechanical contrivance designed, made, and adopted for bona fide amusement purposes that
rewards the player exclusively with non-cash merchandise, prizes, toys, or novelties, or a representation of value redeemable for those items, that have a wholesale
value available from a single play of the game or device of not more than ten times the amount charged to play the game or device once, or $5.00, whichever amount is
less.
Applicant. A person who submits an application to the city. The term includes: owner, owner's agent, operator, principal, officer, or general manager of the applicant.
Compensation. Any and all forms of payment as remuneration for the provision of playing a game of chance to include, but not limited to, table games such as cards,
poker, blackjack, dice, craps, or roulette, an amusement redemption machine or random generator machine. Compensation includes, but is not limited to, fees, tips,
membership fees, seat rentals, seat time-charges, buy-ins, goods, services, barter, or any other exchange or any value made to or on behalf of a game room, the game
room owner, game room operator, game room employee, or any other person working for or affiliated with the establishment. Compensation includes discounted,
reduced, or waived student fees for tuition, books, supplies, or other educational expenses. Compensation is also understood through the purchase of chips that are
intended to be used in table game activity.
Employee. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or older, who renders any service in connection with the operation of a game room establishment and who receives
compensation from the operator of the business or from patrons. No one under the age of 18 may be allowed to work at a game room in the city.
Freestanding building. A building that is designed or updated to hold only one business, and is a structure that is not attached to another structure. A freestanding
building does not rely on another existing structure for support. This type of building would have no other occupants other than the game room establishment once
approved, and may not be sub-leased for any other purposes.
Game room establishment. A building, facility, or other place that contains two or more amusement redemption machines, regardless of whether compensation is given
in any form.
Game room owner. An individual who:
(1) Has an ownership interest in or receives income from a game room, random generator machine or an amusement redemption machine located in a
game room;
(2) Is a partner, director, or officer of a business, company, or corporation that has an ownership interest in a game room, random generator machine or in
an amusement redemption machine located in a game room;
(3) Is a shareholder that holds more than ten percent of the outstanding shares of a business, company, or corporation that has an ownership interest in a
game room, random generator machine or in an amusement redemption machine located in a game room;
(4) Has been issued by the county clerk an assumed name certificate for a business that owns a game room, random generator machine or an amusement
redemption machine located in a game room;
(5) Signs a lease for a game room establishment;
(6) Opens an account for utilities for a game room establishment;
(7) Applies for and/or receives a certificate of occupancy for a game room establishment;
(8) Pays for advertising for a game room establishment; or
(9) Signs an alarm permit for a game room establishment.
Operator. An individual who supervises, manages, or participates in the performance of activities that contribute to the functioning of a game room establishment,
including but not limited to the following activities:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/349
(1) Operates a cash register, cash drawer, or other depository on the premises of a game room or of a business where the money earned or the records of
credit card transactions or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of a game room establishment or activities conducted in a
game room are kept;
(2) Displays, delivers, or provides to a customer of a game room; merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered on the premises of a game
room establishment;
(3) Takes orders from a customer of a game room for merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered on the premises of a game room
establishment; or
(4) Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons into a game room establishment.
Patron. Any person who goes to a game room establishment with the intent of watching or participating in the game room activities provided.
Premises. A building or a portion of a building. The term includes any public or private driveway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area owned or rented by
the game room establishment.
Random generator machine. A type of amusement redemption machine that is recreational and provides the user with an opportunity to receive something of value other
than a right to replay and in which credits, or the equivalent thereof, are accumulated when: a particular configuration of like symbols is displayed in a random fashion by
the machine; symbols or numbers are matched to a randomly selected symbol or number determined by the machine; a combination of cards is arrived at and valued in
a traditional hierarchy for purposes of poker; or a combination of cards is arrived at and points assigned for purposes of blackjack.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.002 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit game rooms for children where tickets are provided for redemption of children's toys, nor does it embrace
bona fide fraternal organizations and lodges, casino events for nonprofit organizations, or social gatherings in private residences for the sole purpose of sociability and
amusement in which the house or owner(s) does not receive any compensation for hosting the game room activities. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.003 Penalty
(a) Any person operating, using or maintaining any room or place for which a permit or license is required by this article without first paying the fee and securing a
permit or license therefor, or who operates, uses or maintains such place after the license therefor has been revoked, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each day that such room or place is so operated.
(b) Each licensee under this article must meet and comply with all requirements of law applicable to the premises or any activity conducted thereon and the issuance
of a license under this article shall not excuse the licensee, agents or employees or any patrons of such premises therefrom. Immediate revocation of a game room
establishment license or individual operator permittee will be taken upon criminal activity found, or when criminal cases are filed against the game room establishment
owners, operators or staff.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.004 General regulations
Game room establishment shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) May not be located within a radius of 1,000 feet from the nearest existing game room establishment.
(2) May not be located within 1,000 feet from the following land uses: residentially zoned parcels, religious institution, apartment complex, school or daycare
facility, school bus stop, child entertainment establishment, bar or liquor store, massage establishments, and pawnshops.
(3) Store fronts shall have glass or transparent glazing in the window and doors and as prescribed under article 3.04 shall have no more than 10 percent of
any window or door area covered by signs, banners or opaque coverings of any kind, and shall allow a clear and unobstructed view of the full screen of all
random generator machines, amusement redemption machines, and provide a clear view of all table games in operation.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit or display, or to permit to be exhibited or displayed, for commercial use any random generator machine or
amusement redemption machine in a game room unless the required transparent walls or windows of the game room:
(A) Are located on at least two sides of the game room, and each random generator machine located therein is visible through such walls or windows;
(B) At the lowest point are not more than four feet above the adjacent sidewalk or ground level;
(C) At the highest point are at least eight feet higher than the adjacent sidewalk or ground level; and
(D) Are at least four feet wide.
(5) Display of a sign that is animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving or similar type on-premises signs are prohibited at, on, or advertising a
game room establishment.
(6) May only operate within a freestanding building and may not operate in the same structure as any other game room establishment or any other type of
business.
(7) This article shall not be construed to authorize or permit the keeping, exhibition, operation, display, or maintenance of any machine or gaming that is
prohibited by the constitution of this state or chapter 47 of the Texas Penal Code.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Secs. 4.12.005–4.12.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permits
Sec. 4.12.031 Permit required
(a) No person shall engage in or carry out the business of a game room establishment for any form of compensation unless they have a valid game room permit
issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this article for each and every separate office or place of business conducted under this article. A game room owner and
game room operator shall obtain a license from the city for each game room associated with located in the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful to operate, use or maintain any room or place in the city where persons are permitted to play at any game of dominoes, cards or other games,
and for the use of which, or privilege of playing therein or thereat, any compensation shall be paid or received, or where memberships are sold or rented for anything of
value for the privilege of playing therein or thereat, without first securing a license or permit as required under this section.
(c) An application for an existing game room location that is submitted by an individual who is different from the individual named as the owner or operator on the
current application or a re-application for an existing game room location after denial or revocation shall be considered a new application and not a renewal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/349
(d) The application for a city license required by this section shall be in the form prescribed by the chief of police or his designee and shall contain such information as
the chief shall require. The application will include a consent from each individual applying, including all stockholders holding more than 10% of the stock of the
corporation; all of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation; or all of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, to allow the
chief of police or designee to conduct a background investigation of all game room establishment owners, operators, and staff. Any failure to provide the information
required by this article or a determination by the chief of police or designee that inaccurate, erroneous or incomplete information has been submitted shall be grounds for
denial or revocation of the application or permit once approved.
(e) In the case of a game room to be operated under an assumed name, a true and correct copy of the registration of the assumed name filed in the office of the
county clerk, bearing the file mark or stamp that evidences its filing in that office; and a nonrefundable fee(s) for the license as stated in the city fee schedule shall be
included with the application. Any failure to provide the documents or payments required by this article shall be grounds for denial by the chief of police or designee.
(f) The chief of police or designee shall investigate each application received under this article to determine whether the applicant has been convicted of an applicable
criminal offense as specified in this article. If it appears that the applicant has been convicted of such an offense, the chief of police shall deny the application of the
licensee or permittee as set forth in this article.
(g) A license issued under this section shall be subject to temporary revocation by the chief of police and permanent revocation by the city council.
(h) Any failure of a proposed game room to meet all requirements of this article shall be grounds for denial, revocation, or suspension of a game room license.
(i) Each game room establishment permit or individual operator license is valid for one year and shall expire on the anniversary date of the issuance of the permit or
license. A permit or license may be renewed for the following calendar year beginning 60-days before the expiration of the current permit or license by filing a completed
application for each permit or license and paying the applicable fee set forth in the city's fee schedule. A renewal application, or an application by a new game room
owner, shall be subject to the same requirements in this article, as for an initial game room establishment license application.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.032 Application for permit
(a) Game room establishment permit. An applicant desiring a game room establishment permit shall file a written application with the chief of police or designee, on a
form to be furnished by the city. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the permit fee required by this article, and shall, in addition, furnish the
following:
(1) The type of ownership of the business, i.e. whether individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise;
(2) The name, style and designation under which the business or practice is to be conducted;
(3) The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted;
(4) A complete list of the names and the residence addresses of all game room establishment owners and each individual operator in the game room
establishment and the name and residence address of the manager, supervisor or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business. Failure
to notify the chief of police or designee of any changes in owners or operators shall be cause to revoke a permit to operate in the city.
(5) The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and director, if the applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a
partnership; and the holder of any lien, of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein; and concerning the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business:
(A) The names, complete residence addresses, and residence and mobile telephone numbers;
(B) The two (2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;
(C) Proof of age from a state or federally issued identification card;
(D) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex;
(E) Two (2) front face portrait photographs of the applicant(s) and any partners taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application and at least two
(2) by two (2) inches in size;
(F) Similar business history and experience ten (10) years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to, whether such person previously
operating in this or another city or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, and the reason
therefore. Applicant shall also provide written evidence of any business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or
revocation;
(G) A listing of all criminal arrests other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which arrested and the disposition
thereof;
(H) A complete set of fingerprints for all owners, partners, managers, employees and staff taken and to be retained on file by the chief of police or
his/her designee or authorized representative;
(6) Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the chief of police;
(7) Signed authorization for the city, its agents and employees to verify the information in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit;
(8) The names and addresses of three (3) adult residents of the county who will serve as references. The references must be persons other than relatives
and business associates;
(9) Written declaration by the applicant and all partners, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and
correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the city.
(b) Game room operator license. An applicant desiring an individual operator license shall file a written application with the chief of police on a form to be furnished by
the city. The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the license fee required by this article, and shall, in addition, furnish the following:
(1) Proof of age from a state or federally issued identification card;
(2) Two (2) front face portrait photographs of the applicant taken within thirty (30) days of the date of application and at least two (2) by two (2) inches in
size;
(3) Similar business history and experience ten (10) years prior to the date of application, including but not limited to, whether such person previously
operating in this or another city or state under license or permit, has had such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor.
Applicant shall also provide written evidence of any business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or revocation;
(4) A listing of all criminal arrests other than misdemeanor traffic violations, fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which arrested and the disposition thereof;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/349
(5) A complete set of fingerprints taken and to be retained on file by the chief of police or his/her designee or authorized representative;
(6) Such other information, identification and physical examination of the person as shall be deemed necessary by the chief of police;
(7) Signed authorization for the city, its agents and employees to verify the information in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit;
(8) The names and addresses of three (3) adult residents of the county who will serve as references. The references must be persons other than relatives
and business associates;
(9) Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct, said
declaration being duly dated and signed in the city.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.033 Approval and investigation by the chief of police
(a) Upon receiving the application for a game room establishment or individual operator permit, the chief of police shall order an investigation into the applicant(s)
moral character and personal and criminal history. The chief of police may in his discretion require a personal interview of the applicant(s), and such further information,
identification and physical examination of the person as shall bear on the investigation.
(b) In the case of applications for a game room establishment permit, the chief of police shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises where the game
room establishment is to be conducted, for the purposes of assuring that such premises comply with all sanitation requirements as set forth in this article, by the county,
and by the state, to include all regulations of public health, safety and welfare.
(c) Before any permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued under this article, the chief of police shall first sign his approval for the application.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.034 Issuance or denial of game room establishment permits
The chief of police shall authorize issuance of a game room establishment permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application unless he finds that:
(1) The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the city, and in the case of check or bank draft, has not been honored with payment upon presentation;
(2) The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to this article, or the city's
building, zoning and health regulations;
(3) The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than ten (10) percent of the stock of the corporation, or any of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or the holder of any lien of any
nature on the business and/or equipment used therein; and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, have been
convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude unless such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to the date of the application;
(4) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the
city in conjunction therewith;
(5) The applicant has had game room establishment or individual operator permit, or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the
city or any other city, state, federal or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of application;
(6) The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant is a partnership, and the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the game room establishment, is not over the age of
eighteen (18) years.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.035 Issuance or denial of individual operator license
The chief of police shall authorize issuance of an individual game room operator license within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application unless he finds that:
(1) The correct license fee has not been tendered to the city, and in the case of check or bank draft, has not been honored with payment upon
presentation;
(2) The individual has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude unless such conviction occurred at least five (5) years prior to
the date of the application;
(3) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statements of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the
city in conjunction therewith;
(4) The applicant has had a game room establishment, game room operator or other similar permit or license denied, revoked or suspended by the city,
other city or any other state, federal or local agency within five (5) years prior to the date of application;
(5) The applicant is not over the age of eighteen (18) years; and
(6) If the applicant fails to pay all required permit fees upon application.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.036 Display of permits
The game room establishment permittee shall display the city's game room establishment permit, state tax identification certificate, and certificate of occupancy in an
open and conspicuous place near the entrance of the game room establishment. All applicable permits or licenses shall be current and failure to renew any of the
required permit or licensing requirements will be grounds for closure of the game room establishment until such time the license or permit is current. (Ordinance 2018-
36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.037 Fees generally
There is a game room establishment permit fee and an individual game room operator license fee for each operator employed at the game room establishment. All fees
assessed shall be paid when renewed annually. Failure to pay all required fees at the time of application shall cause the application to be rejected. Failure to renew all
fees in a timely manner shall cause the permit and/or certificate of occupancy to be revoked. The permit fees shall be as listed in appendix A. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec.
1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.038 Return of fee
No portion of any fee collected under this article shall be returned after a permit has been issued. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/349
Sec. 4.12.039 Suspension and revocation of permits
(a) A game room establishment permit may be temporarily revoked or suspended by the chief of police in any case where any of the provisions of this article are
violated, or where any game room operator is found to have engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state laws or city ordinances at the permittee's place of
business and the permittee or supervisor has actual or constructive knowledge thereof. Constructive knowledge shall be established by the day to day operation of the
business. Permanent revocation proceedings shall be as prescribed by subsection (c) of this section.
(b) An individual game room operator permit may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police in any case where any of the provisions of this article are violated, or
where the permittee is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state laws or city ordinances at the game room establishment. Permanent revocation
proceedings shall be as prescribed by subsection (c) of this section.
(c) A game room establishment or game room individual operator permit may be permanently revoked or suspended by the city council after notice and hearing for
any cause set forth in this section. The chief of police or his designee shall initiate such proceedings by petition to the city council in writing setting forth specifically the
grounds for a permanent revocation or suspension. A copy of such petition shall be mailed to the last known address of the permit holder. Proper notice of the time and
date of the hearing, setting forth the specific grounds upon which the chief of police's petition is based, shall be given in writing by the city at least five (5) days prior to
the date set for such hearing through (1) first class United States mail, postage prepaid, registered or certified with return receipt requested, (2) delivering same in
person to the intended addressee, (3) delivery to an independent third-party commercial delivery service for same day or next day delivery and providing for evidence of
receipt at the office of the intended addressee, or (4) prepaid telegram, telex, or facsimile to the addressee. Notice so mailed shall be effective upon its deposit with the
United States Postal Service or any successor thereto; notice sent by such a commercial delivery service shall be effective upon delivery to such commercial delivery
service; notice given by personal delivery service shall be effective only if and when received by the addressee; and notice given by other means shall be effective only if
and when received at the office or designated place or machine of the intended addressee. The city council shall, by a majority vote, determine whether or not such
permit shall be permanently revoked or suspended, and such action shall be final and conclusive.
(d) Any applicant denied a game room establishment permit or individual game room operator license shall have the right of appeal to city council. Such appeal shall
be taken by filing with the city within ten (10) days after proper notice (as described in subsection (c) above) of the denial has been mailed to such person's address as
set forth in the application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city shall provide for a council hearing on such appeal at the earliest
convenient regular city council meeting and shall provide proper notice to the appellant and chief of police of the date and time of such hearing in the same manner as
provided in subsection (c). The council shall by a majority vote either sustain the action of the chief of police or issue the permit.
(e) Nothing in this section prevents the city from revoking any existing certificate of occupancy, permit or license if found to be issued in error, in violation of a law,
when issued under a false application, or when issued to an establishment that does not meet the state licensing requirements. An existing business whose certificate of
occupancy is revoked under this section must meet all current licensing and permitting requirements in the city before it is allowed to reopen for business.
(f) Nothing in this section precludes the city from revoking any existing certificate of occupancy, permit or license if the game room establishment is found to be in
violation of a health and safety code or fire code adopted by the city which warrants closing said business until all violations are rectified to the city's sole satisfaction that
no violations exist.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.040 Transfer of permit prohibited
No game room establishment permit or individual game room operator license is transferable, severable or divisible, and such authority as a permit or license confers
shall be conferred only upon the permittee or licensee named therein. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Secs. 4.12.041–4.12.060 Reserved
Division 3. Operation Regulations
Sec. 4.12.061 Hours
No game room establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.062 Alcoholic beverages prohibited
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide, keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any game room
establishment business. This includes a prohibition against patrons being allowed to consume, sell, give, dispense, provide, keep or cause to be sold, given, dispensed,
or provided while on the premises of the property of a game room establishment. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.063 Entrances and exits
No game room establishment shall have any entrance or any exitway providing a direct passageway to any other type of business, residence or living quarters. No game
room operators may be allowed to sleep or reside inside the game room establishment. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.064 Access
(a) All game room establishments operating under the authority of this article are declared to be public places, and shall not, during business hours, have the doors to
the entrances or exits of such establishments, or to any room locked or obstructed in any way so as to prevent free ingress and egress of persons; provided, however,
such doors may be closed.
(b) It shall be the duty of all of game room establishment owners and operators of a place where dominoes, cards, or other games are permitted, as described in this
article, or the owner or operator of a game room, or other person exercising control over a game room or a portion of a game room, or over a building, facility, or other
place that contains random operating machines or amusement redemption machines, to provide egress doors during business hours that are readily opened from the
egress side without the use of a key or special knowledge or effort, in conformance with the construction code and fire code. No electronic locks shall be used to prevent
entry during business hours at the places described in this section.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.065 Sanitation
(a) By applying for a game room establishment permit, the owners, agents, managers and operators agree that all premises used pursuant to this article shall be
subject to regular inspections by the chief of police or his/her designee for city code compliance, including but not limited to, health and sanitation, safety of structure and
adequacy of plumbing ventilation, heating and illumination.
(b) Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt and refuse. Well-marked toilet and handwashing facilities for permittees, operators and patrons shall be
provided. All walls, ceilings, windows and doors shall be free of dust, dirt, refuse and mold. In high humidity areas, including toilet rooms, shower rooms, steam rooms,
locker rooms, and other such rooms, the walls, ceilings and floors shall be constructed or covered with a material that is smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleaned.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.066 Animals prohibited
No animals shall be permitted within a game room establishment at any time. Service animals brought by a patron shall be the only exception. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec.
1, adopted 4/17/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/349
Sec. 4.12.067 Equipment
All equipment used by patrons at game room establishments regulated by this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and the equipment shall be kept in a
good and safe state of repair at all times. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.068 Sexual misconduct
(a) A game room establishment owner or individual game room operator shall not engage in sexual contact with any patron while at the game room establishment.
(b) A game room establishment permittee or individual game room operator licensee shall not allow any patron to promote or engage in sexual contact on the
premises of the game room establishment.
(c) A game room establishment permittee or individual game room operators shall not work, whether or not for compensation, at or for a sexually oriented business.
(d) Violations of this section shall result in an immediate temporary revocation of the permit or license and may result in a permanent revocation, if approved by city
council.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.069 Nudity or clothing designed to arouse
A game room establishment permittee or individual game room operator licensee shall not allow any individual to provide any services or conduct any aspects of their
employment while in the nude, while partially nude, or in clothing designed to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any individual. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted
4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.070 Required documentation
A game room establishment shall maintain a current list of all establishment owners, operators and/or contractors at all times which includes full name, date of birth, and
a state or governmental identification number. (Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.071 Required signage
(a) A game room establishment permitted by this article, shall mark each entrance to a game room with a sign that:
(1) States “game room” in four inch or larger block letters; and
(2) Is legible and visible at all times from a distance of 25 feet.
(b) Any signage required by this section shall be in conformance with the city's sign code.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
Sec. 4.12.072 Unrestricted access by law enforcement officer
(a) It shall be the duty of all owner, manager, operators, or employee of a game room establishment, or other person exercising control over a game room
establishment, a portion of a game room, an amusement redemption machine, random generator machines, or a place where dominoes, cards, or other table games are
permitted, to provide any law enforcement officer with immediate unrestricted access during business hours to all areas of a game room.
(b) An owner, manager, operator or employee of a game room or other person who does not allow a law enforcement officer to inspect a game room establishment or
amusement redemption machine commits an offense and will be subject to immediate temporary revocation of the establishment and individual operator licenses and
may warrant a case being forwarded to city council for a hearing for a permanent revocation of the permits and licenses.
(c) The owner(s) of a game room establishment shall be present during planned inspections and during any meetings related to obtaining permits or licenses required
under this article.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 1, adopted 4/17/18)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Penalty
Any violation of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1972 Code, sec. 10.1000; 2008 Code, sec. 5.01.001)
Sec. 5.01.002 Removal of debris and rubble after fire
(a) The owner or person having under his control or in his possession upon any premises in the city any substances which have been rendered useless or
unmerchantable by reason of any fire on such premises, or any debris resulting from such fire, must remove such substances and debris from such premises within five
days after notice to do so has been served by the fire marshal.
(b) Whenever any building or other structure in the city is partially burned, the owner thereof, or the person in charge or control thereof, shall, within ten days after
notice from the fire marshal to do so, remove all refuse, debris, charred and partially burned lumber and material from the ground; and, if such building or other structure
shall be burned to such an extent that it is rendered incapable of being repaired, the owner of the property upon which such structure is located, or person in charge or
control thereof, shall, within ten (10) days after notice from the fire marshal to do so, remove all of the remaining portion of the building or structure from the ground.
(c) The fire marshal may extend the ten-day period of removal of such burned or partially burned buildings when the insurance adjustment, if any, is still pending.
(1972 Code, sec. 10.701; 2008 Code, sec. 5.01.003)
Sec. 5.01.003 Above-ground storage of flammable liquids
The storage of flammable liquids in above-ground tanks is strictly prohibited unless specifically authorized by the fire chief. (1972 Code, sec. 10.501; 2008 Code, sec.
5.01.004)
State law reference–Standards for flammable liquid storage tanks, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 753.001 et seq.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/349
Sec. 5.01.004 Wood shakes and shingles prohibited
The use of treated or untreated wood shakes or wood shingles as a roof covering or exterior wall covering is strictly prohibited on any building in the city. Existing wood
shake or shingle roofs or wood shake or shingle exterior wall coverings may not be repaired or replaced with treated or untreated wood shakes or shingles. (Ordinance
07-011 adopted 5/6/07; 2008 Code, sec. 5.01.005)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created
The office of fire marshal and fire chief is hereby created. The fire marshal and fire chief for the city shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire
occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigations as to whether such fire was the result of
carelessness or design. The fire marshal and fire chief shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all the facts, statistics and circumstances, including the
origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. (1972 Code, sec. 10.201; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.001;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 5.02.002 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal and fire chief, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to
be cognizant of any of the facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he
shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to
defraud, or criminal conduct, in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, or either of them, and shall
furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all
pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1972 Code, sec. 10.202; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 5.02.003 Powers as investigator
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and
investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1972 Code, sec. 10.203; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.003)
Sec. 5.02.004 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any
book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal on the
matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. (1972 Code, sec. 10.204; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.004)
Sec. 5.02.005 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be
excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each
other until they have been examined. (1972 Code, sec. 10.205; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.005)
Sec. 5.02.006 Entry on premises where fire has occurred
The fire marshal and fire chief shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions
of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which
authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1972 Code, sec. 10.206; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.006; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 5.02.007 Inspections for dangerous buildings and hazardous conditions
The fire marshal and fire chief, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, or without any complaint, shall have a right at all
reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty to enter upon and make, or cause
to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall
find any building or other structure which, for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so
situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or
dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may
be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene,
dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to
cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be
forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises. Provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order,
he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the city manager, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order
shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. The fire marshal and fire chief shall report to the state fire marshal any information in
regard to fire investigations or inspections, as may be required or requested. (1972 Code, sec. 10.207; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.007; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 5.02.008 Maintaining dangerous building
No owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition,
or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire, and which is so
occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property. (1972 Code, sec. 10.401; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.008)
Sec. 5.02.009 Maintaining hazardous condition
No owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other
heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or
health, or safety of persons or property of others, or keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or
system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, or refuse, or with
any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others, or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting,
augmenting or causing fires, or which shall create conditions dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of such buildings, structure or premises. (1972 Code, sec. 10.402;
2008 Code, sec. 5.02.009)
Sec. 5.02.010 Notice required prior to prosecution
No prosecution shall be brought under sections 5.02.008 and 5.02.009 of this article until the order provided in section 5.02.007 be given, and the party notified shall fail
or refuse to comply with the same. (1972 Code, sec. 10.403; 2008 Code, sec. 5.02.010)
Sec. 5.02.011 Authority to establish fire prevention programs and activities
The fire marshal and fire chief shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions
of this article, to create and establish fire prevention and education activities and programs, necessary and intended to reduce fires and prevent injury or death.
(Ordinance 2018-44 adopted 6/5/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/349
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Sec. 5.03.001 Created
There is hereby created the city fire department, which shall operate as a departmental function of the city. The city council shall procure fire engines and other
apparatus for the extinguishment of fires and provide engine houses for preserving the same, and shall authorize the city manager to employ departmental employees.
(1972 Code, sec. 10.101; 2008 Code, sec. 5.03.001)
Sec. 5.03.002 Officers; appointment of volunteers
There are hereby created the positions of fire chief and assistant fire chief. The fire department chief, with approval from the city manager, shall appoint volunteer fire
officers as needed. (1972 Code, sec. 10.102; 2008 Code, sec. 5.03.002)
Sec. 5.03.003 Administration and operation
The fire chief shall make recommendations to the city manager concerning the equipment to be acquired, the organization to be adopted, and the employees and
volunteers to be respectively employed or appointed, as well as to the rules and regulations to be adopted for the administration thereof. (1972 Code, sec. 10.103; 2008
Code, sec. 5.03.003)
Sec. 5.03.004 Powers and duties of fire chief
The fire chief is the administrative head of the fire department and is responsible for the management and operations of the fire protection program of the city. He is
responsible for insuring the immediate readiness and operations capability of the fire department as defined by local, state and federal law. The fire chief is also
responsible for the proper enforcement of departmental rules and regulations and for maintaining discipline, efficiency and good morale within the fire department. The
fire chief will appoint a fire marshal from within his department, or assume the duties himself. (1972 Code, sec. 10.104; 2008 Code, sec. 5.03.004)
Sec. 5.03.005 Emergency interlocal assistance
(a) Pursuant to a mutual aid agreement made under the authority of this article, the fire department of the city is hereby authorized to provide such firefighting, rescue,
EMS and/or emergency equipment as is available in the opinion of the chief of the fire department or other officer in charge of the fire department of the city, whenever
firefighting or other type of emergency equipment or personnel is requested by the chief of the fire department or officer in charge of the fire department or the fire
departments, emergency service districts or agencies that have approved the San Antonio Area Emergency Services Mutual Aid Agreement. Such fire chief, CEO, or
other officer in charge shall certify that there is an emergency and shall specify the equipment and personnel which are needed. The fire chief of the city or such officer in
charge shall take into consideration as a first requisite that he/she shall withhold such equipment and personnel as would be necessary, in his/her opinion, to protect the
health, property and lives of the citizens of the city. The fire chief of the city is herewith directed and authorized to keep the fire chiefs of these respective fire
departments and other agencies informed as to his/her equipment and his/her personnel, and as to the inventory of his/her firefighting, rescue, and/or emergency
medical equipment.
(b) When any firefighting official of the city is ordered by proper authority to perform firefighting, rescue, and/or emergency medical duties outside the territorial limits of
the city, he/she shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, or death benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within the limits of the city, as well as for
damage to equipment and clothing, and medical expenses, which he/she may incur while on duty outside such limits, or while traveling to or from such assignment.
(c) Whenever any firefighting or other emergency services official is assigned to the city, pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, to assist under circumstances as
described above which may exist in the city, such officer shall be a fire suppression, EMS, fire prevention or emergency services agent of the city and shall be under the
command of the chief of the fire department or other officer in charge for the city while so assigned, and he/she shall have all the powers and duties of a regular
firefighting official of the city, and his/her qualifications for office where regularly employed/assigned shall constitute his/her qualifications for office in the city and no other
oath, bond or compensation shall be made.
(d) When any firefighting, rescue, and/or emergency medical equipment is damaged while being used in another jurisdiction, or if any damage to equipment should
occur while traveling to or from such emergency in another jurisdiction, the city will bear the costs of such damage.
(Ordinance 09-030 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 5.03.005)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE CODE*
Sec. 5.04.001 Adopted
There is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city the 2018 edition of the International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council, including all its
appendices and references, and all its subsequent supplements and changes in and to said 2018 edition and references, save and except such portions as may be
inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provisions of the Code, or any statute of the state, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if
set out at length herein. (Ordinance 07-017, sec. 1, adopted 4/3/07; 2008 Code, sec. 5.04.001; Ordinance 14-028, sec. 1, adopted 12/8/14; Ordinance 2018-28 adopted
3/20/18)
Sec. 5.04.002 Amendments
Section 101.1, “Title,” shall read:
These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of City of Leon Valley, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
Section 101.2.1, “Appendices,” is added, and shall read:
The Provisions within the appendices shall apply unless specifically stated otherwise through other section in amendments.
Section 101.6, “Requirements of other agencies,” is added, and shall read:
101.6 Requirements of other Agencies. The City of Leon Valley Building Codes do not include all additional requirements for buildings and structures that
may be imposed by other state/county agencies, occupational licensing boards or commissions. It shall be the responsibility of a permit holder, design
professional, contractor or occupational license holder to determine whether any additional requirements exist.
Section 102.3 Change of use or occupancy is added, and shall read:
102.3 Change of use or occupancy. A change of occupancy shall not be permitted unless the use or occupancy is made to comply with the requirements of
this code and the International Existing Building Code. A change of the business name, responsible party, designated use, or any activity that deviates from
the original submitted application within the occupancy shall qualify as a change of occupancy. No exceptions.
Section 102.3.1, Notice of alteration to be given to fire chief, is added, and shall read:
102.3.1 Notice of Alteration to be given to Fire Chief. The Director of the Planning and Development Services Department shall provide written notice to the
Fire Chief of every application made to repair, alter, or remodel any occupancy and any building or structure with the exception of noncommercial singlefamily
and two-family dwellings.
Sections 104.3.2 Photographic documentation, is added, and shall read:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/349
104.3.2 Photographic Documentation. Members of the Fire Department making such examinations or inspections shall have the right, with proper credentials,
and be authorized to take a reasonable number of photographs or videotapes for evidence and for records for use by the Fire Department to study hazards
and scientific control for fire safety.
Section 105.2.5 Investigation fee/working without a permit, is added, and shall read:
105.2.5 Investigation fee/working without a permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until said permit is posted in a conspicuous place on the job
site and approved plans are available at this location. Where work is commenced prior to obtaining said permit, the fees provided in the City Code may be
doubled. The payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this ordinance in the execution of the
work nor of any other penalties prescribed herein.
Section 105.4.1 Submittals, is entirely deleted and replaced with the following language:
105.4.1 Submittals. Construction documents and supporting data shall be submitted in two or more sets, and at least once by portable document format
accepted on electronic memory card with each application for a permit and in such form and detail as required by the fire code official. The construction
documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed.
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and supporting data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to
obtain compliance with this code.
Section 105.6.1, Aerosol products, is added, and shall read:
105.6.1 Aerosol products.
An operational permit is required to manufacture, store or handle an aggregate quantity of Level 2 or Level 3 aerosol products in excess of 250 pounds
net weight. Aerosol storage in excess of 250 pounds net weight shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 51 of the International Fire Code, 2018
edition, and NFPA 30B, 2015 edition. The classification of aerosol, Level 1, 2 or 3, will be printed on the product manufacturer's packaging.
There shall not be allowed any storage or handling an aggregate quantity of any combination or single type of Level 1 or Level 2 aerosol products more
than a combined net weight to exceed 1,000 pounds at any time, unless the products are stored in approved flammable liquid storage rooms (NFPA
30B, 2015 edition).
When stored or handled within the allowable quantities, segregation rules apply as referenced in Chapter 51 of the International Fire Code, 2018
edition. Where chain link fence enclosures are required, the fencing must comply with the following:
1. The fence shall not be less than No. 9 gage steel wire, woven into a maximum 2- inch diamond mesh.
2. The fence shall be installed from the floor to the underside of the roof or ceiling above.
3. Class III, IV and high-hazard commodities shall be stored outside of the aerosol storage area and a minimum of 8 feet (2438 mm) from the
fence.
4. Access openings in the fence shall be provided with either self-closing or automatic-closing devices or a labyrinth opening arrangement
preventing aerosol containers from rocketing through the access openings.
5. Not less than two means of egress shall be provided from the fenced enclosure.
Aisle requirements for segregated storage in general purpose warehouses shall comply with Table 5104.3.2.2
Section 105.6.14, Explosives, is added and shall read:
The manufacture, storage, handling, sale or use of any quantity of explosives, explosive materials, fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects within the city limits
of Leon Valley is strictly prohibited unless permitted.
Section 105.6.32, Open burning, is added and shall read:
105.6.32 Open burning. Whenever it shall become necessary for any person to have a fire out-of-doors for cooking, washing, or any other purely domestic
purpose, such person is hereby required to build such fire in an appropriate fire-resistant container of some kind, made of brick, stone, metal or other fireresistant
material in such manner as to prevent said fire from escaping. Open burning of leaves, trash, construction waste, yard debris and any vegetation is
strictly prohibited.
Exception: When authorized and supervised by the Fire Department, open burning for ceremonial or training purposes, such as a flag retirement, or live
fire training by Firefighters will be permitted.
Section 105.6.37 Places of assembly - deleted.
Section 105.7.7, Fire alarm and detection system and related equipment, shall read:
105.7.7 Fire alarm and detection system and related equipment. A construction permit is required for installation of or modification to fire alarm and detection
systems and related equipment. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit.
Replacing a fire alarm panel is not considered maintenance to an existing system and shall require construction permit.
Section 105.7.21, Solar photovoltaic power systems, shall read:
105.7.21 Solar photovoltaic power systems. A construction permit is required to install or modify solar photovoltaic power systems. Photovoltaic power
systems shall be installed and maintained according to listed manufacturer instructions, and the most current standards established by the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC).
Section 106.3 Work commencing before permit issuance, shall read:
106.3 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the
necessary permits shall be subject to a double permit fee. All work shall cease until the required permits are obtained and inspections completed. It shall be
unlawful, and a violation of this code, subject to penalties as described herein, for any person to continue any work after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform by the fire chief, in order to remove a violation or unsafe condition.
Section 106.5, Refunds, shall read:
106.5 Refunds. Refunds to permit fees will be issued if no part of a plans review or fire inspections have been scheduled or performed, minus a $50.00
administrative processing fee.
Section 108.3.1, Records of hazardous materials, is added, and shall read:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/349
108.3.1 Records of hazardous materials. Owners or the Owners Representative of buildings or properties that store or use hazardous materials shall maintain
chemical documents (SDS), and building/site data, construction, maintenance and modifications over the entire life of the building. A means shall be
developed for off-site storage and maintenance of the documents. In addition, a secondary source of this information shall be made available in suitably
designed hard copy or electronic format for use by emergency responders within a reasonable timeframe. The primary source of information shall be easily
accessible by responders during emergencies.
Section 109, Board of appeals, shall be retitled to read:
Section 109 Appeals.
Section 109.1, Appeals, is hereby created and shall read:
109.1 Appeals. Appeals shall be made first to the Fire Chief, then the Building Official, and finally the City Manager. Further appeals may be presented to the
City Council.
Section 110.4, Violation penalties, shall read:
110.4 Violation penalties. Persons who violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erect, install, alter, repair
or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Chief, or if a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code,
shall be guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Such fine and imprisonment shall be at the discretion of the City Judge. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 111.2.1 Removal of occupants is added, and shall read:
111.2.1 Removal of occupants. A member of the Fire Department is authorized to require the removal of occupants at a location when actual occupancy
exceeds the permitted or posted occupant load. A person commits an offense if he refuses to obey an order to vacate.
Section 112.4, Failure to comply, shall read:
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person continues any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 dollars or more than $2,000.00 dollars.
Section 113.1.1 Prohibition of electrical service, is added and shall read:
113.1.1 Prohibition of electrical service. When any fire hazard is permitted to continue in existence by the owner after receiving the notice provided in Section
110.1 and after expiration of the time limit as determined under Section 110.3 if the Fire Marshal shall find and determine from the facts that the danger to
human life is materially increased by the electrical wiring and appliances present in the building, he shall notify City Public Service of the city to disconnect its
service and forthwith cease supplying electric current thereto. It shall thereupon be the duty of the manager of City Public Service to cause said service to be
disconnected and the supply of electrical current disconnected immediately.
Section 113.1.2 Prohibition of gas service, is added and shall read:
113.1.2 Prohibition of gas service. When any fire hazard is permitted to continue in existence by the owner after receiving the notice provided in Section 110.1
and after expiration of the time limit as determined under Section 110.3, if the Fire Marshal shall find and determine from the facts that the danger to human
life is materially increased by the gas plumbing and/or appliances present in the building, he shall notify City Public Service or Grey Forest Utilities to
disconnect its gas service and forthwith cease supplying gas thereto. It shall thereupon be the duty of the manager of the City Public Service or Grey Forest
Utilities to cause said service to be disconnected and the supply of gas disconnected immediately.
Section 202, Add to definitions in section 202:
HIGH-RISE BUILDING(S). Any building with an occupied floor located more than 50 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. Any other
definition or description described throughout this code shall be disregarded.
FIRE HAZARD shall mean any condition or act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that
customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire, or which may obstruct,
delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the fire department or the egress of occupants in the event of fire.
FIRE LANE shall mean any area appurtenant to entrances or exits of a building deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or his designee to remain free and clear
of parked vehicles for access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by him as such, and may include sidewalks, driveways,
portions of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near building entrances or exits, or any fire hydrant.
FIRE MARSHAL shall mean the fire code official responsible for investigations of fires, inspection of facilities, and code enforcement.
FIRE WATCH. Qualified individuals are defined as State Certified Fire Inspectors assigned to the Fire Prevention Division of the City of Leon Valley, or, if
approved by the Fire Marshal, Texas Certified Firefighters, Peace Officers, individuals employed by a private security firm, or other designated individuals
whose sole duty when assigned a fire watch is to perform constant patrols of the premises and keep watch for signs of unwanted fire. A written attendance
log must be maintained and personnel must have at least one approved means of notifying the fire department of fire or other emergencies.
FOSTER CARE FAMILY HOME shall mean a single independent residential occupancy that is the primary residence of the caregiver and licensed by the
state to provide twenty-four (24) hour care for six or fewer children (including those related to the caregiver) up to the age of eighteen (18) years.
MOBILE FOOD ESTABLISHMENT shall mean a mobile food operation using any heat producing equipment to cook, fry, or warm products for consumption
from a motorized vehicle, towable trailer, or watercraft.
PARK shall mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a street otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of, and while actively engaged
in, receiving or discharging passengers or loading or unloading merchandise or in obedience to traffic regulations, signs, or signals or an involuntary stopping
of a vehicle by reason of a cause beyond the control of the operator of the vehicle.
Whenever the word “JURISDICTION” is used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the City of Leon Valley, Texas.
Whenever the words “Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention,” or “Fire Code Official” are used in the International Fire Code, it shall be held to mean “The Fire
Chief.”
Section 304.2.1 Dangerous storing of combustibles is added and shall read:
304.2.1 Dangerous storing of combustibles. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to have or keep or store, within the city, any quantity of tar,
pitch, resin, petroleum or its products, or other combustible materials or substances in such manner that such materials or substances shall be in danger of
taking and communicating fire.
Section 307.1, General, shall read:
307.1 General. Except for domestic purposes to include; cooking food, or for heating. Open burning of leaves, trash, yard debris and any vegetation is strictly
prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/349
Exception: When authorized and supervised by the Fire Department, open burning for ceremonial or training purposes, such as a flag retirement, or live
fire training by Firefighters will be allowed.
Section 307.2, Permit required, is deleted in its entirety.
Section 307.2.1, Authorization, is deleted in its entirety.
Section 307.3 Extinguishments authority, shall read:
307.3 Extinguishments authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the person responsible or the fire department of open
burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation.
Section 307.4, Location, is deleted in its entirety.
Section 307.4.1, Bonfires, is deleted in its entirety.
Section 307.4.2, Recreational fires, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section 307.4.3, Portable outdoor fireplaces, shall read:
307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. The use of portable outdoor fireplaces within the complex of any group R is prohibited. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall
be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet of a structure or combustible material.
Exception: Portable outdoor fireplaces used at one and two-family dwellings.
Section 307.5 Attendance, shall read:
307.5 Attendance. The use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire
extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel,
garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
Section 307.6 Sky lanterns prohibited is added, and shall read:
307.6 Sky lanterns. Sky lanterns; also known as Chinese lanterns, sky candles, or fire balloons, which are airborne lanterns constructed of combustible
material and contain a candle or fuel cell that when lit, causes the device to go airborne and travel in the air; are prohibited within the city limits.
Section 308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices, exceptions number two (2) and three (3) are deleted and shall read:
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. No person living within any multifamily housing such as an apartment, apartment condominium, hotel, motel, or any
other multifamily type occupancy shall construct, install, store, maintain or use any incinerator, barbecue pit, charcoal or propane grill or container of any kind
for the purpose of igniting any combustible materials for whatever domestic purpose such as cooking or washing, within 10 feet of a combustible multifamily
housing occupancy.
Exception: One- and two-family dwellings.
Section 311.2.2 Fire protection, exceptions number one (1), two (2), and three (3) are deleted and shall read:
311.2.2 Fire protection. Fire alarm, sprinkler, and stand-pipe systems shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times.
Section 501.3, Construction documents, shall read:
Section 501.3 Construction documents.
Construction documents for proposed fire apparatus access, location of fire lanes, security gates across fire apparatus access and construction
documents and hydraulic calculations for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to the fire department for review and approval prior to construction.
Upon completion of construction and prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a copy of finished drawings (as built) shall be provided to the fire
department in an electronic format, acceptable by the Fire Chief.
Section 501.3.1 Fire protection site plan is added, shall read:
501.3.1 Fire protection site plan. A Fire Protection Site Plan (labeled as such) shall be submitted electronically in portable document format with the
construction documents when application is made for a building permit. Plans must be reviewed and approved by the Fire Marshal and/or fire plan review
staff before a building permit is issued. The approved Fire Protection Site Plan will be retained by the City of Leon Valley. The Fire Protection Site Plan shall
be drawn to scale and shall show and include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Compass reading.
2. Property and/or lot lines.
3. Street frontages.
4. Location of all buildings (existing and proposed).
5. Fire apparatus access roads (i.e., fire lanes, aerial apparatus access roads) to buildings. Fire lanes shall be highlighted and shall include
dimensions (width, turning radii, clearance to overhead obstructions, etc.). The plans shall also show dimensions and calculations for evaluation of
compliance with Section D105.3.
6. Fences, gates, walls, streams and other obstructions to firefighter access.
7. Location of all fire hydrants (existing and proposed). This shall include the direction and the distance to all hydrants not shown on the site plan, but
within one thousand (1,000) feet of the building to be protected.
8. Size (diameter and length) and locations of all fire main piping (proposed and existing). The pressure class and type of new pipe to be installed
shall be identified.
9. The location, type, and size of backflow prevention devices, where installed.
10. Number of lanes, including turning lanes, of all adjacent streets and the location of medians as applicable.
11. Location of all automatic sprinkler and standpipe risers.
12. Location of Fire Department connection(s).
13. Size, type, and location of valves including post indicator valve (if they are located in a pit), control room automatic sprinkler system shut-off, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/349
14. Other water supplies.
15. Where required, type of protection from collision that may cause physical damage to fire protection equipment.
Section 503.2.1 Dimensions, shall read:
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet, exclusive of shoulders, except where a fire
hydrant is located on a fire department access road, in which case the minimum road width shall be 26 feet. An unobstructed vertical clearance of not less
than 14 feet and shall be required and maintained at all times. Security gates shall be sized to match the required clear width.
Section 503.2.1.2 Mountable curbs, is added, and shall read:
503.2.1.2 Mountable curbs. Mountable curbs are permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal.
Section 503.2.3 Surface, is amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:
503.2.3 Surface. Drivable grass surfaces, or other alternative drivable surfaces, are permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal or his designee and in
accordance with all of the following conditions:
1. Sealed documents indicating compliance with the provisions of 503.2.3 shall be submitted by a registered design professional for review.
2. The drivable grass surface, or alternative drivable surface, shall not be used as the primary access to the site.
3. The surface shall be capable of supporting the imposed load of fire apparatus weighing at least 75,000 pounds.
4. Blue traffic reflectors shall be provided on each side of the surface every 20 feet to clearly mark its boundaries. Vegetation on and surrounding the
surface shall be maintained such that said reflectors are visible at all times.
5. Sod is not permitted to be placed over the drivable base.
6. If the surface proposed is to be used as the aerial apparatus access road for the facility, concrete curbing, or other approved edging, shall be
installed along both sides of the portion to be used as such for enhanced lateral stability. A registered design professional shall design said curbing.
Sealed drawings of the design shall be provided to the Fire Department and Development Services for review.
7. If sand or other free-flowing fill is used as a main structural component for the surface, concrete curbing or other approved edging shall be installed
along both sides of the surface for material containment. A registered design professional shall design such curbing. Sealed drawings of the design
shall be provided to the Fire Department and Development Services for review. A signed letter from the manufacturer shall be provided to the Fire
Marshal certifying that the installation meets all requirements in the manufacturer's installations prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
8. The surface shall be maintained in proper working order at all times when utilized as a required fire lane. Should the surface become damaged or
fall into disrepair, the Fire Marshal or his designee shall be authorized to require the repair and re-certification of said surface.
Section 503.2.4 Turning radius, shall read:
503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be determined by the fire code official. The turning radii of a fire
apparatus access roadway shall require a minimum of 50 feet outside radius and a minimum of 25 feet clear distance to the inside radius on all turns in
excess of 30 degrees.
Section 503.2.5, Dead ends, shall read:
503.2.5 Dead ends. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45 720 mm) in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning
around fire apparatus. Turnarounds approved by the Fire Marshal or as permitted by Appendix D are acceptable. Dead-end fire apparatus access roads
located between buildings shall have a 10-foot setback from the edge of the access road to the structures on each side of the road.
Section 503.2.8 Angles of approach and departure, shall read:
Section 503.2.8 Angles of approach and departure. An angle of approach and an angle of departure shall be designed so that at least 8 degrees shall be
maintained at the front and the rear of the department's apparatus when it is loaded to the estimated in-service weight.
Section 503.3 Marking, shall read:
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such
roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs, and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and shall be
replaced or repaired necessary to provide adequate visibility.
503.3.1 Striping. Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lined of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the
boundaries of the lane. The words “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” shall appear in four-inch (4") white letters at twenty-five
feet (25') intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical and
horizontal of the curb.
503.3.2. Signs. Signs, when approved by the fire code official, shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” and shall be twelve
inches (12") wide and eighteen inches (18") high. Signs shall be on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than two inch (2")
tall lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6' 6") above finished grade.
Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the
Fire Chief.
Section 503.3.1 Maintenance of markings, is added and shall read:
503.3.1 Maintenance of markings. The person in possession of the premises on and into which a fire apparatus access roadway or fire lane is required shall
be solely responsible for the maintenance of such roadways or fire lanes and all required signs. No owner, manager, or other person(s) in charge of premises
served by a required fire apparatus access roadway or fire lane shall abandon, close, or alter the fire apparatus roadway or any part thereof without
permission of the fire chief. The person(s) in possession of the premises shall be responsible for ensuring that fire apparatus roadways are clear at all times.
Section 503.2.7 Grade, is amended to read as follows:
503.2.7 Grade. The gradient for a fire apparatus access road shall not exceed ten percent (10%).
Section 503.4.2 Parking in fire lane, is added and shall read:
503.4.2 Parking in fire lane. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, equipment or device to park in or block a fire lane. Any owner of vehicle, equipment or device
found to have parked in or blocking a fire lane shall be cited or have vehicle, equipment, or device removed and impounded by police or the fire department.
Section 503.6 Security gates shall read:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/349
503.6 Security gates. The installation of a security gate(s) across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the fire chief. Where security gates are
installed, they shall be required to have installed on such gate a siren operated sensor, and manual access controls. The siren operated sensor shall open
gates when approached by an emergency apparatus. Manual access controls shall open gates during non-emergency responses and serve as a backup in
the event that the siren operated sensor fails to operate. The maintenance of access controls and the siren operated sensor system shall be the responsibility
of the Owner or Owners Agent. The security gates and the emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where
provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the
requirements of ASTM F 2200.
Section 503.6.1 Direction of swing, is added and shall read:
503.6.1 Direction of swing. Security gates installed across a Fire Apparatus Access Road shall swing in the direction of travel towards the building or open
horizontally to avoid backing up of Fire Apparatus and to allow for an expedited response.
Section 503.6.1.2 Gate timing, is added and shall read:
503.6.1.2 Gate timing. Gates must fully open within 15 seconds of activation and remain in the open position until closed by operation of the electrical control
device.
Section 503.6.1.3 Fail safe position, is added and shall read:
503.6.1.3 Fail safe position. Fire department access gates shall fail safe (open) in the event of a power failure.
Section 503.6.1.4 Gate and entrance design, is added and shall read:
503.6.1.4 Gate and entrance design. Gates shall be designed so that the access roadway or turning radius (AASHTO WB50) shall not be obstructed by the
operation of the gate. Minimum setback from the public street shall be a distance determined by the city engineer and shall allow the emergency vehicle the
ability to safely operate the lock box or panel without the rear of the vehicle protruding into the street. Security gates installed across a fire apparatus access
road shall swing in the direction of travel towards the building or open horizontally to avoid backing up of fire apparatus and to allow for an expedited
response. Turning radius from the public street shall be in accordance with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) standard, WB50.
Section 503.6.1.5 Access controls, is added and shall read:
503.6.1.5 Access controls. Access controls shall be exterior to the gate and located for activation by the vehicle operator without leaving the vehicle. The
height of the lock box/control panel shall be 66 inches, measured from the finished grade line of the street.
Section 503.6.1.6 Additional access, is added and shall read:
503.6.1.6 Additional access. If required by the fire chief, additional “exit only” or “emergency access” gates shall be set up for fire department emergency
access. Exit only gates, which are not motorized, shall be installed per the fire department's recommendations. Exit only gates shall have a minimum
clearance of 20 feet clear width and be posted with a sign that states “Caution Gate Opens Out,” and designated as a Fire Lane. In addition to Fire Lane
markings, the markings on the pavement shall include a 5-inch yellow stripe showing the depth of the gate swing.
Section 503.6.1.7 Additional access gate controls, is added and shall read:
503.6.1.7 Additional access gate controls. Where motorized, operation of a secondary gate shall be by siren operated sensor.
Section 503.7 Temporary fire department access road, is added and shall read:
503.7 Temporary fire department access road. When required, temporary access roadways shall be a minimum of 16 feet (4,877 mm wide), with a minimum
of 4 inches (101.6 mm) thickness of aggregate base course or decomposed granite compacted to a 90% density where natural soil will not meet compaction
requirements.
Section 505.1 Premises identification, shall read:
505.1 Premises identification. All address numerals shall be in contrasting color with their background. Where a building stands alone, it is required that the
address numerals be placed on the building front in an approved location by the fire department official, visible from the nearest primary roadway, and that the
minimum height of address numerals be six (6) inches when the building front is less than 150 feet from the nearest primary roadway, and increase two
inches in height for every 50 feet more than 150 feet from the nearest primary roadway to a maximum required height of 12 inches. The stroke width shall be
minimum one-half (1/2) inch for numerals up to eight (8) inches in height, and increase in size to one (1) inch in width when the numeral height is required to
be more than eight (8) inches. Where in a commercial building complex with multiple tenant spaces that share a main sign visible from the nearest primary
roadway, each tenant space shall have its respective address number, including suite number, on their business front, that meets the requirements for standalone
buildings as stated in this section, and the commercial building complex sign or sign post shall have address numerals on each side of the sign that
faces a primary roadway, or on the post or pillar facing the roadway that holds the sign, of at least eight (8) inches in height and a minimum stroke width of
one (1) inch for signs less than thirty-five (35) feet in height and ten (10) inches in height with a minimum stroke width of two (2) inch for signs more than
thirty-five (35) feet in height. All suites within a commercial building complex that have a rear exit shall have their respective address numerals affixed to the
rear exits, with the same requirements applicable to the business front. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall also be provided in
additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Address numbers shall be maintained.
Section 505.1.1 Building complex identification, is added and shall read:
505.1.1 Building complex identification. A building complex composed of multiple structures shall have an official suite/unit number assigned to each building
as well as a street address number. If there is sufficient street frontage, each unit or building may be assigned a separate official street address number. The
official street address number of each structure as designated by the Building Official must be prominently posted on the building so that it is visible from the
nearest public street. Each number designated by the Building Official for each individual suite/unit must be conspicuously posted on the suite/unit.
Section 505.2 Graphic directories, is added and shall read:
505.2 Graphic directories. Approved graphic directories shall be provided at all driveway entrances for all multiple-dwelling developments, manufactured
home parks, or when required by the fire chief. Such directories shall be illuminated, shall conform to the city sign design standards, and shall be approved by
the fire chief.
Section 505.4 Additional markings and signs, is added:
505.4 Additional markings and signs. When required by the fire code official, the following signs shall be posted in an approved manner, in conspicuous
location(s):
Section 506.1 Where required, shall read:
506.1 Where required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary
for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be a
Knox ® rapid entry system capable of holding the number of keys necessary for operation and access of necessary equipment, doors, and other areas
necessary for access as determined and approved by the fire code official. The Knox ® rapid entry system shall be keyed to system code registered for the
City of Leon Valley Fire Department.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/349
Section 506.1.1 Locks, shall read:
506.1.1 Locks. Any lock required by the fire code official for access, or where a lock is placed per request of the owner or manager of the business or
property, and the area locked is determined by the fire code official to require access; the lock shall be a Knox ® rapid entry system keyed to the system code
registered by the City of Leon Valley Fire Department.
Section 506.1.2 Key boxes for non-standardized fire service elevator keys, shall read:
506.1.2 Key boxes for non-standardized fire service elevator keys. Key boxes provided for non-standardized fire service elevator keys shall comply with
Section 506.1 and all of the following:
1. The key box shall be a Knox ® rapid entry system keyed to the system code registered by the City of Leon Valley Fire Department.
2. The front cover shall be permanently labeled with the words “Fire Department Use Only-Elevator Keys.”
3. The key box shall be mounted at each elevator bank at the lobby nearest to the lowest level of fire department access.
4. The key box shall be mounted 5 feet 6 inches (1676 mm) above the finished floor to the right side of the elevator bank.
5. Contents of the key box are limited to fire service elevator keys. Additional elevator access tools, keys and information pertinent to emergency
planning or elevator access shall be permitted when authorized by the fire code official.
6. In buildings with two or more elevator banks, a single key box shall be permitted to be used when such elevator banks are separated by not more
than 30 feet (9144 mm). Additional key boxes shall be provided for each individual elevator or elevator bank separated by more than 30 feet (9144 mm).
Exception: A single key box shall be permitted to be located adjacent to a fire command center or the nonstandard fire service elevator key shall be
permitted to be secured in a key box used for other purposes and located in accordance with Section 506.1.
Section 506.2.1 Key box access and removal of keys, is added and shall read:
506.2.1 Key box access and removal of keys. The Fire Department shall have the only key to the key box. Removal of any key by other than the authorized
Fire Department personnel shall be a violation of this Code.
Section 507.3 Fire flow, is amended and shall read:
507.3 Fire flow. The approved method to determine the required Fire Flow for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities shall be as per Appendix B of the
International Fire Code, 2018 edition. When utilizing Table B105.1 to determine number and distribution of fire hydrants, and the flow requirement falls
between the values on the table, the flow requirement shall be rounded up to meet the higher value.
Section 507.4 Water supply test, is amended and shall read:
507.4 Water supply test. Adequacy of the water supply shall be determined by an approved flow test that is conducted on the fire hydrants nearest the project
site. The flow test shall be as follows:
1. The flow test shall have been conducted no more than twelve (12) months prior to the date of construction document submittal to the City of Leon
Valley.
2. The flow test shall be constructed in accordance with the 2016 edition of NFPA 291, Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of
Hydrants.
3. The flow test results shall be submitted with the construction documents in accordance with the NFPA standard fire flow test format.
4. If the water supply piping is not yet constructed, hydraulic calculations for the proposed piping design shall be submitted. The calculations shall be
based on the flow test conducted on the fire hydrants nearest the project site and shall verify that the piping design provides the minimum require fire
flow at no less than 25 psi residual. Upon completion of construction and prior to final certificate of occupancy, a flow test shall be conducted to verify
the results of the calculations.
Section 507.5.1.2 Additional locations required, is added and shall read:
507.5.1.2 Additional locations required. Public and/or private fire hydrants are required to be installed where one or more of the following conditions exist:
1. Existing fire hydrants do not meet the required fire hydrant location and spacing criteria defined in Section 507.5.1, or Appendix C.
2. The complexity of the project justifies their installation as determined by the Fire Marshal.
Section 507.5.5 Clear space around hydrants, is amended and shall read:
507.5.5 Clear space around hydrants. A 3-foot (914 mm) clear space shall be maintained around the circumference of fire hydrants except as otherwise
required or approved. The clear space around hydrant and the access to the hydrant shall be level, unobstructed, and firefighters must be able to operate the
hydrant without climbing above surrounding grade level.
Section 507.5.7 Fire hydrant installation criteria, is added and shall read:
507.5.7 Fire hydrant installation criteria. Fire hydrants shall be installed per the following criteria:
1. Fire hydrants shall be a minimum of one (1) foot and a maximum of seven (7) feet from the gutter face of the curb.
2. The steamer connection shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1.5) feet and a maximum of two (2) feet above grade.
3. All private hydrants shall be painted red.
4. Fire hydrants shall be right turn only.
5. The steamer connection shall face the street, fire access road or fire lane.
6. The Steamer connection shall be a 5-inch Storz.
Section 508.1.6 Required features, is amended and shall read:
508.1.6 Required features. The fire command center shall comply with NFPA 72 and shall contain the following features:
1. The emergency voice/alarm communication system control unit.
2. The fire department communications system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/349
3. Fire detection and alarm system annunciator.
4. Annunciator unit visually indicating the location of the elevators and whether they are operational.
5. Status indicators and controls for air distribution systems.
6. The firefighter's control panel required by Section 909.16 for smoke control systems installed in the building.
7. Controls for unlocking stairway doors simultaneously.
8. Sprinkler valve and water-flow detector display panels.
9. Emergency and standby power status indicators.
10. A telephone for fire department use with controlled access to the public telephone system.
11. Fire pump status indicators.
12. Schematic building plans indicating the typical floor plan and detailing the building core, means of egress, fire protection systems, firefighting
equipment and fire department access, and the location of fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers and smoke partitions.
13. An approved Building Information Card that contains, but is not limited to, the following information:
13.1 General building information that includes: property name, address, the number of floors in the building (above and below grade), use and
occupancy classification (for mixed uses, identify the different types of occupancies on each floor), estimated building population (i.e., day, night,
weekend);
13.2 Building emergency contact information that includes: a list of the building's emergency contacts (e.g., building manager, building engineer,
etc.) and their respective work phone number, cell phone number, and e-mail address;
13.3 Building construction information that includes: the type of building construction (e.g., floors, walls, columns, and roof assembly);
13.4 Exit stair information that includes: number of exit stairs in the building, each exit stair designation and floors served, location where each
exit stair discharges, exit stairs that are pressurized, exit stairs provided with emergency lighting, each exit stair that allows reentry, exit stairs
providing roof access; elevator information that includes: number of elevator banks, elevator bank designation, elevator car numbers and
respective floors that they serve, location of elevator machine rooms, location of sky lobby, location of freight elevator banks;
13.5 Building services and system information that includes: location of mechanical rooms, location of building management system, location
and capacity of all fuel oil tanks, location of emergency generator, location of natural gas service;
13.6 Fire protection system information that includes: locations of standpipes, location of fire pump room, location of fire department
connections, floors protected by automatic sprinklers, location of different types of automatic sprinkler systems installed (e.g., dry, wet, pre-action,
etc.); and
13.7 Hazardous material information that includes: location of hazardous material, quantity of hazardous material.
14. Work table.
15. Generator supervision devices, manual start and transfer features.
16. Public address system, where specifically required by other sections of this code.
17. Elevator fire recall switch in accordance with ASME A 17.1.
18. Elevator emergency or standby power selector switch(es), where emergency or standby power is provided.
19. Water flow rates from pressure and flow rate devices.
20. Certain building rooms and corridor temperature and smoke conditions.
21. Status of smoke doors and status and operation of smoke pressurization and smoke removal systems.
22. All communications and control pathways in the building shall be hardened, designed and installed to have increased resistance to failure and
increased survivability.
Section 603.5.3 Special day care provision, is added and shall read:
603.5.3 Special day care provision. In adult and child day care facilities, unvented fuel burning heaters and portable electric heaters of all types are
prohibited.
Section 703.2 identification of protected openings, is added and shall read:
703.2 Identification of protected openings. Walls and partitions required to have protected openings (fire walls, fire barriers, fire partitions, smoke barriers, and
smoke partitions) shall be permanently identified with signs or stenciling. Such identification shall be above any ceiling or other concealed space. Markings
shall be red in color, with at least four (4) inch letters with one half (½) inch stroke width, and shall be spaced so that no more than ten (10) feet is visible
without a marking. Markings shall include the phrase, “Fire Barrier, Protect All Openings.”
Section 901.4.6 Pump and riser room size, shall read:
901.4.6 Pump and riser room size. The main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area shall be installed inside the building. A door providing direct access
from the exterior wall into the room containing fire sprinkler controls may be required by the fire chief. The main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area
shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 13, and shall be equipped with a listed double horizontal or vertical backflow prevention device(s) sized to match
riser piping. Clearance around the fire riser and other equipment shall not be less than 36 inches. This room shall be designed and used for fire protection
and fire detection equipment only. Fire pump and automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be provided with a door(s) and an unobstructed passageway
large enough to allow removal of the largest piece of equipment.
Section 901.4.6.2 Marking on access doors, shall read:
901.4.6.2 Marking on access doors. Access doors for automatic sprinkler system riser rooms and fire pump rooms shall be labeled with an approved sign.
The lettering shall be in contrasting color to the background and reflective. Letters shall have a minimum height of 2 inches (51 mm) with a minimum stroke of
3/8 inch (10 mm).
Section 901.4.6.5 Exterior identification of main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area is added, and shall read:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/349
901.4.6.5 Exterior identification of main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area. Where an exterior access door is required by the Fire Chief, a
weatherproof horn and strobe unit shall be installed on the exterior wall outside of the main fire sprinkler valve assembly and riser area. This horn and strobe
shall be installed according to the requirements for a water-flow notification appliance referenced in NFPA 13. It shall be interconnected to actuate
concurrently with the water-flow alarm-initiating device of the system, but its placement is in addition to the minimum requirements for water-flow alarm,
unless otherwise approved by the fire chief.
Section 901.5 Installation acceptance testing, is hereby amended to read as follows:
901.5 Installation acceptance testing. Fire detection and alarm systems, fire-extinguishing systems, fire hydrant systems, fire standpipe systems, fire pump
systems, private fire service mains and all other fire protection systems and appurtenances thereto shall be subject to acceptance tests as contained in the
installation standards and as approved by the fire code official. The fire code official shall be notified before any required acceptance testing. A representative
of the Fire Marshal shall witness all required acceptance tests for all these systems.
Section 901.6 Inspection, testing and maintenance, is amended by adding section 901.6.2.3 maintenance agreement as follows:
901.6.2.3 Maintenance agreement. A maintenance agreement, as defined by Section 202, with a licensed fire protection company shall be provided to the
Fire Marshal for each fire protection system at all times. Proof of a maintenance agreement shall be provided during any system acceptance test. Agreements
for testing and inspection only as defined by Section 202 shall not be credited with having met this requirement.
Section 901.7 Systems out of service, is hereby amended to read as follows:
901.7 Systems out of service.
Where a required fire protection system is out of service, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required
by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the
shutdown until the fire protection system has been returned to service.
A fire watch will be performed at all times that a system is taken out of service. Except for emergencies, the fire code official shall be given 72-hours'
notice before a system is voluntarily taken out of service. When, at the discretion of the Fire Chief or his designee, there is a life safety issue, uniformed
employees of the Leon Valley Fire Department or other fire watch personnel as approved by the Fire Chief or his designee shall perform a fire watch.
Fire watch personnel shall be provided with at least one approved means for notification to the fire department dispatch and their sole duty shall be to
perform constant patrols and watch for safety hazards and occurrences of fire. The cost of the fire watch shall be at the current overtime rate for fire
inspections and shall be the sole responsibility of the owner/contractor to pay. The fire watch fee shall be paid before final approval is granted on system
work.
Section 903.2.1.1 Group A-1, shall read:
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet.
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
4. The fire area contains a multi-theater complex.
Section 903.2.1.3 Group A-3, shall read:
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet.
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
4. The fire area contains a multi-theater complex.
Section 903.2.1.4 Group A-4, shall read:
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 occupancies where one of the following conditions exists:
1. The fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet.
2. The fire area has an occupant load of 100 or more.
3. The fire area is located on a floor other than a level of exit discharge serving such occupancies.
4. The fire area contains a multi-theater complex.
Section 903.2.3 Group E, shall read:
903.2.3 Group E. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for throughout all Group E occupancy fire areas greater than 10,000 square feet or with
accessible areas above or below the level of exit discharge.
Section 903.2.4 Group F-1, Shall read:
903.2.4 Group F-1. Automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group F-1 occupancy where one of the following
conditions exists:
1. A Group F-1 fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet.
2. A Group F-1 fire area is located more than two stories above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group F-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 12,000 square feet.
Section 903.2.7 Group M, Shall read:
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group M occupancy where one of the following
conditions exists:
1. A Group M fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/349
2. A Group M fire area is located more than two stories above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 10,000 square feet.
4. A Group M occupancy is used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture.
Section 903.2.9 Group S-1, shall read:
903.2.9 Group S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings containing Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following
conditions exists:
1. A Group S-1 fire area exceeds 10,000 square feet.
2. A Group S-1 fire area is located more than two stories above grade plane.
3. The combined area of all Group S-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 12,000 square feet.
4. A Group S-1 fire area used for the storage of commercial trucks or buses where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
Section 903.2.9.1 Repair garages, shall read:
903.2.9.1 Repair garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with Section 406.8
of the International Building Code, as shown:
1. Buildings having more than one story above grade plane, including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 5,000 square
feet.
2. Buildings not more than one story above grade plane, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 5,000 square feet.
3. Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements.
4. A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet.
Section 903.3.1.2.3 Elevator machine room, is added and shall read:
903.3.1.2.3 Elevator machine room. In all R occupancies or occupancies using a 13R system with elevator systems, the elevator machine room shall be
sprinklered as per NFPA 13 standards.
Section 903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages, shall read:
903.2.10 Group S-2 enclosed parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages
in accordance with Section 406.6 of the International Building Code as follows:
1. Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds 10,000 square feet; or
2. Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups. (No exception)
Section 905.2.1 Class-I Reducer is added, and shall read:
905.2.1 Class-I Reducer. A two and one-half (2-1/2) inch by one and one-half (1-1/2) inch reducer shall be provided on Class-I standpipe connections with
caps and chains.
Section 905.3 Required installations, delete the exception.
Section 905.3.1 Building height, shall read:
905.3.1 Building height. Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more than 20
feet above the lowest level of the fire department access, or where the floor level of the lowest story is located more than 20 feet below the highest level of
fire department vehicle access.
Section 906.5.1 Conspicuous location in Group R occupancies, is added and shall read:
Section 906.5.1 Conspicuous locations in group R occupancies. In addition to other areas listed herein or in NFPA10, fire extinguishers in R occupancies may
also be placed in any of the following locations to satisfy the requirements:
1. On a wall in the unit;
2. Inside a closet, cabinet or pantry as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher inside;
3. Inside a mechanical closet as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher insider; or
4. Inside storage closets as long as the door has a label indicating that there is a fire extinguisher insider and there is no locking device on the door
that requires a key or combination to open it.
Section 907.2, delete exception to section 907.2.
Section 907.2.1, delete exception to section 907.2.1.
Section 907.2.2, delete exception to section 907.2.2.
Section 907.2.3, delete all exceptions in section 907.2.3.
Section 907.2.4, delete exception to section 907.2.4.
Section 907.2.6, delete exceptions to section 907.2.6.
Section 907.2.6.1, delete exceptions to section 907.2.6.1.
Section 907.2.6.2, delete exceptions to section 907.2.6.2.
Section 907.2.6.3.3, delete exceptions to section 907.2.6.3.3.
Section 907.2.7, delete exception to section 907.2.7.
Section 907.2.8, delete exceptions to section 907.2.8.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/349
Section 907.2.8.2, delete exceptions to section 907.2.8.2.
Section 907.2.9.1, delete exceptions to section 907.2.9.1.
Section 907.2.12, delete exceptions to section 907.2.12.
Section 912.1 Installation, add to section 912.1:
When single or multiple fire department connections service a building or group of buildings, the piping shall be arranged so that use of any fire department
connection will supply the entire building or group of buildings.
Section 912.2 Location, add to section 912.2:
Sprinkler system and standpipe fire department connections shall be:
1. Within forty (40) feet of a public street, approved fire lane, or access roadway;
2. Within one hundred (100) feet of an approved fire hydrant as measured and approved by the Fire Chief.
3. Minimum of two (2) feet above finished grade and a maximum of four (4) feet above finished grade for standard inlets and minimum of 30 inches at
lowest point above finished grade and maximum of four (4) feet above finished grade for the fire (5) inlet;
4. The Fire Chief shall approve the location of any freestanding fire department connections;
5. Fire department connections for H occupancies will be freestanding remote and located as determined by the Fire Chief.
6. Fire department connection(s) shall be located on the main entrance side of the building, and within 100 feet of a fire hydrant.
Section 912.5 Signs, add to section:
912.5 Signs. An additional metal sign with dimensions ten (10) inches wide and eight (8) inches in height shall be posted not more than 72 and not less than
48 inches from the bottom of the sign to grade level and within 6 feet of the fire department connection. This additional sign shall have a white reflective
background and have the letters “FDC” in red reflective material and be permanently affixed to a wall or post. The letters shall be at least 4 inches in height
and a 1/2-inch stroke width.
Section 1003.8 Special provisions, is added, and shall read:
1003.8 Special provisions. Rooms in E occupancies used for kindergarten or daycare, children 5 or under, classified as an E occupancy shall not be located
above or below the first story.
Section 1008.3.4 Illumination in group E is added, and shall read:
1008.3.4 Illumination in Group A and Group E. Group E occupancies shall have emergency lighting in interior stairs, corridors, shops, and laboratories, and
windowless areas with student occupancy.
Section 1009.1 Accessible means of egress, shall read:
Section 1009.1 Accessible means of egress. All buildings or portions of buildings must comply with the accessibility standards adopted by the State of Texas.
Projects shall be submitted to the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation for review, inspection and approval in accordance with State law. Copies of
the approval on plans shall be submitted to the fire department for review and final approval.
Section 1009.2.2 Elevators required, is added, and shall read:
1009.2.2 Elevators required. Where an elevator is required to meet the standards of an accessible means of egress, its construction shall be hardened,
designed to withstand a maximum credible fire scenario without collapse. The structure's fire resistance shall be enhanced to ensure that an uncontrolled fire
shall result in a burnout without collapse of the elevator structure. The building's structure shall not depend on the elevator shaft for support. The elevator car
shall be of such a size and arrangement to accommodate a 24-inch by 84-inch ambulance stretcher in the horizontal, open position and shall be identified by
the international symbol for emergency medical services (star of life). The symbol shall not be less than 3 inches high and shall be placed inside on both
sides of the hoist way doorframe.
Delete exceptions.
Section 1010.1.9.5 Bolt locks. Delete exceptions: #3, #4, and #5.
Section 2303.2 Emergency disconnect switches, shall read:
2303.2 Emergency disconnect switches. An approved, clearly identified and readily accessible emergency disconnect switch shall be provided at an
approved location to stop the transfer of fuel to the fuel dispensers in the event of a fuel spill or other emergency. An emergency disconnect switch for exterior
fuel dispensers shall be located within 100 feet (30 480 mm) of, but not less than 20 feet (6096 mm) from, the fuel dispensers. For interior fuel-dispensing
operations, the emergency disconnect switch shall be installed at an approved location. Such devices shall be distinctly labeled as: EMERGENCY FUEL
SHUTOFF. Signs shall be provided in approved locations and be a minimum of 18 inches high and 24 inches wide.
Section 2303.2.2 Additional emergency disconnect switches for attended self-service, is hereby added as follows:
2303.2.2 Additional emergency disconnect for attended self-service. Attended facilities shall have an additional emergency disconnect switch located inside
the building for attendant use at a location approved by the fire code official.
Section 2306.2.1.1 Inventory control for underground tanks, is amended to read as follows:
2306.2.1.1 Inventory control for underground tanks. Accurate daily (normal working days only) inventory records shall be maintained and reconciled on all
Class I, II or III-A liquid storage tanks for indication of possible leakage from tanks or piping. The records shall be made available for inspection by the Fire
Marshal, and shall include, as a minimum, records showing by product: daily reconciliation between sales, use, receipts, and inventory on hand. If there is
more than one system consisting of a tank(s), serving pump(s), or dispenser(s) for any product, the reconciliation shall be made separately for each tank
system.
1. Daily inventory shall be maintained for each tank system at each location by the operator. The inventory records shall be kept for the past 12
months at the premises.
2. Inventory shall be based on the actual daily measurement and recording daily recording of actual sales, or by readout from an automated gauging
system. The inventory records shall include a daily compilation of gain or loss. The mere recording of pump meter reading and product delivery receipts
shall not constitute adequate inventory records.
3. The operator of the location shall be held responsible for notifying the owner or person(s) in control of the facility to take action to correct any
abnormal loss or gain not explainable by spillage, temperature variations or both causes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/349
4. The Fire Marshal may require the operator of an underground tank storage system to test the system for tightness, at the operator's expense,
when accurate daily inventory records have not been maintained as required or when in his judgment conditions indicate possible leakage of product
from the location of such tanks.
5. The Fire Marshal may require copies of Class I, II and III-A liquid storage tank inventories, deliveries or receipt of product sales and dip gauge stick
readings or other control measures in addition to copies of any tank tightness or line leakage test results from the station operator, agent, or terminal
management.
6. When a service station tank is found to be leaking, its contents shall be removed immediately. If any investigations or tests indicate the source of
such loss, the owner shall take immediate action to correct the system failure and remove dangerous spillage from the environment.
7. The Fire Marshal may order the closure of a Service Station by barricading if necessary and the emptying of contents from storage tanks should
the operator of a service station be unwilling to cooperate with the Fire Department during the search for the source of such leakage or should the Fire
Marshal determine that a hazardous condition exists that merits such action.
Section 2306.2.3 Above-ground tanks located outside, above grade, is amended by adding sections 2306.2.3.1 inspections, 2306.2.3.2 required access, and 2306.2.3.3
fire hydrant access as follows:
2306.2.3.1 Inspections. An inspection of the installation shall be conducted prior to loading the tank with fuel. For those installations approved by the Fire
Chief or his designee to dispense class 1 liquids, the initial loading of fuel shall be witnessed by the fire inspector.
2306.2.3.2 Required access. Fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every aboveground storage tank. The aboveground storage tank shall not be
more than 150 feet from fire apparatus access roads as measured by an approved route.
2306.2.3.3 Fire hydrant access. A minimum of one fire hydrant shall be provided for every aboveground storage tank. The aboveground storage tank shall not
be located more than 250 feet from a fire hydrant as measured by an approved route.
Section 2308.2.3 Vehicle impact protection is added, and shall read:
2308.2.3 Vehicle impact protection. Vehicle impact protection shall be installed and approved by the Fire Chief.
Section 3405.1 Individual piles shall read:
3405.1 Individual piles. Tire storage shall be restricted to individual piles not exceeding 1500 square feet of continuous area. Piles shall not exceed 10 feet in
height.
Section 3405.6 Volume more than 150,000 cubic feet is deleted:
Section 5601.1.3.1 unlawful possession of fireworks, 5601.1.3.2 instigating or aiding a minor to violate the ordinance prohibiting fireworks, and 5601.1.3.3 summons to
be issued for violation of fireworks ordinance are added to read as follows:
5601.1.3.1 Unlawful possession of fireworks. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, transport or
manufacture fireworks or pyrotechnics of all kinds in any quantity, within the corporate limits of the City of Leon Valley.
Exception: A permit for public display has been issued by the Leon Valley Fire Department consistent with Section 5608.
5601.1.3.2 Instigating or aiding a minor to violate the ordinance prohibiting fireworks. No person shall furnish money or a thing of value to a minor for the
purchase of fireworks or encourage, act in conjunction with or in any manner instigate or aid a minor in the act of having, keeping, storing, selling, offering for
sale, giving away, using, transporting, or manufacturing fireworks within or 5000 feet beyond the corporate limits of the City. Such actions shall constitute
Class C misdemeanors and be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00.
5601.1.3.3 Summons to be issued for violation of fireworks ordinance. A summons or notice to appear in answer to a charge of illegal possession or use of
fireworks in violation of this section specifying the location of such violation, the date and time of such violation, and the name and address of the offender,
may be issued by any Police Officer, Arson Investigator, Fire Inspector or by any Firemen who has been assigned to citation duties by the fire chief.
Section 5602.1 Definitions, is amended by adding a definition as follows:
5602.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown
herein.
HIGHWINDS. Sustained wind velocity of 15 mph or gusts of 25 mph.
Delete Appendix A, “board of appeals.”
Section C103.4 Additional distribution, is added, and shall read:
C103.4 Additional distribution. A fire hydrant shall be located not more than 100 feet from an unobstructed and approved route to a fire department
connection (FDC) located at ground level. The FDC may be installed in an approved remote location, and within 100 feet to a fire hydrant. This distance and
route is as approved by the Fire Chief.
Delete Appendix J, “Building information system.”
Delete Appendix L, “Requirements for firefighter air replenishment systems.”
(Ordinance 07-017, sec. 2, adopted 4/3/07; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 5.04.002; Ordinance 14-028, sec. 2, adopted 12/8/14; Ordinance 2018-28
adopted 3/20/18)
Sec. 5.04.003 Enforcement
The fire code shall be enforced by the fire marshal, the fire chief, and the fire department of the city. (1972 Code, sec. 10.302; 2008 Code, sec. 5.04.003)
Sec. 5.04.004 Modifications
The fire marshal shall have power to modify the effect of any of the provisions of the fire code upon particular property, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee,
or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical obstacles in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done, and the particulars of any such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire marshal
thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the city and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. (1972 Code, sec. 10.303; 2008 Code, sec. 5.04.004)
Sec. 5.04.005 Appeals
Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application, or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do not
apply or that the same has been wrongly interpreted by the fire marshal, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the council within thirty (30)
days from the date of the decision of the fire marshal. (1972 Code, sec. 10.304; 2008 Code, sec. 5.04.005)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/349
Sec. 5.04.006 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code–Adopted
There is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city the 2018 edition of the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code as published by the International Code Council,
including all its appendices and references, and all its subsequent supplements and changes in and to said 2018 edition and references, save and except such portions
as may be inconsistent with or in conflict with any other provisions of the code, or any statute of the state, and such code is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as
fully as if set out at length herein. (Ordinance 2018-42 adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 5.04.007 Same–Amendments
Section 101.1 Title shall read:
These regulations shall be known as the Wildland-Urban Interface Code of City of Leon Valley, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”
Section 106, Appeals, shall read:
Section 106 Appeals. Appeals shall be made first to the Fire Chief, then the Building Official, and finally the City Manager. Further appeals may be presented
to the City Council.
Section 110.4.7, Violation penalties, shall read:
110.4.7 Violation penalties. Persons who violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erect, install, alter, repair
or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Chief, or if a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code,
shall be guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Such fine and imprisonment shall be at the discretion of the City Judge. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been
served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 114.4, Failure to comply, shall read:
114.4 Failure to comply. Any person continues any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to
perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50.00 dollars or more than $2,000.00 dollars.
Section 202, Add to definitions in section 202:
FIRE HAZARD shall mean any condition or act which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that
customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire, or which may obstruct,
delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the fire department or the egress of occupants in the event of fire.
FIRE LANE shall mean any area appurtenant to entrances or exits of a building deemed necessary by the Fire Chief or his designee to remain free and clear
of parked vehicles for access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by him as such, and may include sidewalks, driveways,
portions of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near building entrances or exits, or any fire hydrant.
FIRE MARSHAL shall mean the fire code official responsible for investigations of fires, inspection of facilities, and code enforcement.
Section 403.2.1 Dimensions, shall read:
403.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet, exclusive of shoulders, except where a fire
hydrant is located on a fire department access road, in which case the minimum road width shall be 26 feet. An unobstructed vertical clearance of not less
than 14 feet and shall be required and maintained at all times. Security gates shall be sized to match the required clear width.
Section 403.2.2, Length, shall read:
403.2.2 Length. Fire apparatus access roads in excess of 150 feet (45 720 mm) in length shall be provided with an approved area for turning around fire
apparatus. Turnarounds as specified in Appendix D of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition, are acceptable.
Section 403.3 Fire apparatus access road, shall read:
403.3 Fire apparatus access road. Where required, fire apparatus access roads shall be all-weather roads with a minimum width of 20 feet and a clear height
of 14 feet; shall be designed to accommodate the loads and turning radii for fire apparatus; and shall have a gradient negotiable by the specific fire apparatus
normally used at that location within the jurisdiction. Dead-end roads in excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with turnarounds as specified in
Appendix D of the International Fire Code, 2018 edition. An all-weather road surface shall be any surface material acceptable to the code official that would
normally allow the passage of emergency service vehicles typically used to respond to that location within the jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 2018-42 adopted 5/15/18)
ARTICLE 5.05 OUTDOOR BURNING*
Sec. 5.05.001 General prohibition
It shall be unlawful to burn trash, brush, tree limbs, grass, trees, leaves, paper, boards, planks, lumber or any other character of debris or flammable materials
whatsoever in the city limits. No open fire shall be burned for any purpose except as provided in section 5.05.003. (1972 Code, sec. 10.601; 2008 Code, sec. 5.05.001)
Sec. 5.05.002 Specific prohibitions
The burning of garbage in any form, or petroleum products, or automobiles, or other motor vehicles, or any part thereof, for wrecking or salvage purposes, in or on any
lot or other premises within the city limits is hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to light or have lighted any fire in any street, alley, thoroughfare, or
public property. It shall be unlawful to burn trash in a garbage container. (1972 Code, sec. 10.602; 2008 Code, sec. 5.05.002)
Sec. 5.05.003 Fires for cooking or other domestic purpose
Whenever it shall become necessary for any person to have a fire out-of-doors for cooking, washing, or any other purely domestic purpose, such person is hereby
required to build such fire in an appropriate fire-resistant container of some kind, made of brick, stone, metal or other fire-resistant material in such manner as to prevent
said fire from escaping. (1972 Code, sec. 10.603; 2008 Code, sec. 5.05.003)
Sec. 5.05.004 Restrictions at multifamily dwellings
No person living within any multifamily housing such as an apartment, apartment condominium, hotel, motel, or any other multifamily type occupancy shall construct,
install, maintain or use any incinerator, barbecue pit, charcoal or propane grill or container of any kind for the purpose of igniting any combustible materials for whatever
domestic purpose such as cooking, washing, etc. (1972 Code, sec. 10.604; 2008 Code, sec. 5.05.004; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 5.06 FIRE LANES
Sec. 5.06.001 Definition
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/349
A fire lane shall be defined as any area adjacent to the entrance or exit of any building or buildings deemed necessary by the fire chief. This area, now called fire lane, is
to remain free and unobstructed of parked vehicles or other obstacles at all times, day or night. This designated area may also include sidewalks, driveways, portions of
parking lots or any other area directly adjacent to or near building entrances or exits, and to include any fire hydrant. (1972 Code, sec. 10.901; 2008 Code, sec.
5.06.001)
Sec. 5.06.002 Designation
The fire chief is hereby duly authorized to designate a fire lane on any premises that, in his opinion, might hinder or cause slow response of fire apparatus or other
emergency vehicles. A fire lane designated by the fire chief shall in no way make the city responsible for the upkeep of such area, but the owner of such property will
continue to be responsible as upon initial designation of such fire lane by the fire chief. An official record of all locations of designated fire lanes shall be kept in the office
of the fire chief. Owners of private property or their representative may request additional fire lanes be designated by the fire chief at his discretion. (1972 Code, sec.
10.902; 2008 Code, sec. 5.06.002)
Sec. 5.06.003 Marking; obstruction prohibited
(a) Posting of signs; curb markings. Upon designation of a fire lane by the fire chief, notice shall be given to the owner(s) of said property that signs are to be posted in
that particular area. These signs shall be posted at designated locations and shall conform to the standard size, coloring, lettering (“FIRE LANE - NO PARKING AT ANY
TIME”), and mounting set forth by the fire chief. The cost and maintenance of signs shall not be incurred by the city but by the owner(s) of said property. If so directed by
the fire chief, painted red curbing with white stenciled letters stating “FIRE LANE - NO PARKING” will accompany any fire lane signs. The owner(s) of such premises
mentioned herein may, at their discretion, paint the curbing to conform to specifications described above if not required to do so by the fire chief.
(b) Obstruction and parking prohibited. It is unlawful to park any vehicle, other than fire apparatus or other emergency vehicles, in any designated fire lane. It shall
also be unlawful for any individual(s) to place any obstruction, for whatever purpose, in this area.
(c) Removing or altering signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove or alter in any way, shape or form any sign designating a fire lane or
any area pursuant thereto.
(1972 Code, sec. 10.903; 2008 Code, sec. 5.06.003)
Sec. 5.06.004 Enforcement
A summons or notice to appear in court may be issued by any police officer, any arson investigator or any member of the fire prevention division of the fire department
for any direct violation of this fire lane code. (1972 Code, sec. 10.904; 2008 Code, sec. 5.06.004)
Sec. 5.06.005 Removal of vehicles
(a) The owner or the owner's agent may have any vehicle removed, other than fire apparatus or any emergency vehicle, that is parked in any required fire lane. The
cost of having the vehicle(s) removed and stored shall be incurred by the owner or operator of such vehicle(s). The owner or his agent who has a vehicle removed and
stored shall not be held liable for any damage incurred by the vehicle owner or operator, provided that the movement and storage of such vehicle be accomplished by a
vehicle wrecker service that is insured against such damages during tow procedures and a storage company that is insured against liability for property damage for
vehicles being stored.
(b) Any vehicle(s) parked in a designated fire lane may be removed at the owner's expense by the fire chief:
(1) When a vehicle is repeatedly parked in a fire lane designated by this article.
(2) When a vehicle is blocking the entrance to or exit from any business, apartment complex or place of assembly.
(3) When the presence of a vehicle threatens the life safety of the general public or hinders the ability of fire apparatus or any emergency vehicle to
respond to any emergency.
(c) The fire chief, when having a vehicle removed from premises and stored, shall use the towing service and storage facility presently under contract with the city.
(d) No owner or agent of any premises shall close or remove signs pertinent thereto unless written permission has been obtained from the fire chief.
(1972 Code, sec. 10.905; 2008 Code, sec. 5.06.005)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 6.01.001 Penalty
Each violation of this chapter shall be punished by a penalty of a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code, with each day of offense being a separate
offense. (Ordinance 1213, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/87; 2008 Code, sec. 6.01.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 6.01.002 Sanitary code adopted
(a) The city hereby adopts as its sanitary code, consisting of minimum standards of sanitation and health protection measures, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code,
chapter 341 et seq., as amended.
(b) The provisions of said V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 341 et seq., excluding the penalty therein, are incorporated into this section and adopted as the
sanitary code of the city.
(1972 Code, secs. 12.101, 12.102; 2008 Code, sec. 6.01.002)
Sec. 6.01.003 Rodent control
The provisions of the San Antonio Code, 1986 edition, chapter 15, Health and Sanitation, article V, Rodent Control, are hereby adopted verbatim by this city as if written
out fully herein, except insofar as the same should be inconsistent with other sections of this code. Where the term “director of public health” is used in said article, it
shall be meant to refer to the equivalent health and sanitation officer of this city. (Ordinance 1445 adopted 1/5/93; 2008 Code, sec. 6.01.003)
Sec. 6.01.004 Dumping; maintenance of alleyways
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any trash or refuse of any type on any vacant property or along any street or road within the city limits.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any trash or refuse of any kind in any public street, alley or way of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/349
(c) It shall be unlawful for both the owner and for the tenant of any property in the city abutting upon a public alley or way to permit the accumulation of any trash or
refuse of any kind therein upon that part thereof from his property line to the center thereof, or to permit any shrubbery, brush, weeds, grasses or other vegetation
whatsoever to grow therein to said centerline to a height of greater than five inches. Every such tenant and owner is required to keep such alley cleaned up and in a
passable, sightly and sanitary condition, or cause same to be done, at all times.
(1972 Code, secs. 11.201, 11.202, 11.203; 2008 Code, secs. 6.01.004, 6.01.005)
State law reference–Illegal dumping, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 365.012.
ARTICLE 6.02 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Sec. 6.02.001 State retail food store sanitation code adopted
The definitions, the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits (licenses) to operate food service establishments, the
prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink, and the enforcement of this code shall be regulated in accordance with the department of state health
services, division of food and drugs, Retail Food Store Sanitation Code, 1985 edition, a certified copy of which shall be on file in the office of community development
(which outlines procedures for obtaining a permit or license to operate a retail food store, or a retail food store in conjunction with a food service establishment), except
when in conflict with other provisions of this code, and provided that the words “regulatory authority” shall be understood to refer to the health and sanitation officer.
(Ordinance 1445 adopted 1/5/93; 2008 Code, sec. 6.02.001)
Sec. 6.02.002 State rules on food service sanitation adopted
The definitions, the inspection of food service establishments, the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits (licenses) to operate food service establishments, the
prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink, and the enforcement of this section shall be regulated in accordance with the department of state health
services, division of food and drugs, Rules on Food Service Sanitation, sections 301.73.11.001–.011, a certified copy of which shall be on file in the office of community
development, except when in conflict with other provisions of this code, and provided that the words “regulatory authority” shall be understood refer to the health and
sanitation officer, and that the “Compliance Procedures” attached to Ordinance 1445 be substituted for rule .011 of the Rules on Food Service Sanitation. (Ordinance
1445 adopted 1/5/93; 2008 Code, sec. 6.02.002)
Sec. 6.02.003 Definitions of food establishments
Definitions of food establishments shall be as listed in the Retail Food Store Sanitation Code, adopted in section 6.02.001. (1972 Code, sec. 12.302; Ordinance adopting
2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 6.02.003)
Sec. 6.02.004 Licenses
(a) The annual license fees to cover the cost of inspection of such food service establishments shall be paid in advance upon issuance of such licenses as set forth in
the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(b) Upon initial payment of such license fees, the proprietor of each such food establishment shall be required to purchase a copy of the rules of food service
establishments, including the “Compliance Procedures” (attachment A to Ordinance 1445) (reference the schedule of fees in appendix A of this code as amended or
revised by ordinance from time to time), and shall be required to receipt in writing therefor. Licenses shall be signed by the development coordinator and attested by the
issuing administrative officer. Licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December in the year when issued. The fees for annual licenses issued on or after February 1st
each year shall be prorated, but no annual license shall be issued on and after November 1 each year, and monthly licenses shall thereafter be the license of greatest
duration granted for the balance of said year.
(1972 Code, sec. 12.306; Ordinance 1445 adopted 1/5/93; 2008 Code, sec. 6.02.004; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 6.02.005 Health and sanitation officer
The terms of this article shall be enforced by a health and sanitation officer, any assistant health inspectors that may be appointed, and the city health officer. All
references in the provisions adopted in this article to the director of public health and other officials shall be construed to mean their counterparts as set out above.
(Ordinance 1445 adopted 1/5/93; 2008 Code, sec. 6.02.005)
Sec. 6.02.006 Inspection of meat and meat products
No person may sell, offer for sale, or have in his possession with intent to sell, store, or transport for sale any meat, meat products, or prepared meals and dishes
consisting of or containing meat of any kind capable of being used for food for human consumption unless such meat or product has been inspected and passed for
human consumption by a qualified agency of a state health department or agricultural department or under the supervision or control of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Meat Inspection Division, and is so marked by the official “inspected and passed” legend or its legal equivalent. (1972 Code, sec. 12.303; 2008 Code, sec.
6.02.006)
Sec. 6.02.007 Employment of infected persons
No person, firm, corporation, or organization operating or managing any public eating place or any place where food or drink is manufactured, processed, prepared,
dispensed, or otherwise handled in such manner or under such circumstances as would permit probable transmission of disease from any handler thereof to the
consumer shall employ or work any person to handle such products, or utensils, dishes, or serving implements used in connection therewith, who is infected with any
transmissible condition of any disease known to be normally communicable through the handling of food or drink. (1972 Code, sec. 12.201; 2008 Code, sec. 6.02.007)
Sec. 6.02.008 Handling of food and drink by infected persons
No person infected with a disease, the condition of which is transmissible to another through the handling of food or drink, or who resides in a household with a
transmissible case of a communicable disease which may be food-borne, or who is known to be a carrier of the organisms causing such disease, and no person having
a local infection transmissible through food or drink, shall be employed at any place or vehicle in which food or drink is manufactured, processed, prepared, or
dispensed; nor shall any such person at any time handle any food or drink or utensils, dishes, or serving implements used in connection therewith which may be directly
or indirectly for public sale or offered for the use or consumption of another. (1972 Code, sec. 12.202; 2008 Code, sec. 6.02.008)
Sec. 6.02.009 Personal cleanliness of food handlers
Every person engaged in the handling of food, drink, or unsealed containers therefor shall maintain personal cleanliness, shall wear clean outer garments, shall keep his
hands clean at all times, and shall thoroughly wash the hands with soap and water after each visit to the toilet. The use (in, on, or about any place where food or drink for
public consumption is handled or sold) by two (2) or more persons of any towel before it is thoroughly laundered is hereby declared to be an unsanitary practice and
shall constitute a violation of this code. (1972 Code, sec. 12.204; 2008 Code, sec. 6.02.009)
ARTICLE 6.03 WEEDS, HIGH GRASS AND DEBRIS*
Sec. 6.03.001 Definitions
Authorized official. The city manager or his designee. (1972 Code, sec. 14.101; 2008 Code, sec. 6.03.001)
Sec. 6.03.002 Prohibited conditions; penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/349
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent, owning, renting or having under his control any lot or premises, whether vacant or improved, within the city, to
permit the same to be covered, in whole or in part, with any weeds, high grass, down timber or brush, old logs, decaying vegetable matter, trash or trash piles, junk,
scrap, open garbage, filth or debris whatsoever, and same are hereby declared to be public nuisances, a hazard and menace to public health, and fire hazards.
(b) Each violation of subsection (a) of this section shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day's
continuation on such premises of any of the conditions enumerated in subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (V.H.S.C. section 342.005)
(1972 Code, secs. 14.102, 14.102.1; 2008 Code, sec. 6.03.002)
Sec. 6.03.003 Summary abatement
The authorized official shall have the power and duty, when any such situation shall constitute a health or fire hazard, or both, to summarily abate same, or have same
abated, using city firemen, policemen, or other employees. (1972 Code, sec. 14.103; 2008 Code, sec. 6.03.003)
Sec. 6.03.004 Weeds and debris in alleys
It shall be unlawful for both the owner and the tenant of any property in the city abutting upon a public alley or way to permit any weeds, grasses, or other vegetation
whatsoever to grow therein to the centerline to a height of greater than five inches (5") or to allow the accumulation of debris. (1972 Code, sec. 14.104; 2008 Code, sec.
6.03.004)
State law reference–Authority to require removal of weeds, unclean matter or trash from street, sidewalk or gutter, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.003.
Sec. 6.03.005 Notice to remove
(a) It shall be the duty of the authorized official of the city to notify the owner and/or agent of any premises within the city which are grown up in weeds to a greater
height than twelve inches (12"), or have accumulated debris, to remove such weeds or debris within ten (10) days. This notice shall be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is
located; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained:
(A) By publication at least once;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates.
(b) If the city mails a notice to the property owner in accordance with subsection (a) and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or
“unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(c) In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner, by regular mail and a posting on the property or by personally delivering the notice, that if the
owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice,
the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this
subsection occurs within the one-year period and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, the city may, without notice, take any
action permitted in this article and assess its expenses as provided in this article.
(1972 Code, sec. 14.105; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 6.03.005)
Sec. 6.03.006 Removal by city
Upon the failure of any such owner and/or agent to comply with the notice as set forth in section 6.03.005 hereof, or upon the written request and authorization of such
owner and/or agent so notified, it shall become the responsibility of the authorized official to have such weeds cut, raked and removed, or said debris removed, on all
property within the city that abuts or adjoins improved property, by the employment of city forces, or by an authorized independent contractor. Said high weeds will be
cut, raked, and removed on all lots up to two (2) acres. For lots in excess of two (2) acres, said high weeds will be cut, raked, and removed to a depth of at least fifty feet
(50') inward from all property lines of said property which adjoins or abuts improved property. (1972 Code, sec. 14.106; 2008 Code, sec. 6.03.006)
Sec. 6.03.007 Assessment of city's expenses
A charge of actual costs plus twenty-five percent (25%) administrative costs for each cutting, raking and removal of said weeds and removal of said debris shall be
levied, assessed and collected against such property each time such cutting, raking and removal of said weeds or removal of said debris shall be performed. The
charges provided for herein shall be levied, assessed, and collected by the authorized official, and if any person shall fail to pay such charges so assessed within ten
(10) days after proper notice, the authorized official will file with the county clerk a statement by the mayor setting out the expenses that the city has incurred pursuant to
the provisions of this section, and the city shall thereby perfect a privileged lien on the property involved, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to
secure the expense to the city, together with ten percent (10%) per annum interest from the date such payment is due. (V.H.S.C. sections 342.004–342.007 inclusive)
(1972 Code, sec. 14.107; 2008 Code, sec. 6.03.007)
Sec. 6.03.008 Authority to immediately abate dangerous weeds
(a) Notwithstanding any of the foregoing sections, the city may abate, without notification, weeds that:
(1) Have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person.
(b) The city must give notice, in the manner provided in section 6.03.005, to the property owner no later than the tenth (10th) day after the date the city abates weeds
under this section. The notification shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violation of this article that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's rights to request an administrative hearing regarding the city's abatement of the weeds.
(c) The city, by and through its city manager or designee, shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later than the
thirtieth (30th) day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the owner files a written request for a hearing with the city.
(d) The city shall conduct the administrative hearing not later than the twentieth (20th) day after the date a request for hearing is filed. At the administrative hearing,
the owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information relating to the city's abatement of the weeds.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/349
(e) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section in the same manner and subject to the same conditions as set forth in section 6.03.007 above.
(f) The authority granted the city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by section 6.03.007.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 6.03.008)
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
Sec. 6.03.009 Yard waste disposal
(a) Definitions.
Containerized. The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing out into the street and
coming into contact with stormwater.
Mulch. Yard waste one inch or less in length or square.
Person. Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction.
Recycling. Yard waste may be recycled by blowing, raking or sweeping the material onto the vegetative area as a mulch.
Street. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive, or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway, and includes the land between
the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street
lines.
Vegetative area. Any area which is not a street or sidewalk that contains grass or other plant life.
Yard maintenance area. The property to the curb or edge of the roadway.
Yard waste. Leaves, grass and weed clippings.
(b) It shall be unlawful to sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste that is not containerized at the curb. Placing yard waste that is containerized at the curb or
along the street is allowed the day of trash pickup and shall not be placed closer than ten feet from the storm drain inlet. Placement of containers shall be as prescribed
in the prevailing waste management contract for hours of collection.
(c) Yard waste may be blown, raked or swept into a vegetative area to be collected as mulch. Yard waste/clippings are not allowed in the street or along the edge of
the roadway.
(Ordinance 10-040 adopted 9/21/10; 2008 Code, sec. 6.03.009)
ARTICLE 6.04 EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICE*
Sec. 6.04.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms have meanings as indicated:
Emergency. A circumstance in which the element of time is involved in treating and/or transporting a sick, wounded or injured person in order to protect such person's
health or life.
Emergency ambulance. Any motor vehicle designed, equipped or used for transporting the injured or sick from an emergency site to a medical facility for treatment.
Emergency ambulance service. Responding to calls for ambulance service to the site of an emergency, the ambulance trip to the place or from the place of an
emergency, the transporting of the sick and injured from the site to a medical facility or the rendering of first aid or medical assistance at an emergency site from an
emergency ambulance.
Emergency run. An ambulance trip to a place where an emergency exists, or from such a place to a hospital or other medical facility for treatment.
(1972 Code, sec. 33.100; 2008 Code, sec. 6.04.001)
Sec. 6.04.002 Penalty
It shall be unlawful to do or perform any act prohibited hereby, and it shall be unlawful to fail to do or perform any act required hereby. Upon conviction, any violation
hereof shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense. (1972 Code, sec.
33.300; 2008 Code, sec. 6.04.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 6.04.003 Emergency runs restricted to city emergency service; exceptions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person other than a member of the city fire department, emergency medical services division, to operate, drive, or cause to be operated
or driven any ambulance on the streets of the city for the purpose of furnishing emergency ambulance service, or to furnish or attempt to furnish emergency ambulance
service in the city.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that the site of the emergency is outside the area served by the city emergency medical services system, and the
emergency ambulance is operating on city streets only for the purpose of responding to an emergency site so located or transporting the victim(s) to a medical facility.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that the driver of such an ambulance is operating same pursuant to a contract for maintaining an ambulance at a
particular location or event for the purpose of transporting sick or injured persons for medical or hospital treatment.
(d) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that the site of an emergency is inside the area served by the city emergency medical services system, but permission
has been received from the emergency medical services dispatcher to make such an emergency run. Upon receipt of a request to make such an emergency run, the
dispatcher shall grant such permission if no other ambulance, public or private, has been dispatched to the emergency scene.
(e) The area served by the city emergency medical services system shall consist of the corporate limits of the city.
(1972 Code, sec. 33.200; 2008 Code, sec. 6.04.003)
ARTICLE 6.05 SMOKING REGULATIONS*
Sec. 6.05.001 Penalties
Each violation of this article if a first offense shall be punished by a penalty of a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred dollars
($200.00); a second conviction shall be punished by a penalty of a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second
conviction; and shall be fined an amount no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a third or more convictions nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(Ordinance 08-053 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 6.05.001)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/349
Sec. 6.05.002 Purpose
The Surgeon General of the United States has declared that smoking is the number one public health issue. The United States Environmental Protection Agency has
concluded that passive smoking poses a public risk larger than the hazardous air pollutants from all industrial emissions combined. The city recognizes the evidence that
smoke creates a danger to the health of some citizens, and is a cause of annoyance and discomfort to those who are in confined spaces where same is present. The
city also recognizes that it is the right of citizens to choose whether or not to smoke actively or passively and it is the policy of the city to encourage food service
establishments which have enclosed dining areas to provide adequate seating for patrons and employers and employees of such establishments who prefer a smokefree
environment. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public as well as protect the rights of smokers and non-smokers, this article has been
created to restrict smoking in public places, except in areas designated as smoking areas. (Ordinance 08-053 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 6.05.002)
Sec. 6.05.003 Definitions
Administrative areas. The area of an establishment not generally accessible to the public, including but not limited to individual offices, stockrooms, employee lounges,
or meeting rooms.
Employee. Any person who is employed by any employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or is in a position that would lead one to believe that such
person is employed.
Employer. Any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity that employs one or more persons.
Enclosed. Closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress, but does not include areas commonly described as public lobbies.
Food establishment. Any operation defined as such in section 6.02.003 of this code.
Hospital. Any institution that provides medical, surgical, and overnight facilities for patients.
Movie theater. Any establishment engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures to the public.
Public-owned facilities. All buildings or structures whatsoever owned or operated by the city, to include the entirety thereof, where the public has access or not.
Public place. Any enclosed indoor area that may be used by the general public, and includes, but is not limited to: stores, offices, and other commercial establishments;
restaurants; public and private institutions of higher education; and health care facilities.
Retail and service establishments. Any establishment which offers goods or services for sale to the general public.
Service line. Any indoor service line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of
money.
Smoke/smoking. The carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, and the lighting of, emitting or
exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind.
Workplace. Any enclosed area of a structure, or portion thereof, intended for occupancy by employees who provide primarily clerical, professional or business services
of a business entity, or which provide primarily clerical, professional, or business services to other business entities, or to the public, at that location. The enclosed indoor
area under the control of the employer shall include those areas to which employees have access during the course of employment, including but not limited to work
areas, employee lounges, employee restrooms, employee conference rooms, and employee cafeterias. A private residence is not considered a place of employment.
(Ordinance 08-053 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 6.05.003)
Sec. 6.05.004 Smoking prohibited in certain public areas
(a) A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product or any lighted burning pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind,
or smoking equipment or device, in any of the following indoor or enclosed areas:
(1) An elevator used or that may be used by the public;
(2) A hospital or nursing home corridor providing direct access to patients;
(3) Any publicly owned facility or operated by the city as defined in section 6.05.003 above;
(4) All retail or service establishments and financial institutions serving the general public, including but not limited to any department store, grocery store,
drugstore, clothing store, shoe store, hardware store, bank, savings and loan, laundromat, hair salon or barbershop, and shall include all public areas and
waiting rooms of public transportation facilities, including but not limited to common areas of city-owned theaters, concert halls, and cultural facilities; provided
that smoking may be allowed in common areas of the shopping malls and designated areas of public facilities;
(5) An area marked with a no smoking sign in accordance with section 6.05.005 by the owner or person in control of a hospital, nursing home, or retail or
service establishment serving the general public; or
(6) Any facility of a public primary or secondary school; or an enclosed theater, motion picture theater, library, museum, and transportation vehicles, such
as buses and taxicabs, except on charter buses for private hire or in taxicabs clearly designated by the operator to permit smoking;
(7) All rooms in which meetings and/or hearings are open to the public.
(b) The owner or person in control of an establishment or area designated in this section shall post a sign, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at or near each public
entrance to the establishment. The sign shall contain the words “No Smoking Except in Designated Areas, City of Leon Valley Ordinance,” the universal symbol for no
smoking, or other language that clearly prohibits smoking.
(c) The owner of person in control of an establishment or areas described in subsection (a)(4) or (a)(6) may designate an area, including but not limited to lobbies,
meeting rooms, waiting rooms, or lounges, as a smoking area; provided that the designated smoking area may not:
(1) Include the entire establishment;
(2) Include cashier areas, over-the-counter service or sales areas, or service lines;
(3) Include the viewing area of any theater or motion picture theater.
(d) It is the defense to prosecution under this section if the person was smoking:
(1) In a location that is not a designated nonsmoking area of a facility or establishment described in subsection (a)(4) or (a)(6) of this section;
(2) In a location that is an administrative area or office area of an establishment described in subsection (a)(4) or (a)(6) of this section;
(3) In a location that is a retail or service establishment serving the general public with less than 750 square feet of public showroom or service space or
having one employee on duty, unless posted as designated in subsection (b) of this section;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/349
(4) In a location that is a retail or service establishment which is primarily engaged in the sale of tobacco, tobacco products or smoking implements;
(5) In a retail or service establishment which is a food service establishment regulated by section 6.05.005;
(6) As a participant in an authorized theatrical performance; or
(7) In a situation in which the person is present at an event in which an entire room or hall is used for a social function, and seating arrangements are under
the control of the sponsor of the function and not the proprietor or person in charge of the place. However, the sponsor of the social function may designate a
nonsmoking area.
(Ordinance 08-053 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 6.05.004)
Sec. 6.05.005 Regulation of smoking in food establishments
(a) A food service establishment which has indoor or enclosed dining areas shall provide areas for both smoking and nonsmoking patrons.
(b) A nonsmoking area must:
(1) Be separated from the smoking areas by a minimum of four feet of contiguous floor space, a partition or a wall;
(2) Be ventilated and situated so that air from the smoking area is not drawn into or across the nonsmoking area, or the smoking area shall be separately
ventilated;
(3) Be clearly designated by appropriate signs visible to patrons within the dining area indicating the area that is designated nonsmoking; and
(4) Have ashtrays or other suitable containers for extinguishing smoking materials at the perimeter of the nonsmoking area.
(c) Each food establishment which has a dining area shall:
(1) Have and implement a written policy on smoking which conforms to this article;
(2) Make the policy available for inspection by employees; and
(3) Have signs, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at each public entrance to the establishment indicating that nonsmoking seating is available.
(d) Non-dining areas of any food establishment affected by this section to which the public has general access, including, but not limited to, food order areas, food
service areas and restrooms, shall be designated as nonsmoking areas.
(e) It is a defense to the prosecution under this section that the food establishment is:
(1) An establishment which has indoor seating arrangements for less than 50 patrons;
(2) An establishment which has more than 70 percent of its annual gross sales in alcoholic beverages; or
(3) A physically separated bar area of a food service establishment otherwise regulated.
(4) The establishments covered in subsections (1) through (3) above shall post a sign, conspicuous to the ordinary public view, at each public entrance to
the establishment which shall contain the words “This Establishment Does Not Provide for a Nonsmoking Section.”
(Ordinance 08-053 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 6.05.005)
Sec. 6.05.006 Regulation of smoking in the workplace
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 6.05.004 and 6.05.005, any employer may designate a portion of the workplace as a nonsmoking area. Any employer who
chooses to designate any portion thereof as a nonsmoking area shall:
(1) Have and implement a written policy on smoking which conforms to this article;
(2) Make the policy available for inspection by employees;
(3) Prominently display reasonably sized signs conspicuous to ordinary public view, indicating that smoking is prohibited in certain areas; and
(4) Provide facilities in sufficient numbers and at such locations to be readily accessible, for the extinguishment of smoking materials.
(Ordinance 08-053 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 6.05.006)
Sec. 6.05.007 Reporting of violations not required
This article does not require the owner, operator, employer, manager or any employee of an establishment to report a violation or to take any action against any
individual violating sections 6.05.002 through 6.05.006 of this article. (Ordinance 08-053 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 6.05.007)
Sec. 6.05.008 Distribution, display and sale of tobacco products; and cigarette machines
(a) Definition. For purposes of this section only:
Tobacco products. Any product that is made from or derived from tobacco and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated,
chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or an
electronic smoking device or liquids used in electronic smoking devices. Tobacco product does not include drugs, devices, or combination products authorized for sale
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
(b) Prohibited. Distribution, display, and sale of smoking tobacco products, or smoking paraphernalia on any public right-of-way, city park or any city-owned building or
facility is hereby prohibited.
(c) Sale of tobacco products to persons under 21 years of age prohibited.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person, with criminal negligence:
(A) Sells, gives, or causes to be sold or given a tobacco product to someone who is younger than 21 years of age; or
(B) Sells, gives, or causes to be sold or given a tobacco product to another person who intends to deliver it to someone who is younger than 21 years
of age.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the person to whom the tobacco product was sold or given presented to the defendant
apparently valid proof of identification.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/349
(3) A proof of identification satisfies the requirements for this subsection if it contains a physical description and photograph consistent with the person's
appearance, purports to establish that the person is 21 years of age or older and was issued by a governmental agency. The proof of identification may
include a driver's license issued by this state or another state, a passport, or an identification card issued by a state or the federal government.
(d) Warning notice.
(1) Each person who sells cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or tobacco products at retail or by vending machine shall post a sign in a location that is conspicuous to
all employees and customers and that is close to the place at which the cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or tobacco products may be purchased.
(2) The sign must include the statement:
THE SALE OR PROVISION OF TOBACCO OR E-CIGARETTE PRODUCTS TO A PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW
WITHIN THE CITY OF LEON VALLEY.
(3) The director shall determine the size and design of the sign.
(4) The department, on request, shall provide the sign without charge to any person who sells cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or tobacco products.
(e) Notification to employees and agents.
(1) Each retailer shall notify each individual employed by that retailer who is to be engaged in retail sales of cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or tobacco products
that the city code:
(A) Prohibits the sale or distribution of cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or tobacco products to any person who is younger than 21 years of age; and
(B) Requires each person who sells cigarettes, e-cigarettes, or tobacco products at retail or by vending machine to post a warning notice as provided
by subsection (d), requires each employee to ensure that the appropriate sign is always properly displayed while that employee is exercising the
employee's duties;
(2) The notice required by this section must be provided within 72 hours of the date an individual begins to engage in retail sales of e-cigarettes or tobacco
products. The individual shall signify that the individual has received the notice required by this section by signing a form stating that the law has been fully
explained, that the individual understands the law, and that the individual, as a condition of employment, agrees to comply with the law.
(3) Each form signed by an individual under this section shall indicate the date of the signature and the current address and social security number of the
individual. The retailer shall retain the form signed by each individual employed as a retail sales clerk until the 60th day after the date the individual has left
the employer's employ.
(4) A retailer required by this section to notify employees commits an offense if the retailer fails, on demand of a person authorized to enforce the city code,
to provide the forms prescribed by this section.
(5) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (e)(4) above to show proof that the employee did complete, sign, and date the forms required by
subsection (e)(2) and (3) above.
(f) Cigarette vending machines.
(1) Subject to the defenses provided in subsection (2) below, it shall be unlawful for any business owner, manager and employee in control of cigarette
vending machines within the city to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence allow the display or use of any cigarette vending machine
upon any property within the city.
(2) It is a defense to prosecution under the provision of subsection (f)(1) that:
(A) The cigarette vending machine is situated in a premises where entry by any person under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited by law; or
(B) The cigarette vending machine is located in a workplace with the permission of the employer, provided that the employer has no persons under
the age of twenty-one (21) years employed at the workplace, and further provided that the cigarette vending machine is situated at a location within the
workplace to which persons other than those employed at the workplace are not permitted to have access.
(g) Penalty. A violation of any subsection of this section is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor crime, and upon conviction, shall be punishable as set out below:
(1) A violation of subsections (b) or (f)(1) shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(2) A violation of subsections (c), (d) or (e) shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 2018-81 adopted 11/6/18)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Created
There is hereby created and established a court to be known as the municipal court of the city. (1972 Code, sec. 16.101; 2008 Code, sec. 7.01.001)
Sec. 7.01.002 Jurisdiction
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits of the city in all criminal cases arising under this code and the ordinances of the city and shall also
have concurrent jurisdiction with the justice of the peace in the county precinct in which this city is situated, in all criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of the
state in which punishment is by fine only, and where the maximum of such fine does not exceed $500.00, and where the maximum of such fine does not exceed
$2,000.00 in all cases arising under the ordinances of such city that govern fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse. (1972 Code,
sec. 16.102; 2008 Code, sec. 7.01.002)
State law references–Municipal court jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.003, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 4.14.
Sec. 7.01.003 Judges
(a) Appointment; term. The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge or judges of the municipal court, who shall be appointed by the city council for a term of
two (2) years, coterminous with the mayor, and said judges shall serve until their successor has been appointed and qualified.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/349
(b) Duties.
(1) Weekly judge: Responsible for holding court on one of the first four Thursdays of each month, which includes any pre-trial hearings or not guilty trials,
and executing any associated paperwork.
(2) Monthly judge: Responsible for conducting all examining trials, providing the court and other departments of the city with 24-hour magistrating service
for both adults and juveniles, and reviewing and issuing all search warrants and warrants of the court as needed.
(3) Each judge will be required to work bi-weekly, three (3) months per year, on a rotating basis. It is the responsibility of the monthly judge to be available
within a reasonable time to the requesting city department. The requesting department will relay any pertinent instructions to the judge.
(4) In addition to the weekly and monthly duties set forth above, each judge will be required to conduct jury trials on a rotating basis. The clerk of the court
will coordinate with the judge in the scheduling of trial dates.
(c) Compensation. The city municipal court holds a regular court docket on the first four Thursdays of each month except for holidays. Compensation shall be as
established by contract as amended by the city council from time to time.
(1972 Code, secs. 16.103–16.103.2; 2008 Code, sec. 7.01.003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law references–Municipal court judges, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004 et seq.; term of municipal court judge, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.005.
Sec. 7.01.004 Clerk
The clerk of the municipal court shall keep the records of the court, issue all processes, and generally perform all the duties of the clerk of a court as prescribed by law
for a county clerk insofar as the same may be applicable. (1972 Code, sec. 16.104; 2008 Code, sec. 7.01.004)
State law reference–Municipal court clerk generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
Sec. 7.01.005 City prosecutor and alternate city prosecutor
Prosecutions in the municipal court of the city of all criminal cases arising under this code and the ordinances of the city, and under the laws of the state over which said
court has jurisdiction, shall be conducted by the city prosecutor or alternate prosecutor, who shall be members in good standing of the state bar and residents of the
county. Their compensation shall be determined by the council. (1972 Code, sec. 16.105; 2008 Code, sec. 7.01.005)
State law reference–Municipal prosecutions by city attorney or deputy city attorney, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.201.
Sec. 7.01.006 Schedule of fines
The recommended schedule of fines for guidance of the municipal court in imposing penalties for convictions and subject to all limits of all state statutory provisions
(exclusive of court costs) in the city municipal court shall be as adopted from time to time. (Ordinance 06-020 adopted 7/18/06; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008
Code, sec. 7.01.006)
State law reference–Municipal court fines, costs and special expenses, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.203.
Sec. 7.01.007 Judgments and sentences to run consecutively
All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the municipal court shall run consecutively unless otherwise specifically provided by the judge of such court in
such judgments and sentences. (1972 Code, sec. 1.303; 2008 Code, sec. 7.01.008)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 8.02 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.02.001–8.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew†
Sec. 8.02.031 Definitions
Emergency. Includes but not be limited to fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or obtaining immediate medical care for another person.
Legal guardian. Any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court order.
Minor. Any person less than seventeen (17) years of age and over nine (9) years of age.
Parent. A person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. As used herein, “parent” shall also include a court appointed guardian or other person eighteen (18)
years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas
of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 8.02.031; Ordinance 14-022 adopted 10/13/14; Ordinance 2018-17 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.02.032 Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for a minor to purposefully remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/349
(b) It shall be unlawful for a minor to purposefully remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place in the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 3:30 p.m. on a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday on school days only, unaccompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in
subsections (a) and (b).
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 8.02.032; Ordinance 14-022 adopted 10/13/14; Ordinance 2018-17 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.02.033 Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.02.032 of this division that:
(1) The minor was accompanied by his or her parent, legal guardian or another adult approved by the parents;
(2) The minor was on an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or legal guardian;
(3) The minor was attending a school, government sponsored, or religious activity or was going to or coming from a school, religious, or government
sponsored activity without detour or stop;
(4) The minor was engaged in a lawful employment or volunteer work at a recognized charity institution or was going to or coming from such activity
without detour or stop;
(5) The minor was on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides or on the sidewalk of a place where the minor had permission from his or her
parent or legal guardian to be;
(6) The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation or transportation for which passage through the curfew area was the
most direct route;
(7) The minor was exercising his or her First Amendment rights protected by the United States or Texas Constitution, including, but not limited to the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and freedom of assembly;
(8) The minor is married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code chapter 31;
(9) With respect to section 8.02.032(b) of this division, that the offense occurred during the scheduled vacation of or on a holiday observed by the school in
which the minor was enrolled; or that the minor had graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor had
permission to be absent from school or be in a public place from an authorized school official. In the case of a minor being educated in a home school, a
parent shall be deemed a school official.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 8.02.033; Ordinance 14-022 adopted 10/13/14; Ordinance 2018-17 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.02.034 Enforcement
(a) Any peace officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 8.02.032 of this division, shall determine the name and address of the minor, and the name and
address of his or her parent(s) or legal guardian(s) and may issue a warning notice or a citation.
(1) Upon issuance of a warning notice, the notice shall be forwarded to the city's police department, which shall send a letter to the parent(s) or legal
guardian(s) of the minor advising of the fact that the minor was found in violation of this division and soliciting cooperation in the future.
(2) Upon issuance of a citation, the peace officer may transfer the case to proper authorities for handling under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Family Code title
3. In addition, a complaint will be filed against the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) in municipal court for violation of section 8.02.032(c). The police department
shall file all necessary legal papers, supply all necessary documentation, and provide necessary testimony as required for pursuing the violation of this
Division by either the minor or by any parent(s) or legal guardian(s).
(b) Any peace officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 8.02.032 that has previously been issued a warning or citation as provided for in subsection (a)
above, shall transfer the case to proper authorities for handling under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Family Code title 3. In addition, a complaint will be filed against the
minor and any parent(s) or legal guardian(s) in municipal court for violation of sections 8.02.032(b) and (c) hereof. The police department shall file all necessary legal
papers, supply all necessary documentation, and provide necessary testimony as required for pursuing violation of this division by either the minor or by any parent(s) or
guardian(s).
(c) In addition to the issuance of a warning notice or citation, the city's police department may schedule a person to person conference with the parent(s) or
guardian(s) of the minor and the minor concerning this curfew and the city's expectation and requirement for parental control.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 8.02.034; Ordinance 14-022 adopted 10/13/14; Ordinance 2018-17 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.02.035 Penalties
(a) Any minor violating the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor as defined in the Texas Penal Code and shall be dealt with in
accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Family Code title 3 and other applicable law.
(b) Parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor violating this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) and no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(c) In assessing punishment for either any parent(s), legal guardian(s) or a minor, the municipal court judges are encouraged to consider the community service
program.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 8.02.035; Ordinance 14-022 adopted 10/13/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code; Ordinance 2018-17 adopted 2/6/18)
ARTICLE 8.03 GRAFFITI*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.03.001–8.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Graffiti Implements
Sec. 8.03.031 Definitions
Felt tip marker. An indelible marker or similar implement with any size tip.
Graffiti. Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on any surface of a public or private building, structure
or other facility or upon any other property, regardless of its content or nature and regardless of the nature of the material of the structural component or property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/349
Graffiti implement. Any aerosol paint container, any type of felt tip marker or paint stick or etching tool capable for scarring or otherwise defacing glass, metal, concrete,
or wood, or any petrochemical or other synthetic material used in construction.
Guardian. Any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court order.
Owner. Shall include, but not be limited to, any equitable owner, any person having a possessory right to the land or building or the person occupying it, any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, lessee, joint tenant or tenant by entirety, or any person, individual, corporation, or partnership in apparent control of
the property, or any agent or employee of any of the foregoing.
Paint stick or graffiti stick. Any device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure
and, upon application, leaving a visible mark.
Parent. A person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. As used herein, “parent” shall also include a court-appointed guardian or other person eighteen (18)
years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person.
(Ordinance 04-007 adopted 4/6/04; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.031)
Sec. 8.03.032 Penalty
Violation of any provisions of this division shall be a misdemeanor offense and shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense and
subsequent offenses. The court shall have the discretion to provide other means of punishment, which may include community service. (Ordinance 04-007 adopted
4/6/04; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.032)
Sec. 8.03.033 Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement upon the grounds of or in any public park, public school, public library,
public playground, public swimming pool, public recreation facility, any public right-of-way, or any other public grounds or public buildings in the city when any of the
above premises are closed to the public.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession, for the purpose of defacing property, any graffiti implement while on private property not open
to the public. The graffiti implement shall be presumed to be for the purpose of defacing property if it is in the holder's possession while the holder is on private property
without the owner's permission and the property is closed to the public.
(c) It shall be an offense for the parent or legal guardian of a child under seventeen (17) years of age to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence
allow the child to violate the provisions of this section.
(d) Prosecution for this offense does not preclude prosecution for any other violations of city ordinance, state statutes, or federal law, including violations of the curfew
ordinance (article 8.02, division 2 of this chapter), or Graffiti, section 28.08 Texas Penal Code.
(Ordinance 04-007 adopted 4/6/04; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.033)
Sec. 8.03.034 Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.03.033 of this division that the person uses the graffiti implement in their employment or in connection with a school, civic,
or religious activity, or has written permission from the owner of the premises to engage in an authorized activity utilizing the implements. (Ordinance 04-007 adopted
4/6/04; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.034)
Secs. 8.03.035–8.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Removal
Sec. 8.03.071 Definitions
Director. The director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this division, or the director's authorized representative.
Graffiti. Any unauthorized inscription, word, letter, figure, symbol or design visible from a public place, a public right-of-way or another person's property that is marked,
etched, scratched, drawn, painted or made in any manner on any surface of tangible property, regardless of its content or nature and regardless of the nature of the
material of the structural component or property. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that the inscription, word, letter, figure, symbol or design was unauthorized if:
(1) The graffiti is inconsistent with the design and use of the subject property;
(2) There is no specific authorization by the owner for the graffiti; or
(3) The person causing the graffiti was unknown to the owner.
Property owner. Shall include, but not be limited to, any equitable owner, any person having a possessory right to the land or building or the person occupying it, any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or any person, individual, corporation, association or partnership in
apparent or actual control of the property, or any agent or employee of any of the foregoing.
Unauthorized. Without the specific consent of the owner or without authority of law, regulation or ordinance.
(Ordinance 08-011 adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.071)
Sec. 8.03.072 Penalty
Violation of any provisions of this division shall be a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense and
subsequent offenses. The court shall have the discretion to provide other means of punishment that may include community service. (Ordinance 08-011 adopted
2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.072)
Sec. 8.03.073 Declaration of nuisance
Any graffiti is hereby declared to be a public nuisance as it:
(1) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(2) Invites vandalism, additional graffiti, and other criminal activities;
(3) Produces urban blight; and
(4) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public.
(Ordinance 08-011 adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.073)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/349
Sec. 8.03.074 Removal required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fail to abate or cause the abatement of graffiti from his or her property after receiving notice of the nuisance.
(b) The time period in which an owner shall abate or cause to be abated a graffiti nuisance shall be ten (10) calendar days.
(c) This section shall not apply to property or structures owned by utility companies if they provide a graffiti abatement plan, within three (3) months of passage of this
division, to the city.
(Ordinance 09-047 adopted 9/15/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.074; Ordinance 2018-5, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.03.075 Notice to remove
(a) Whenever the city has probable cause to believe graffiti has been placed upon any private property, the city shall notify the owner of the presence of the nuisance
and provide a ten (10) calendar day time period for the owner to abate the nuisance.
(b) Notice under this division shall be given:
(1) Personally in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner's post office address;
(3) By posting the notice on or near the front door of the main building on the property to which the violation relates; or
(4) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the graffiti relates, if the property contains no
buildings.
(c) Reserved.
(d) Notice under this division shall be deemed to have been received:
(1) For personal service, as of the date the notice was given personally to the owner;
(2) For mailed notice, the date the notice is mailed; or
(3) For notice by posting, fifteen (15) calendar days after notice was posted on the property or structure.
(Ordinance 09-047 adopted 9/15/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.075; Ordinance 2018-5, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.03.076 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 8.03.076 pertaining to a hearing and deriving from Ordinance 08-011 adopted 2/19/08 and the 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.076, was deleted in its entirety by
Ordinance 2018-5, sec. 3, adopted 2/6/18.
Sec. 8.03.077 Abatement by city; collection of city's expenses
(a) If an owner fails to abate a graffiti nuisance during the time allowed for abatement and/or fails to respond to the notice of the nuisance, the city may order
abatement of the nuisance to be done at the owner's expense. This remedy shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the city.
(b) Persons authorized by the city to abate the nuisance may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to
remove or direct the removal of the nuisance.
(c) Whenever the city shall abate a graffiti nuisance as provided by this division, the city shall have the option of selecting a private contractor to abate the nuisance,
or by having the city's public works department abate the graffiti and charge the owners accordingly for their expenses.
(d) The city shall assess to the owner a charge for all work done to abate the graffiti nuisance, including an administrative expense as provided in appendix A of this
code as amended or revised by ordinance from time-to-time, and cause the expense thereof to be assessed on the property upon which such expense is incurred.
(Ordinance 08-011 adopted 2/19/08; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.077; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code; Ordinance 2018-5, sec. 4, adopted
2/6/18)
Sec. 8.03.078 Anti-graffiti measures
The city manager or city manager's designee is directed to implement, as resources permit, measures aimed at graffiti control, including but not limited to:
(1) Providing public information on graffiti removal programs and on contractors who perform removal services.
(2) Coordinating governmental and volunteer graffiti removal programs such as Graffiti Wipeout Day, anonymous tip button on the website, and other
similar initiatives.
(3) Providing information on methods to discourage graffiti, such as building techniques, lighting and landscaping.
(4) Creating a reward program for information concerning graffiti vandals.
(5) Removing of graffiti promptly from city-owned property.
(6) Encouraging a paint bank from which community-based groups or individuals may obtain paint and materials needed to remove graffiti, and
encouraging businesses and other potential donors to contribute to the paint bank.
(7) Educating parents and the public that parents are liable for damages caused by their children via the city website, newsletter and other educational
means.
(8) Encouraging anti-graffiti education in schools.
(Ordinance 08-011 adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.03.078)
ARTICLE 8.04 EXPLOSIVES*
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
Explosive. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion, that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units, or other ingredients, in such proportions, quantities or packing, that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or by detonation of
any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing
destructive effects on contiguous objects or of destroying life or limb.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/349
Highway. Any public street or public road.
Magazine. Any building or structure used for the storage of explosives.
Public conveyance. Any cab, bus, airplane or other vehicle which is carrying passengers for hire.
Small arms ammunition. Any shotgun, rifle, pistol or revolver cartridges.
(1972 Code, sec. 9.101; 2008 Code, sec. 8.04.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 8.04.002 General restrictions
(a) No person shall manufacture any explosives, including small arms ammunition, within the corporate limits of the city except as provided in section 8.04.006.
(b) No person shall possess, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, discharge, transport, or dispose of in any manner any explosives within the city, but by the
authority of a written permit therefor as specified in section 8.04.004, except permits shall not be required by this code for small arms ammunition.
(c) No person shall discharge any explosives, except small arms ammunition and construction devices such as explosive rivets and explosive-driven pins or studs, for
purposes other than blasting or demolition operations.
(d) No person shall sell or give away any explosive, except small arms ammunition and construction devices such as explosive rivets and explosive driven pins or
studs, to any person not in possession of a permit to either possess, transport, or use explosives as required by this article.
(e) No person shall sell or expose for sale any explosive upon any highway, street, sidewalk, public way, or public place within the city.
(1972 Code, sec. 9.102; 2008 Code, sec. 8.04.002)
Sec. 8.04.003 Bond required for blasting
Before a permit to do blasting, as required under section 8.04.004(a)(3), shall be issued, the applicant for such permit shall file a bond deemed adequate in each case by
the city secretary, which bond shall become available in the payment of any damage arising from the neglect of the contractor or his agents or employees. (1972 Code,
sec. 9.103; 2008 Code, sec. 8.04.003)
Sec. 8.04.004 Permits
(a) Separate and distinct permits shall be required concerning explosives as follows, subject to the conditions specified in this article:
(1) To possess, store, keep, sell or otherwise dispose of, but not use, any explosives except small arms ammunition.
(2) To transport explosives, except small arms ammunition, on public highways within the municipality by motor truck or other vehicle. Possession of a
permit or license from the federal or state government to transport explosives on the public highways shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this
subsection.
(3) To use explosives, except small arms ammunition and construction devices such as explosive rivets and explosive driven pins or studs.
(b) Permits as required by subsection (a)(1) of this section shall not be issued for the possession of:
(1) Liquid nitroglycerine.
(2) Dynamite (except gelatin dynamite) containing over 60% of liquid explosive ingredient under any conditions liable to exist during storage.
(3) Nitrocellulose in a dry and uncompressed condition in quantity greater than ten pounds net weight in one package.
(4) Fulminate of mercury in bulk in a dry condition and fulminate of all other metals in any condition except as a component of manufactured articles not
hereinafter forbidden.
(5) Explosive compositions that ignite spontaneously or undergo marked decomposition rendering the products of their use more hazardous when
subjected for forty-eight consecutive hours or less to a temperature of 167 degrees F.
(6) New explosives until approved by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
(7) Explosives condemned by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
(8) Explosives not packed or marked in accordance with the requirements of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
(9) Explosives containing an ammonium salt and a chlorate.
(c) Permits as required by subsection (a)(3) of this section shall not be issued for a quantity of explosives in excess of fifty pounds, exclusive of blasting caps, unless a
greater quantity is authorized by the development department as provided in subsection (d) of this section.
(d) Permits as required by subsection (a)(3) of this section may be issued by the city secretary in excess of that specified in subsection (c) of this section when
blasting operations require greater amounts, but such permits shall not be issued for quantities in excess of the amount actually needed for one day's operation and any
unused explosives shall be returned to a class A magazine.
(1972 Code, sec. 9.104; 2008 Code, sec. 8.04.004; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 8.04.005 Blasting operations
(a) Blasting operations shall not be conducted between the hours of seven o'clock p.m. and seven o'clock a.m., nor at any time on Sundays, except by special
permission of the fire marshal.
(b) At least twenty-four hours in advance of blasting, the blaster shall give written notice specifying the location and intended time of blasting to appropriate
representatives of the gas, electric, water, fire alarm, telephone, telegraph, and steam utilities which operate within the municipality. In an emergency, the fire chief may
waive the time limit and allow verbal instead of written notice to be given.
(c) When blasting is done in congested areas or in close proximity to a structure, railway, or highway, the blast shall be covered before firing with a mat constructed so
that it is capable of preventing fragments from being thrown.
(d) Electric blasting caps only shall be used as the detonating agent for blasting operations in congested districts, or on highways, or adjacent to highways open to
traffic.
(e) Containers of explosives shall not be opened inside a magazine or within fifty feet of a magazine. In opening containers, wooden wedges and either wood, fiber or
rubber mallets shall be used. No metal tools except brass shall be used for opening any container of explosive.
(f) No person shall handle explosives while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/349
(g) No person shall smoke while handling explosives or in the vicinity thereof.
(h) Empty boxes or cases which have previously contained explosives shall not be used again for any purpose, but shall be destroyed.
(i) No open flame or light shall be used in the vicinity of explosives.
(1972 Code, sec. 9.105; 2008 Code, sec. 8.04.005)
Sec. 8.04.006 Exceptions
(a) Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to the regular military or naval forces of the United States, the duly authorized militia of this state, or the police
and fire departments in the proper performance of their duty.
(b) Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to the laboratories of schools, colleges, and similar institutions when confined to the purpose of instruction or
research, or explosives in the forms prescribed by the official United States Pharmacopeia.
(c) Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the hand loading of small arms ammunition for private personal use and not for resale. For this purpose, not
more than 10 pounds of smokeless powder and one thousand small arms primers packed in approved ICC containers shall be permitted to be kept on hand when
acceptable to the police authorities.
(1972 Code, sec. 9.106; 2008 Code, sec. 8.04.006)
ARTICLE 8.05 FIREWORKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
Fireworks as used herein shall have its usual and ordinary meaning, and shall include but not be limited to the following: firecrackers, Roman candles, sparklers,
torpedoes, bombs, skyrockets, buzzbombs, atomic wings, aerial flash salutes, and trail blazers.
Fire inspector means a city firefighter who is certified by the state commission on fire protection as a fire inspector.
Person means an individual or entity, including an owner, manager, officer, employee, or occupant.
Public fireworks display means the igniting of fireworks for public or private amusement.
Sec. 8.05.002 Penalty
Any violation of this article is punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day any violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense. If fireworks are separately wrapped or packaged, the commission or omission of any act prohibited by this article shall be a separate offense as to
each such separately wrapped or separately packaged fireworks.
Sec. 8.05.003 Prohibition; declaration of nuisance
The possession, use, manufacture, sale, offer for sale, giving away, or discharge of fireworks within the city limits is hereby declared to be a common and public
nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, use, manufacture, sell, offer for sale, give away, or discharge fireworks within the city limits.
Secs. 8.05.004–8.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Public Displays
Sec. 8.05.031 Exception for public displays; insurance requirements
(a) A person seventeen (17) years or older may discharge fireworks within the city limits if they have obtained a display permit to do so, or is a member of an
organization which has obtained a display permit to do so, from the city.
(b) The person shall maintain at its sole expense insurance coverage:
(1) That is written by an insurance company with an A- or better rating by AM Best and that is submitted and licensed to do business in the state;
(2) That is in full force and effect at the time of the public fireworks display;
(3) That provides one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of liability coverage per occurrence;
(4) That names the city, its officers, employees, and elected representatives as additional insureds;
(5) That provides that any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city shall apply in excess of and not contribute with it;
(6) A statement that the insured will not cancel the insured's coverage without fifteen (15) days' prior written notice to the city; and
(7) The person shall file and keep a current certificate of insurance signed by an agent authorized to bind coverage indicating that the person has obtained
the aforementioned insurance coverage with the fire department.
Sec. 8.05.032 Permit; conditions
(a) Permit required. No person may conduct a public fireworks display without a display permit having been issued.
(b) Compliance with state and federal regulations. All persons who have a public fireworks display shall comply with the regulations as set forth in Texas Occupations
Code chapter 2154 (regulation of fireworks), National Fire Protection 1123 and 1124, and any other standards set forth by federal and state regulations.
(c) Licenses. All persons who assemble, conduct, and/or supervise a public fireworks display shall have the appropriate licenses issued by the state.
(d) Creating nuisance; prohibited times. Fireworks shall not be discharged in such a manner that may create a nuisance or between the hours of midnight and 7 a.m.
unless otherwise permitted.
(e) Other restrictions. The use of fireworks shall also be subject to any additional ordinances such as noise and/or assembly.
(f) Application for permit; approval or denial. An application for a display permit to conduct a public fireworks display must be submitted by an authorized person on a
form provided by the city and shall have the signature of the person applying for the permit. The application shall be filed with the city at least forty-five (45) calendar
days prior to the event. Within twenty (20) calendar days after receipt of the application, the city shall approve the permit, with or without conditions, or deny the permit. If
the application is denied, the reasons for denial shall be stated in the denial notice. The denial of a permit may be appealed to the fire chief. This appeal must be
submitted, in writing, within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of the notice of denial.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/349
(g) Permit valid only for specified date and time; indemnification of city. If issued, such a display permit shall be valid only for the date and time period as set forth in
the permit. Moreover, the city shall not be responsible or liable for any injury, death, or damage to property that may occur during the course of the public fireworks
display. The permittee and participants shall be responsible or liable for, and shall indemnify and hold the city harmless for, any such injury, death, or damage, and they
shall assume all risk of holding and participating in the public fireworks display.
(h) Permit application fee. A nonrefundable application fee, as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time
to time, shall be included with the application.
(i) Investigation by fire inspector. Upon the receipt of a permit application, the fire inspector must conduct an investigation to determine the following:
(1) That the operator of the display is competent and has the appropriate certifications.
(2) That the display is of such character and is to be so located, discharged, or fired that it will not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. In
addition to reviewing the diagram of the display area submitted with the permit application, the fire inspector may want to:
(A) Inspect the areas selected for the discharge site, spectator viewing area, parking areas, and designated landing (fallout) area;
(B) For proximate audience displays, request a walk-through and representative demonstration of the pyrotechnic special effects as a condition of
approval for the issuance of a permit; and
(C) Request a written plan outlining:
(i) The manner and location of storage of fireworks both prior to delivery to the display site and at the display site;
(ii) What type of fire protection will be provided at the discharge site; and
(iii) What provisions will be made for crowd control.
Sec. 8.05.033 Inspections by fire department; fire-extinguishing equipment
(a) Fire inspector to be on duty. The sponsor of the display shall arrange for the presence of one or more fire inspectors as may be required by the fire marshal. They
shall be on duty from the time the fireworks are delivered at the site until the termination of the display and removal of all fireworks and debris from the site. For the
purpose of this rule, debris shall include any unignited fireworks or remnants containing explosive material.
(b) Fire-extinguishing equipment. The fire marshal shall designate such fire-extinguishing equipment as may be required at the display site from the time the fireworks
are delivered at the site until the termination of the display and removal of all fireworks and debris from the site.
(c) Fees. See the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time for the fees associated with this section. These fees
are due to the city ten (10) city business days prior to the event.
(1972 Code, secs. 9.201–9.203; 2008 Code, secs. 8.05.001–8.05.003; Ordinance 14-003 adopted 5/12/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 8.06 WEAPONS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.06.001–8.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Firearms
Sec. 8.06.031 Discharge of firearms
It shall be unlawful to discharge any gun, rifle, pistol, or firearm of any kind within the city limits, except as provided in article 15.02 (zoning) under the use “indoor or
outdoor firing range.” Exception shall be made for a person who is a law enforcement peace officer acting in the performance of his or her official duties and a person
who discharges a weapon in the lawful protection of life or property. (Ordinance 05-012, sec. 1, adopted 5/17/05; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec.
8.06.001)
Sec. 8.06.032 Discharge of airguns
It shall be unlawful to discharge any airgun, air rifle or air pistol of any description (by whatever name known) that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs
or any other means is capable of discharging shots, pellets, or any solid object at any velocity anywhere within the city limits, except as provided in article 15.02 (zoning)
under the use “indoor or outdoor firing range.” (Ordinance 05-012, sec. 2, adopted 5/17/05; 2008 Code, sec. 8.06.002)
ARTICLE 8.07 NOISE AND SOUND LEVEL REGULATIONS*
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates another
meaning:
Daytime hours. The hours from 7:00 a.m. on one day and 10:00 p.m. the same day for residential properties or areas and 6:00 a.m. on one day and midnight on the
same day for nonresidential properties or areas. The definitions of daytime and nighttime hours apply to the property where the sound is being received.
dB(A). The intensity of a sound expressed in decibels.
Emergency. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage or loss that demands immediate action.
Emergency work. Any work performed for the purpose of:
(1) Preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency;
(2) Restoring property to a safe condition following a fire, accident, or natural disaster;
(3) Protecting persons or property from exposure to danger; or
(4) Restoring public utilities.
Nighttime hours. The hours between 10:01 p.m. on one day and 6:59 a.m. the following day for residential properties or areas and 12:01 a.m. and 5:59 a.m. the same
day for nonresidential properties or areas. The definitions of daytime and nighttime hours apply to the property where the sound is being received.
Plainly audible. Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. For example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable
or personal vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine the name of the song, specific words or the artist
performing it. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/349
Property line. With respect to single occupancy properties, the line along the ground surface and its vertical extension that separates the real property owned, leased, or
occupied by one (1) person from that owned, leased, or occupied by another person. With respect to shared occupancy properties the term shall mean the imaginary
line that represents the legal limits of occupancy of any person who owns, leases, or otherwise occupies an apartment, condominium, duplex, hotel or motel room, office,
or any other type of occupancy from that of other occupants.
Streets shall be defined as being in the same category as the surrounding zoning. In the case of residential properties/areas which are across the street from
nonresidential properties/areas, the street shall be considered to be in a residential area.
(Ordinance 08-054 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.07.001)
Sec. 8.07.002 Penalty
Violation of any provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor offense and shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense and
subsequent offenses. (Ordinance 08-054 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.07.007)
Sec. 8.07.003 Prohibited noise
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud or unusual noise that annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others. In determining whether a noise is loud, unnecessary, or unusual, the following factors shall be considered: time of
day; whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; the volume and intensity; whether the noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of
electronic or mechanical means; and whether the noise is subject to being controlled without unreasonable effort or expense to the creator thereof.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or continued, or permit the continuance of any sound that either
exceeds the maximum permitted sound levels specified in section 8.07.005 of this article or otherwise unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health, peace, or safety of others.
(c) It shall be unlawful to keep any animal, fowl, or bird which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise, shall disturb, injure, or endanger the comfort, repose,
health, peace, or safety of others.
(d) [The noises] enumerated in the following sections of this article, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this
article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.
(e) This article shall not apply to any public utility or public works.
(Ordinance 08-054 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.07.002)
Sec. 8.07.004 Amplified sound
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or continued, or permit the continuance of any sound using any
sound amplifier that is part of or connected to any speaker system, radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, microphone, or any other sound
source, when operated: (i) in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants; or (ii) at any time with louder volume than is
necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in the vehicle or within the property or premises in which such sound amplifier is operated and who are voluntary
listeners thereto. The operation of any such sound amplifier in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from a vehicle shall be
presumed to be violative of this section. The operation of any such sound amplifier in such a manner that bass sounds are plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or
more from the property line of a property or premises in which the amplification is located shall be presumed to be violative of this section.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the sound source is a motor vehicle and that:
(1) The motor vehicle is a mobile sound stage or studio that is being used on a stationary basis at a location not situated upon any street for the purpose of
providing sound, during daytime hours, for an event or function; and
(2) The use is in compliance with all other provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 08-054 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.07.003)
Sec. 8.07.005 Maximum permissible sound levels
(a) Maximum levels; violations.
(1) In addition to the violations established by the preceding sections of this article, no person shall conduct, permit, or allow any activity or sound source to
produce a sound discernible beyond the property on which the sound is being generated that when measured as provided in this article exceeds seventy (70)
dB(A) during daytime hours and sixty-five (65) dB(A) during nighttime hours for the respective areas described above. The definitions of daytime and
nighttime hours apply to the property where the sound is being received.
(2) Any sound that exceeds the dB(A) levels set forth in this section under the conditions and measurement criteria set forth in this article is a violation of
this article. Evidence that an activity or sound source produces a sound that exceeds the dB(A) levels specified in this section shall be prima facie evidence of
a sound nuisance that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others in violation of this article.
(b) Loudspeakers, amplifiers, etc., used outside of enclosed structure. No person shall use or cause to be used any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system, sound
amplifier, or any other machine or device that produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound outside of buildings or other enclosed structures in a manner that exceeds the
levels specified in this section.
(Ordinance 08-054 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.07.004)
Sec. 8.07.006 Methods of sound measurement
(a) (1) Whenever portions of this article prohibit sound over a certain decibel limit, measurement shall be made with a type 1 or type 2 calibrated sound
level meter utilizing the A-weighting scale and the slow meter response as specified by the American Standards Association. Measurements recorded shall
be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the sound being measured. The microphone of the meter shall be positioned so as not to create any
unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used.
(2) Traffic, aircraft, and other transportation noise shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the
noise being measured and cannot reasonably be distinguished from the primary noise.
(b) Measurements of sound generated shall be taken from the curbline of the nearest public street to the property where the sound is generated and taken toward the
source of the sound. In the event that there is not at least fifty (50) feet of distance from the building in which sound is being generated and from which sound is being
measured, then measurements shall be taken from the street curbline opposite the said building of the nearest public street to the property where the sound is
generated.
(c) In the event there is no public street between the property where the sound is being received at and the property the sound is being generated on, any sound that
when measured at the property where the sound is being received exceeds the dB(A) levels set forth in this section is a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 08-054 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.07.005)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/349
Sec. 8.07.007 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply if:
(1) The emission of any sound was for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, danger, or attempted crime, or was produced
pursuant to any safety rule or regulation of any governmental entity or agency.
(2) The sound was produced by an authorized emergency vehicle.
(3) The sound was produced by emergency work.
(4) The sound was generated:
(A) At a lawfully scheduled stadium event;
(B) By a parade and spectators and participants on the parade route during a lawful parade;
(C) By patrons and participants using cannons and gunfire during historical battle re-enactments after seeking permission from the chief of police; or
(D) By spectators and participants of any outdoor event, fun run, race, festival, fiesta, or concert that was sponsored or cosponsored by the city.
(5) The sound was produced by the erection, excavation, construction, or demolition of any building or structure, including the use of any necessary tools
or equipment, which activity did not produce a sound exceeding eighty-five (85) dB(A) when measured from the property line of the residential property where
the sound is being received. This activity is only permissible between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(6) The sound was produced by operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, router, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
lawnmower, or any other similar device used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. when the sound is being produced for the maintenance or upkeep
of the property on which it was operated.
(7) The sound was produced by church bells.
(8) The sound was produced during daytime hours by activities conducted on public parks, public playgrounds, and public or private school grounds,
including, but not limited to, school athletic, band and school entertainment practice or events. The use of a radio, stereo, or other device that amplifies sound
on public parks or playgrounds is permissible as long as the sound generated does not disturb other users of the facilities.
(Ordinance 08-054 adopted 11/18/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.07.006)
ARTICLE 8.08 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.08.001 Definitions
Whenever the following terms are used in this article, they shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section:
Demolisher. Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed or scrap metal, or otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles.
Junked vehicle.
(1) A vehicle that:
(A) Is self-propelled; and
(B) Is:
(i) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(ii) A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate; or
(iii) A motor vehicle that is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
a. 24-hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
b. Twenty (20) calendar days, if the vehicle is on private property.
c. Once notice is provided, the amount of hours or days listed above continues regardless of whether the vehicle is moved from the street
to private property, or from private property to the street. The time and days do not reset once moved and a second notice is not required.
d. An extension of ten (10) calendar days may be provided to remove the vehicle upon written request from the vehicle owner to the chief
of police or city manager. The owner must show proof that the vehicle is in the process of being removed, or an emergency situation that
precludes the vehicle from immediate removal. Only one (1) extension shall be provided, if approved, by the chief of police or city manager.
(2) For purposes of this article, “junked vehicle” includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft. This article applies only to:
(A) A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate, or is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or
abandoned;
(B) An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under Federal Aviation
Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. part 47; or
(C) A watercraft that:
(i) Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number and is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or abandoned; and
(ii) Is not a watercraft described by section 31.055, Parks and Wildlife Code.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
(Ordinance 08-008 adopted 2/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.08.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code; Ordinance 2018-2, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.08.002 Declaration of nuisance; exceptions
(a) A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way:
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/349
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates a fire hazard;
(5) Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
(6) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities; and
(7) Is a public nuisance.
(b) The location or presence of any junked vehicle or junked vehicles on any lot, tract, parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or
unimproved, within the city shall be deemed a public nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to cause or maintain such public nuisance by wrecking,
dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding his or their vehicle or vehicles on the property of another or to suffer, permit or allow the same to be placed,
located, maintained or exist upon his or their own real property; provided that this section shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private
property;
(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer,
except that wrecked or dismantled vehicles may only be stored at locations authorized by city permit at a location authorized by city zoning to store or repair
vehicles;
(3) Unlicensed, inoperable antique vehicle(s) stored on property, provided that the vehicle(s) and the outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a
manner that they do not constitute a health hazard and are entirely screened from the ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees,
shrubbery, or other appropriate means. The use of a car covering alone does not constitute screening;
(4) Car repair businesses may only store junk vehicles on their property while the vehicle is being actively worked upon. A business requesting to store a
junk vehicle for more than thirty (30) calendar days shall provide a letter in writing to the city detailing the junk vehicle information and the reason the vehicle
will be maintained at the location for more than thirty (30) calendar days. It will be within the chief of police's sole discretion to approve or deny the request,
giving the car repair business ten (10) calendar days to remove the vehicle, if denied; or
(5) Outside storage of junk vehicles at any business is prohibited unless allowed outright by this code of ordinances, or city council approves a special use
permit under the present zoning or approves an application for rezoning.
(Ordinance 08-008 adopted 2/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.08.002; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code; Ordinance 2018-2, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.08.003 Abatement order
(a) Whenever such public nuisance exists in the city in violation hereof, the chief of police and/or his subordinates, who shall administer and enforce this article, shall
give not less than ten (10) calendar days' notice to the owner of the real property or the occupant, if any, of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists to abate or
remove the same, stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) calendar days. Such notice to be
mailed, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or the occupant of the private or public premises whereupon such public nuisance exists. If
the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) calendar days
from the date of such return.
(b) Whenever such public nuisance exists in the city in violation hereof, the chief of police and/or his subordinates shall have not less than a ten-day period to give
notice, such notice to be mailed, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or the occupant of the public premises or to the owner or the
occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon such public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office,
official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return.
(c) If, within ten (10) days after the receipt of notice from the chief of police and/or his subordinates, or his duly authorized agent, to abate the nuisance, as herein
provided, the owner or occupant of the premises shall give his written permission to the chief of police and/or his employees, or his duly authorized agent, for removal of
the junked vehicles from the premises, the giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this section.
(Ordinance 08-008 adopted 2/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.08.003; Ordinance 2018-2, sec. 3, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.08.004 Removal by city; disposal of removed vehicles
(a) If such public nuisance is not abated by said owner or occupant after notice is given in accordance with this article, official action shall be taken by the city to abate
such nuisance. Junked vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as
scrap or salvage, which removal or process shall be considered in [compliance with] subsection (c) of this section. A junked vehicle disposed of to a demolisher in
accordance with this article must be transferred to such demolisher by a form acceptable to the state department of transportation. The transfer receipt must be listed on
the demolisher's inventory list and surrendered to the state department of transportation in lieu of the certificate of title.
(b) The chief of police, and/or his subordinates, of the city shall administer the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof from the property. Such junked vehicle may be
disposed of as detailed above, or may be sold at auction with other vehicles stored in the city's impound lot. Vehicles sold at auction shall meet all requirements as
detailed in article 12.06 impound lot.
(Ordinance 08-008 adopted 2/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.08.004; Ordinance 2018-2, sec. 4, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 8.08.005 Enforcement; right of entry
The chief of police and/or his subordinates, or his agent, may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this article to examine vehicles or parts thereof, to
obtain information as to the identity or vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. The
city council shall have the authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this article. (Ordinance 08-008 adopted 2/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.08.005)
Sec. 8.08.006 Immediate removal of vehicles obstructing traffic
Nothing in this article shall affect ordinances that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an obstruction to traffic. (Ordinance 08-
008 adopted 2/5/08; 2008 Code, sec. 8.08.006)
ARTICLE 8.09 DRAINS AND DRAINAGE EASEMENTS
Sec. 8.09.001 Throwing trash or debris in drain or easement
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or place any trash, brush, cut grass or weeds, debris or physical matter of any kind in or on any natural or artificial drain,
drainage ditch, drainage easement, or stream, creek or channel whatever in the city, or to permit the introduction of any such material into any such drain. (1972 Code,
sec. 23.401; 2008 Code, sec. 8.09.001)
Sec. 8.09.002 Placing fence or other obstacle in drain or easement
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or place any fence of any kind, or any other structure or physical obstacle, in, on or across any drainage easement, or any
natural or artificial drain, or any stream, creek or channel in the city, or any part thereof, without special permission from the city council, evidenced by an ordinance duly
passed, and then only in strict accord with the terms of such permission, if any. (1972 Code, sec. 23.402; 2008 Code, sec. 8.09.002)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/349
Sec. 8.09.003 Duty to keep easement clean
It shall be unlawful for the owner or tenant of any property in the city which is traversed to any extent by an improved drainage easement to fail to keep such drainage
easement on his property clean and free of all trash, brush, cut grass, weeds, debris or other physical matter which is or could be an obstacle, to any extent, to the free
flow of drainage waters at all times, without regard to the origin thereof. (1972 Code, sec. 23.403; 2008 Code, sec. 8.09.003)
Sec. 8.09.004 Discharging sewage or other substance into drains
(a) Prohibited. No person, firm, corporation, association, or political subdivision shall in any way, either directly or indirectly, cause or allow any chemical, liquid,
effluent, sewage, or any other substance, whether the same shall be treated or untreated, to be discharged into or run along any natural or open drain within the limits of
this city, whether such natural or open drain be a running stream or not.
(b) Declaration of nuisance. The addition of any chemical, liquid, effluent, sewage, or any other substance, whether the same be treated or untreated, to any natural or
open drain shall prima facie constitute a public nuisance.
(c) Industrial uses or other activities resulting in discharge to drain.
(1) No person, firm, corporation, association, or political subdivision shall construct, maintain, or operate any structure, plant, or other thing which shall in
any way result in the discharge of any chemical, liquid, effluent, sewage, or any other substance into any natural or open drain that flows through the limits of
the city.
(2) The construction, maintenance, or operation of any structure, plant, or other thing by any person, firm, corporation, association, or political subdivision,
which results in the discharge of any chemical, liquid, effluent, sewage, or any other substance into any natural or open drain that flows through the limits of
the city, whether the same has commenced, or the commencement of which is imminent or impending, shall constitute a nuisance to the welfare of this city
and its people and residents.
(1972 Code, secs. 23.404–23.406; 2008 Code, sec. 8.09.004)
ARTICLE 8.10 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION
Sec. 8.10.001 Purpose
The city recognizes the need for an organized inspection program for new and aging residential rental units in order to upgrade rental units to meet city and state safety,
health, fire and zoning codes and to provide a more efficient system for compelling both absentee and local landlords to correct violations and to maintain, in proper
condition, rental property within the city. The city recognizes that the most efficient system to provide for rental inspections is the creation of a program requiring the
registration of all residential rental units within the city so that orderly inspection schedules can be made by city officials. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code,
sec. 8.10.001)
Sec. 8.10.002 Definitions
(a) Rental property. For the purpose of this article, rental property shall mean a single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dormitory, boarding
house, lodging or any combination of any such dwelling unit as defined herein.
(b) Additional definitions. The following terms were adapted from chapter 15, zoning, and shall have the following meanings:
Boarding home for sheltered care. A group home for the sheltered care of persons with special needs, which in addition to providing food and shelter may also provide
some combination of personal care, social or counseling services, and transportation.
Boarding house. A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more than ten (10) guest rooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or without meals,
for compensation for more than one (1) week.
Condominium. A single dwelling unit in a multiunit dwelling or structure, which is separately owned and which may be combined with an undivided interest in the
common areas and facilities of the property.
Cottage. An individual single-family dwelling unit, being less than 1,500 heated square feet, situated with other similar dwelling units on one platted lot, for the purpose of
rental or leasing, as part of a multiple-family retirement community.
Dwelling. A house or other structure in which a person or persons live; a residence; abode; habitation; an apartment or building, or group of buildings, occupied as a
place of residence.
Dwelling, garden house. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities, designed for occupancy as a residence.
Dwelling, manufactured home. A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, greater than 320 square feet in gross floor area, designed with attached axles and wheels, which
may be used for permanent or semipermanent living space for humans, and which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. The term shall not include any vehicle
meeting the above description which is used for an office, a classroom, a laboratory, processing, manufacturing, retail sales or other use; see “Building, temporary” [in
section 15.02.052 of the zoning regulations] for these definitions. Also see “Manufactured housing” [in section 15.02.052 of the zoning regulations].
Dwelling, multiple-family. A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently, in structures containing three (3) or
more single-dwelling units in which they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units may be owned as condominiums, or
offered for rent.
Dwelling, single-family. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities, designed for occupancy as a residence.
Dwelling, single-family medium density. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities. Designed for occupancy as a residence, with a minimum lot area of
6,000 square feet.
Dwelling, townhouse. A building that has single-family dwelling units erected in a row as a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit
or units by a firewall along the dividing lot line and each such building being separated from any other building by space on all sides.
Dwelling, two-family or duplex. A building designed or arranged to be occupied as two (2) separate residences, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units.
Dwelling unit. Any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by this article,
for not more than one (1) family, or a congregate residence for six (6) or less persons.
Group home. A dwelling for no more than six (6) legally unrelated, developmentally disabled persons and no more than two (2) supervisory personnel. Said persons and
personnel must live as a single housekeeping unit, for the primary purpose of providing shelter in a family-like atmosphere as part of the residential community, with onsite
medical treatment or therapy a secondary purpose. A group home must qualify as a family home under chapter 123 of the Texas Human Resources Code, the
Community Homes for Disabled Persons Locations Act.
Guest house. Any living space with or without kitchen facilities which is to be used for the housing of two (2) or less persons, attached or unattached to the primary
structure of the site, intended to be used as an accessory use to the primary structure and not for profit purposes.
Guest room. Any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a guest for sleeping purposes. Every 100 square feet of superficial floor area in a dormitory shall be
considered to be a guest room.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/349
Hotel. Any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services, such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities, rented or leased on a daily, weekly, or semipermanent basis.
(Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.002)
Sec. 8.10.003 Registration
(a) Registration requirements. No person shall hereafter occupy, allow to be occupied or let any other person occupy any residential rental property within the city for
which a registration statement has not been properly made and filed with the development office. Registration shall be made on forms furnished by the city for
registration purposes and shall specifically require the following minimum information:
(1) The name, address and phone number of the property owner and/or the designated local property manager if the property owner lives outside the
metropolitan statistical area (MSA).
(2) The street address of the rental property.
(3) The number and types of units within the rental property (dwelling units or sleeping rooms).
(4) The maximum number of occupants permitted for each dwelling unit or sleeping room.
(5) The name, phone number and address of the person authorized to make or order made repairs or services for the property, if in violation of city or state
codes, if the person is different than the owner or local manager.
(b) Manner of registering. The registration must be made on or before October 1, 2009, and annually thereafter by the property owner or designated local property
manager, in the office of the building inspection department of the city.
(c) Transfer of property. Every new owner of rental property (whether as fee owner or contract purchaser) shall be required to furnish to the development department
the new owner's name, address and phone number and the name, address and phone number of the owner's designated local manager before taking possession of the
rental property. No registration fee shall be required of the new owner during the year in which possession takes place provided that the previous owner has paid all
registration fees and has complied with all requirements of this article and any notices from the city concerning violations of health, zoning, fire or safety codes of the city.
If any change in the type of occupancy as originally registered is contemplated by the new owner, a new registration statement will be required.
(Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.003)
Sec. 8.10.004 Inspection required
(a) All dwellings, boarding houses, condominiums, cottages, and/or group homes that rent to permanent residents and dormitories shall be inspected systematically
for compliance with this article and all other applicable laws.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses owned and operated by any governmental agency;
(2) Dwellings, buildings, structures and uses licensed and inspected by the state;
(3) Hotels that do not rent to permanent residents;
(4) Where a nonresidential business or activity, or a state-licensed and inspected use, occupies a portion of a building and premises which would be
otherwise subject to this article, the provisions of this article shall be applicable to the residential and common or public areas of such building and premises.
(Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.004)
Sec. 8.10.005 Frequency of inspections
(a) Generally. All rental dwellings subject to this article shall be inspected at least once every two years or upon change of occupancy, except as provided herein.
(b) New buildings. Neither the common areas nor the dwelling or rooming units in structures newly constructed shall be further inspected after the completion and
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a multifamily unit or completion and final inspection of a single-family structure for a period of ten years from the date of said
certificate or final inspection, respectively, unless a complaint is made thereof. Thereafter said areas and units shall be inspected in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
(c) Inspection of multifamily dwellings.
(1) Ten percent of the entire complex will be inspected each year. Of these, five percent will be occupied units and five percent will be vacant units.
(2) As a result of such inspection, a list of all violations found in each unit, if any, shall be maintained by the inspection department. For each additional unit
that fails due to a high risk item, one additional unit will be inspected. Any reinspection shall require an additional fee as established by resolution of the city
council. High risk reinspections shall be conducted within three business days.
(Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.005)
Sec. 8.10.006 Inspection report required
No person shall rent, let or allow occupancy of any dwelling subject to this article without having a valid, current approved inspection report. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted
7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.006)
Sec. 8.10.007 Inspection procedure
(a) If, upon completion of the biennial inspection, the premises are found to be in compliance with all applicable city codes and ordinances and the appropriate fee has
been paid, the city shall issue an inspection slip/report.
(b) If, upon completion of the inspection, the premises are found to be in violation of one or more provisions of applicable city codes and ordinances, the city shall
provide written notice of such violation and shall set a reinspection date before which such violation shall be corrected. If such violation has been corrected within that
period, the city shall issue an approved inspection report for the premises. If such violations have not been corrected within that period, the city shall not issue an
inspection report and may take any action necessary to enforce compliance with applicable city codes and ordinances. If such uncorrected violations do not pose an
immediate threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants, the city manager or designee may authorize the occupancy of the premises for a period not to
exceed 90 days.
(Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.007)
Sec. 8.10.008 Request for inspection
The owner of any dwelling subject to this article may request inspections of said dwelling at any time after proper request and payment. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted
7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.008)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/349
Sec. 8.10.009 Inspection report to be furnished to tenant upon request
Upon the request of an existing or prospective tenant, the owner or the owner's agent shall produce the inspection approval report. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09;
2008 Code, sec. 8.10.009)
Sec. 8.10.010 Suspension or revocation of approved inspection report
If the city manager or designee, after a hearing before the city manager or designee, determines that any person has failed to comply with this article or any applicable
city code or ordinance, the city manager may suspend or revoke the inspection report held by that person. Such a hearing shall be held not less than seven calendar
days after notice of the time, place, and subject of the hearing has been sent to the certificate holder at the holder's last known address or business address. The city's
representative shall present evidence in support of the suspension or revocation, and the certificate holder shall be permitted to rebut such evidence and present any
other evidence that is, in the discretion of the hearing officer, relevant and material. Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a
written decision. The suspension or revocation of any certificate of occupancy shall not release or discharge the certificate holder from paying any fees due to the city,
nor shall such certificate holder be released from prosecution for violating any code or ordinance. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.010)
Sec. 8.10.011 Appeals
If a property owner wishes to appeal the decisions of this article they may do so to the board of adjustment as set forth in chapter 15, zoning. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted
7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.011)
Sec. 8.10.012 Maintenance of records
All records, files, and documents pertaining to this article shall be maintained by the community development department and made available to the public as allowed or
required by state law or city ordinance. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.012)
Sec. 8.10.013 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to hospital units, nursing units or retirement home units licensed by the state located within the city, all of which shall be
specifically exempt from registration under this article. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.013)
Sec. 8.10.014 Fees
A fee schedule as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time shall be charged for compliance with
this article. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.014; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 8.10.015 Violations declared nuisance; injunction
Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this article, the city attorney may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this article. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order,
temporary injunction and permanent injunction. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.015)
Sec. 8.10.016 Other enforcement actions
Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from taking action under any of its city fire, housing, zoning or other health and safety codes for violations thereof to seek
injunctive relief or criminal prosecution of such violations in accordance with the terms and conditions of the particular ordinance or code under which the city would
proceed against the property owner, designated property manager or occupant of any residential rental dwelling unit covered by this article. (Ordinance 09-031 adopted
7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 8.10.016)
ARTICLE 8.11 ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS AND INGESTION DEVICES
Sec. 8.11.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal smoking products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the
city limits. (Ordinance 10-050 adopted 12/7/10; 2008 Code, sec. 8.11.001)
Sec. 8.11.002 Definitions
The following words and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:
Illegal smoking product. Any plant or other substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice, or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the substance is
marked [marketed] for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any one or more of the following substances or chemicals:
(1) Salvinorin A: Contained within the Salvia divinorum plant, whether growing or not; or possessed as an extract, compound, manufacture, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such plant;
(2) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP 47, 497) and homologues;
(3) 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
(4) Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or
(5) Any products sold, distributed or possessed in the form of incense or herbal smoking blends under the names such as “K-2,” “K-2 Summit,” “K-2 Sex,”
“Genie,” “Spice,” “Dascents,” “Zohai,” “Sage,” “Pep Spice,” “Solar Flare,” “K-O Knockout 2,” “Spice Gold,” “Spice Diamond,” “Spice Cannabinoid,” “Yucatan
Fire,” “Fire N' Ice,” or “Salvia Divinorum,” or related products or chemicals which when ingested produce intoxicating effects similar to marijuana.
Ingestion device. Equipment, a product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the
human body, including:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
(2) A water pipe;
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
(9) A chillum;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/349
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business.
(Ordinance 10-050 adopted 12/7/10; 2008 Code, sec. 8.11.002)
Sec. 8.11.003 Offenses; penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer for sale any illegal smoking product.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess an ingestion device with the intent to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body an
illegal smoking product.
(c) The culpable mental state required by section 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code, as amended, is specifically negated and dispensed with and a violation is a strict
liability offense.
(d) Any person, firm or corporation found to be violating any term or provision of this article shall be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code,
or the maximum amount allowed by law, for each offense. Every day a violation continues shall constitute a specific offense.
(Ordinance 10-050 adopted 12/7/10; 2008 Code, sec. 8.11.003; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 8.11.004 Defenses
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense for a person charged with an offense for possession or use of an illegal smoking product that the use or possession was pursuant
to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act.
(b) It shall be a primary affirmative defense that the sale or possession by a person of Salvinorin A was in conjunction with ornamental landscaping and used solely for
that purpose.
(Ordinance 10-050 adopted 12/7/10; 2008 Code, sec. 8.11.004)
ARTICLE 8.12 PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREA SAFETY ZONES
Sec. 8.12.001 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
City. The City of Leon Valley, Texas.
City parks and recreational areas. Any land, including improvements to the land, which is administered, operated or managed by the city for the use of the general public
as a park, trail or natural area, and city recreational areas which include, but are not limited to: conservation areas, jogging trails, hiking trails, bicycle trails, stretches of
river designated for canoeing or kayaking, recreational centers, water parks, swimming pools, libraries, conference center, community center, soccer fields and baseball
fields. A map depicting the city parks shall be kept and maintained by the city's police department.
City park and recreational area safety zone. In the context of this article shall include, but not be limited to, Raymond Rimkus, the Nature Area, the Silo Park, Old Mill
Park, Hike and Bike Trail, Leon Valley Library, Leon Valley Community Center, Leon Valley Conference Center, Northwest Little League, Forest Oaks Pool, and the Leon
Valley Pool. It shall also include baseball and soccer fields, all city libraries, the Leon Valley Community Center, the Leon Valley Conference Center, and any park or
recreational areas to be added in the city in the future.
Loiter. Standing or sitting idly, whether in a vehicle or not, in and around an area.
Permanent residence. A place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for seven (7) or more consecutive days.
Sex offender. An individual who is required or has been required to register as a sex offender under chapter 62 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, or by a state or
federal agency. Sex offender shall also refer to civilly committed sexually violent predators, as referenced under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code chapter 841.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of less than seven (7) total days during any calendar year and which is not the
person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any
month and which is not the person's permanent address.
(Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 3/20/18)
Sec. 8.12.002 Sex offender residence restrictions
(a) It is an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of the real property comprising a city park and
recreational area safety zone.
(b) The residence restriction of this section applies to a home, apartment, motel, hotel group home, and internet rentals that are in the city park and recreational area
safety zone as defined in this article.
(c) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of this offense and need not be proved.
(Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 3/20/18)
Sec. 8.12.003 Sex offender entry and loitering restrictions
(a) It is an offense for a sex offender to enter a city park and recreational area safety zone.
(b) It is an offense for a sex offender to loiter within five hundred (500) feet of a city park and recreational area safety zone.
(c) A person who is or has been subject to chapter 62 of the Code of Criminal Procedure who on at least three occasions during any month spends more than 48
consecutive hours in the city, and is not registered in our city, before the last day of that month shall report that fact to:
(1) The city police department;
(2) A person described by subsection (c) shall provide the city police department with all information the person is required to provide under article
62.051(c) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, to include the following:
(A) The address of any location in the city, as appropriate, at which the person was lodged during the month; and
(B) A statement as to whether the person intends to return to the city during the succeeding month.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/349
(d) A sex offender who has a right to be present at an official meeting is exempted from this section and may approach and enter a city park and recreational area
safety zone for such time as is necessary to attend the official meeting. This exemption shall only apply to those areas of the city park and recreational area safety zone
that are necessary for attendance at the official meeting, and any sex offender found outside such areas shall be in violation of this article. The sex offender shall be
required to contact the city police department at least 24 hours in advance and request an escort to the meeting.
(e) When a polling place for an election is located within a city park and recreational area safety zone, a sex offender is exempted from this section and may approach
and enter the city park and recreational area safety zone for the limited purpose of voting if the sex offender qualifies to vote at such place. This exemption shall only
apply to those areas of the city park and recreational area safety zone that are necessary for voting, and any sex offender found outside such areas shall be in violation
of this article. The sex offender shall be required to contact the city police department at least 24 hours in advance and request an escort to the meeting.
(Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 3/20/18)
Sec. 8.12.004 Distance measurement
Distances under this article shall be measured between the sex offender's residence, temporary residence or location and the nearest property line of the city park and
recreational area safety zone. (Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 3/20/18)
Sec. 8.12.005 Affirmative defenses
(a) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for sex offender residence restrictions that the sex offender had already established a temporary or permanent residence
within the city park and recreational area safety zone prior to the date of this article's adoption, and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the sex offender was a minor when the offense was committed, and does not qualify as a sex
offender under this article as an adult.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the sex offender is under an order of a court in the state or of the Texas Department of Criminal
Justice Parole Board, permitting the person to be within the city park and recreational area safety zone.
(Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 3/20/18)
Sec. 8.12.006 Exemptions
(a) Exemptions from the terms of this article shall not be contrary to the public interest but may be granted where, owing to special conditions, or when a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship.
(b) A sex offender shall have the right to make an appeal for an exemption from a provision of this chapter by making a request to the chief of the police department,
in writing, stating why an exemption should be granted.
(c) The decision of the chief of police, which may be made based solely on the written appeal without further hearing, shall be final.
(Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 3/20/18)
Sec. 8.12.007 Penalties
(a) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon adjudication or conviction thereof shall be fined in
an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each and every offense.
(b) Each and every violation or day such violation shall continue or exist shall be deemed a separate offense.
(c) The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin a violation of this section.
(d) The city shall retain all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 3/20/18)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01.001 Continuation of social security payments for city employees
(a) The agreement with the Social Security Administration shall be amended to be consistent with the current policy of providing for social security payments for all
paid employees.
(b) Staff is to hereby notify the Social Security Administration accordingly of this action taken by the city council.
(Ordinance 05-044 adopted 12/6/05; 2008 Code, sec. 9.01.001)
State law reference–Social security, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 606.
Sec. 9.01.002 Substance abuse policy; drug and alcohol testing
(a) Substance abuse policy adopted. The city council does hereby adopt comprehensive substance abuse policies and detection methods to ensure, as fully as
possible, to the citizens of the city, public servants who shall be free from such abusive practices. A copy of these policies is attached to Ordinance 1348 as the
Substance Abuse Policy.
(b) Drug and alcohol testing.
(1) Any public servant may be subject to a fitness for duty examination when reasonable suspicion exists either that the employee is currently under the
influence of drugs or alcohol or that the employee's behavior, over a period of time, indicates substance abuse, further providing for search of an employee's
personal property when there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is in possession of drugs or alcohol, either on city property or while conducting city
business. Any employee refusing to submit to a fitness for duty examination, or refusing to sign a fitness for duty examination consent form, will be subject to
dismissal. All prospective employees and appointed members of city positions shall be refused consideration for such employment or appointment if they test
positive from such screening.
(2) The city manager will establish policies/procedures which comply with the federal government Department of Transportation regulations requiring drug
and alcohol testing for employees who operate vehicles which require a commercial driver's license.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/349
(Ordinance 1348 adopted 4/17/90; Ordinance 97-003 adopted 1/7/97; 2008 Code, sec. 9.01.002)
ARTICLE 9.02 POLICE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.02.001 City marshal service abolished; officers reassigned to police department
(a) Ordinance No. 04-001 that allowed for the creation of the city marshal service is repealed.
(b) The police officers assigned to the city marshal service will be reassigned as police officers to the city police department.
(c) The appointment of and the powers of these police officers will be as provided for in this article.
(Ordinance 06-042 adopted 10/3/06; 2008 Code, sec. 9.03.001)
State law reference–Abolition of office of marshal, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.076.
Secs. 9.02.002–9.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Department
Sec. 9.02.031 Creation
There is hereby created the city police department, which shall be operated as a departmental function of the city. (Ordinance 06-043 adopted 10/3/06; 2008 Code, sec.
9.03.002)
Sec. 9.02.032 Chief of police and other positions
The position of chief of police is hereby created. The chief of police shall be the executive head of such department. The city council shall create such additional
positions in the police department as it shall deem advisable from time to time. The city manager will be the appointing and removing authority for all positions within the
police department, with the exception of the chief of police, whose appointment or removal must be confirmed by the city council. (Ordinance 06-043 adopted 10/3/06;
2008 Code, sec. 9.03.003)
Sec. 9.02.033 Powers of police officers
The police officers appointed pursuant hereto shall have all of the powers, rights and authorities vested in police officers and conferred by Texas Local Government
Code, chapter 341, Municipal Law Enforcement, as well as those conferred by articles 2.12 and 2.13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, or as otherwise provided by
state law. (Ordinance 06-043 adopted 10/3/06; 2008 Code, sec. 9.03.004)
Sec. 9.02.034 Emergency interlocal assistance
The mayor or other authorized official, when requested for assistance under the provisions of Local Government Code 362.002, Law Enforcement Assistance, is hereby
authorized to send members of the police department to assist in police duties of the requesting municipality or county during a state of civil emergency as defined in
said statute. (Ordinance 06-043 adopted 10/3/06; 2008 Code, sec. 9.03.006)
State law reference–Law enforcement services provided through cooperation of municipalities, counties and certain other local governments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
362.001 et seq.
Sec. 9.02.035 Arrest without warrant
Pursuant to article 14.03 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, officers of the police department are authorized to arrest, without warrant, persons found in
suspicious places, and under circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten or are about
to commit some offense against the laws. (1972 Code, sec. 1.1001; 2008 Code, sec. 9.03.007)
State law reference–Authority to make arrest without warrant, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. sec. 14.01 et seq.
Secs. 9.02.036–9.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Police Reserve Force*
Sec. 9.02.071 Appointment of members; powers
There is hereby created the position of reserve police officer. The chief of police shall appoint members of the reserve police force. The reserve police officers appointed
pursuant hereto shall have all of the powers, rights and authorities vested in police officers and conferred by Texas Local Government Code, chapter 341.102, Reserve
Police Force, as well as those conferred by articles 2.12 and 2.13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, or as otherwise provided by state law. (Ordinance 06-043 adopted
10/3/06; 2008 Code, sec. 9.03.005)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.02.001 Title
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as article 10.02 of the city code of Leon Valley, Texas, and will be referred to herein as “this article.” (1972 Code, sec.
24.101; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.001)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/349
Sec. 10.02.002 Authority
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to municipalities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, particularly chapters 43 and 212 of the
Texas Local Government Code. (1972 Code, sec. 24.102; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.002)
Sec. 10.02.003 Purpose
(a) The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Leon Valley by promoting good planning and construction
practice;
(b) The provisions in this article shall be administered to ensure orderly growth and development and shall supplement and facilitate the provisions in the master or
comprehensive plan, zoning chapter, official maps and capital budget of the city; and
(c) The requirement for parkland dedication is to provide recreational areas for the citizens of the community.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.103; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.003)
Sec. 10.02.004 Jurisdiction
(a) The provisions in this article shall be applicable in the City of Leon Valley (“city”) and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(b) When necessary, to further its purposes, this article shall be amended by the city council of the City of Leon Valley (“council”).
(1972 Code, sec. 24.104; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.004)
Sec. 10.02.005 Fees
Fees sufficient to recover city costs incurred in support of development activities will be charged in advance of providing said service in accordance with city
ordinance(s). (1972 Code, sec. 24.105; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.005)
Sec. 10.02.006 Penalties for violations
(a) Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), unless some other
fine is specifically prescribed for a particular violation. Each day any violation occurs or continues to occur shall be considered a separate offense.
(b) A fine or criminal penalty prescribed by this article does not apply to a violation in the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(c) The municipality is entitled to appropriate injunctive relief in district court to enjoin a violation of municipal ordinances or codes applicable in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.106; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.006)
Secs. 10.02.007–10.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Definitions and Rules of Construction
Sec. 10.02.051 Words and phrases, rules of construction
(a) Words, phrases and terms defined in this article shall be given the defined meaning.
(b) Words, phrases and terms not defined in this article but defined in the buildings and building code found in article 3.02, division 2, of the Leon Valley City Code
(“this code”), shall be constructed as defined in the building code.
(c) Words, phrases and terms defined neither in this article nor in the buildings and building code adopted in article 3.02, division 2, shall be given their usual and
customary meanings in municipal planning and engineering practices, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(d) The text of this article shall control captions, titles and maps.
(e) The word “shall” is mandatory and not permissive; the word “may” is permissive and not mandatory.
(f) Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.
(g) Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words used in the future tense include the present tense.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.201; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.051)
Sec. 10.02.052 Words and phrases defined
Administrative officer. The governmental officer charged with administering development regulations.
Alley. A minor public right-of-way not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is intended primarily for vehicular service access to the
back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Applicant. A developer (or person) submitting an application for development. See “Person.”
Arterial street. A street used primarily for fast or heavy traffic and designated in the major thoroughfare plan as a primary street, or expressway.
Building setback line, front. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street property line.
Building setback line, side. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the side lot property line.
City. The City of Leon Valley, Bexar County, Texas.
Collector street. A street which primarily provides circulation within neighborhoods, to carry traffic from minor streets to arterial streets, or to carry traffic through or
adjacent to commercial or industrial areas.
Community (district) park zone. The entire City of Leon Valley, including its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and any subsequent additions either to its incorporated limits or to
its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Crosswalk way. A public right-of-way, six (6) feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation.
Cul-de-sac. A street having one (1) outlet to another street and terminating on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround.
Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/349
Dedication. A conveyance of land to the city and/or to the public in general by recorded instrument accepted by the city. A transfer of ownership of subdivision
improvements to the city by petition and acceptance.
Detention basin. A man-made or natural water collector facility designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede its flow and to release the same
gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
Developer. The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase
or other persons having enforceable proprietary interests in such land. See “Applicant.”
Drainage easement. An interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, for the construction, use, and maintenance of drainage facilities across, over, and
under the private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance and/or repair of said drainage facilities.
Drainage right-of-way. A drainage easement granted to the city, to the public generally, for the construction, use, and maintenance of drainage facilities across, over, and
under said public right-of-way. Said right-of-way shall be outside of and not contained within private property.
Easement. An interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, across, over and under private land for the construction, reconstruction, use and maintenance of
public or quasi-public facilities including utilities, streets and sidewalks and within which easements the fee simple owner shall not erect any permanent structures.
Engineer. A person duly authorized and properly registered under provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice
the profession of engineering as evidenced by a valid Texas engineer's seal.
FEMA. The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Final approval. The official action of the council taken on a preliminarily approved subdivision or site plan, after all conditions, engineering plans, and other requirements
have been completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed, or guarantees properly posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon
the posting of such guarantee.
Final subdivision plat. The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision which is presented for final approval.
Fire access roadway. A roadway designed to withstand the live load weight of fire apparatus.
Fire lane. Any area adjacent to the entrance or exit of any building or buildings deemed necessary by the fire chief. This designated area may also include sidewalks,
driveways, portions or parking lots or any other area directly adjacent to or near building entrances or exits, and to include any fire hydrant.
Fire zone. A restricted area clearly delineated and marked to facilitate access to hydrants and buildings, and as designated to be situated by the fire chief.
Guarantee of performance. A security instrument or cash bond acceptable to the city, furnished by a developer to the city, to ensure construction of all subdivision public
improvements within required time limits for such construction. See “Performance guarantee.”
Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which is, or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement;
which is designated as a distinct and separate lot, and which is identified by a lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of
record.
Lot, area. The size of a lot measured by the lot lines and expressed in terms of acres or square feet.
Lot, corner. A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets.
Lot, double frontage. A lot that fronts upon two (2) parallel streets or that fronts upon two (2) streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
Lot, flag. A lot, the bulk of which property is behind another lot, and where frontage on the public street is limited and access thereto is by way of a narrow portion of the
lot.
Lot, frontage. That portion of a lot extending along a street line.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, irregular. A lot whose opposing property lines generally are not parallel, such as a pie-shaped lot on a cul-de-sac, where the side property lines are not parallel to
each other; or a flag-shaped lot.
Lot, reverse corner. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.
Lot, reverse frontage. A through lot that is not accessible from one (1) of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts.
Marginal access street. A street which primarily provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic and is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial
street.
Master plan, Leon Valley. The City of Leon Valley master plan and as may be amended from time to time.
Minor street. A street which primarily provides for access to abutting residential property.
Monument. An artificial mark or marker of relative permanence established by a surveyor to designate or reference to the proper location of a property corner.
Neighborhood park zone. A park which serves about one (1) square mile of urban area, may serve from 2,000 to 10,000 persons, and those zones into which the city is
divided for the purpose of parks and recreation planning.
Non-access easement. See “Vehicular non-access easement.”
Office. Any office referred to in this article by title means the person employed or appointed by the city in that position, or his duly authorized representative.
Park improvements. Any improvements which directly benefit, and contribute to, the development of park land for the enjoyment and use of the general public. Such
improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) Curb/gutter and one-half paving section costs bordering all park land;
(2) Water/sewer line costs bordering all park land;
(3) Land forms such as berms;
(4) Improvements related to increased public access to park land, such as sidewalks, pedestrian bridges and certain drainage improvements;
(5) Park land; and/or
(6) Park equipment.
Parks and recreation plan. The document of said title adopted by the Leon Valley city council, which may or may not be incorporated into the Leon Valley master plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/349
Pavement width. The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the face of curbs.
Performance guarantee. Any security that may be accepted by a municipality as a guarantee that the public improvements required for development will be satisfactorily
completed. See “Guarantee of performance.”
Person. A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent
of any of the aforesaid.
Plat. See “Subdivision plat.”
Preliminary acceptance (approval). The action taken by the city council prior to final approval (acceptance) of a subdivision plat or the public improvements therein which
confer certain privileges and responsibility to the subdivider regarding property to be developed or public improvements which have been constructed.
Privately maintained drainage easement. A drainage easement granted to the public and maintained by the property owner over which the easement is granted.
Private street. A nonpublic right-of-way used for vehicular access and constructed and maintained by a private entity.
Public improvement. Any drainage facility, street, alley, sidewalk, water or sanitary sewer facility, or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume
the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or which may affect as [an] improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
Replat, subdivision. The creation of a new lot or lots out of an area previously platted and recorded by specific procedures allowed by state statute.
Reserve strip. A narrow strip of land not suitable for building upon, ownership of which is retained by a subdivider generally for the purpose of blocking access to a public
street.
Residential. Any use defined by the Leon Valley zoning code, article 15.02, as residential, including all zoning districts with the “R” designation.
Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary
or storm sewer main, or for another special use. The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established
and shown on a final subdivision plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of
such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a public
agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the subdivision plat on which such right-of-way is established.
Safety lane. A designated area on an approved subdivision plat which has a primary purpose of providing access for safety vehicles in any development where public
streets do not adequately provide such access.
Secondary street. A street which primarily provides vehicular circulation to various sections of the city.
Setback. The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps.
Site plan. An accurately scaled development plan that illustrates the existing conditions on a land parcel as well as depicting details of a proposed development.
Street. A public right-of-way, however designated, which provides vehicular access to adjacent land.
Subdivider. Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein.
Subdivision. Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or interests for the purpose of
offer, sale, lease, or development, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions, including resubdivision. Subdivision includes the
division or development of residential and nonresidential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, subdivision plat, or
other recorded instrument.
Subdivision plat. The drawing prepared in accordance with these regulations on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the city for approval and which,
when approved in final form, may be submitted to the county clerk or recorder of deeds for filing.
Surveyor. A registered public surveyor, authorized by the state statutes to practice the profession of surveying as evidenced by a valid Texas surveyor's seal.
Utility easement. An interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over and
under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance, repair or replacement of said utilities.
Variance. A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of the subdivision ordinance granted to a particular property owner because of the practical difficulties or
unnecessary hardship that would be imposed by the strict application of that provision of the ordinance. The granting of variances is the responsibility of the city council.
Vehicular non-access easement. An easement established on a lot for the purpose of prohibiting ingress and egress to vehicular traffic and also known as a “non-access
easement.”
(1972 Code, sec. 24.202; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.052)
Secs. 10.02.053–10.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Administration
Sec. 10.02.101 Authority of city engineer
The city engineer is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules, regulations, standards and specifications for the construction, installation, design, location and
arrangement of streets, curbs, streetlights, street signs, alleys, utility layouts, utility easements, gates for utility easements, sidewalks, water supply and water distribution
systems, fire hydrants, sewage disposal systems, septic tanks, water wells, monuments, drainage facilities, and crosswalk ways. All public improvements shall be
constructed, installed, designed, located and arranged by the subdivider in accordance with such rules, regulations, standards and specifications as established herein.
The city engineer shall also review subdivision plats for conformance with these regulations and make recommendations regarding subdivision plat approval to the
council. (1972 Code, sec. 24.301; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.101)
Sec. 10.02.102 Subdivider's responsibility for costs
(a) The developer (applicant) shall be responsible for all costs relating to his development, including but not limited to:
(1) Construction of all streets, sidewalks, drainage and utilities required;
(2) All design and other professional fees;
(3) All permits and fees; and
(4) City-incurred charges from the city engineer(s) or city attorney(s) and their staff in support of the development at any stage of process.
(b) Payment of all city charges shall be in advance of the service provided and in accordance with city ordinance(s).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/349
(1972 Code, sec. 24.302; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.102)
Secs. 10.02.103–10.02.150 Reserved
Division 4. Additional Regulations
Sec. 10.02.151 Additional regulations
(a) No permit shall be issued by the city or other regulatory agency for the installation of septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained
herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
(b) Except as provided for in paragraph (h) below, permits for buildings, repairs to buildings, roof repairs or replacements, gas, plumbing, air conditioner replacements,
electrical, fencing, irrigation systems, etc. shall not be issued by the city for any structure, parcel or lot for which a subdivision plat has not been approved and filed for
record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been complied with in full unless authorized by the city
engineer and the development director. The city may issue permits for security fencing or for access to properties for maintenance. Temporary occupancy permits may
be issued at the city's sole discretion, provided that the public infrastructure is substantially complete and operational.
(c) The city shall not permit repair, maintenance, installation or provision of streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final subdivision plat has not
been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
(d) Except as provided in paragraph (g) below, the city shall not sell or supply or permit the sale or supply of any water, gas, electricity, or sewage service within a
subdivision for which a final subdivision plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been
complied with in full.
(e) On behalf of the city, the city attorney shall, when directed by the council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of
this article or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the city, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(f) If any subdivision exists for which a final subdivision plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been
complied with in full, council may pass a resolution reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final subdivision plat approval, and reciting the fact that
the provisions of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein, the city secretary shall, when directed by council, cause
a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the city to be filed in the deed records of Bexar County. If full compliance and final subdivision plat
approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the city secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the deed records of Bexar County stating that paragraphs
(a), (b), (c), and (d) no longer apply.
(g) Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits for any lots upon which a residence building exists
and was in existence prior to passage of Ordinance No. 252 of the city on July 16, 1968, nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance, or installation of any street or public
utility services for, to, or abutting any legally recorded lot which was in existence prior to the passage of such ordinance.
(h) Permits for existing buildings or properties that exist in a platted subdivision lot not fully conforming to the standards and requirements of this section 10.02.151,
may be issued until the cumulative value of the permitted work reaches $5,000.00; then the prohibition regarding the issuance of permits provided for in section
10.02.151(b) of this code shall apply.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.400; Ordinance 06-046, sec. 1, adopted 10/3/06; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.151)
Secs. 10.02.152–10.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Subdivision Plat Procedures
Sec. 10.02.201 Preliminary conference
Prior to the official filing of a preliminary subdivision plat, the subdivider shall consult with and present a proposed plan of the subdivision to city staff for comments on
procedures, specifications, and standards required by the city for the subdivision of land. (1972 Code, sec. 24.501; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.201)
Sec. 10.02.202 Preliminary subdivision plat and accompanying data
(a) General.
(1) The subdivider shall cause a preliminary subdivision plat to be prepared by a Texas licensed engineer or surveyor in accordance with this article.
(2) Subdivision plats, which in the opinion of the city involve engineering considerations, shall contain the seal and certificate of a Texas registered
engineer acceptable to the city development staff.
(b) Copies required. The subdivider shall file five (5) black or blue line copies of the preliminary subdivision plat with city staff.
(c) Preliminary fees. Said preliminary subdivision plat shall be accompanied by all subdivision plat administration and filing fees, according to city ordinance(s).
(d) Form and content.
(1) The preliminary subdivision plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet to one (1) inch on sheets eighteen (18) inches wide and twenty-four (24) inches
long, with a binding margin of not less than 2-1/2 inches on the left side of the sheet and margins of not less than 3/8 inches on the other three (3) sides.
(A) Where more than one (1) sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire computed area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an
appropriate scale shall be attached to the subdivision plat.
(2) The subdivision plat shall show the following:
(A) Name(s) and address(es) of the subdivider, record owner, and engineer or surveyor;
(B) Proposed name of the subdivision, which (except for subdivision replats) shall not have the same spelling as, or be pronounced similar to the
name of any subdivision located within the city or within five (5) miles of the city;
(C) Name(s), volume and page number(s) of recording of contiguous subdivisions and/or indication that contiguous properties are not platted;
(D) Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy lines, and the approximate acreage of the subdivision;
(E) Existing site features to include:
(i) The location, dimensions, description and names of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public rights-ofway
within the subdivision, intersecting, or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries or which have an influence on the
subdivision plat;
(ii) The location, dimensions, description and name of all existing or recorded residential lots, parks, public areas, and other sites within or
contiguous with the subdivision or which are across an alley from the subdivision plat; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/349
(iii) The location and dimensions of all existing improvements on lot to be platted, including buildings, utilities and parking areas (shown on
separate site plan).
(F) The location, dimensions, description and name of all proposed streets, alleys, parks, public areas, reservations, easements or other rights-ofway,
blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision;
(G) Preparation date, scale of subdivision plat and north arrow;
(H) Topographical information, including contour lines on a basis of five (5) vertical feet in terrain with an average slope of five (5) percent or more,
and on a basis of two (2) vertical feet in terrain with an average slope of less than five percent (5%);
(I) Number or letter to identify each lot or site and each block (said number shall be coordinated by the developer with the clerk of Bexar County to
prevent duplication);
(J) Front and rear building setback lines on all lots and sites;
(K) Side yard building setback lines at street intersections and crosswalk ways; and
(L) Location map at a scale of not more than 4,000 feet to one (1) inch which shall show existing adjacent subdivisions and major streets.
(e) Accompanying data. The preliminary subdivision plat shall be accompanied by a proposed master plan of all of developer's property when subdivision is a part of a
larger tract, which shall be prepared at a scale of not more than 400 feet to one (1) inch, depicting:
(1) Existing and proposed subdivisions, including streets, lots, parks, drainage easements, and rights-of-way;
(2) Location of city limit line(s) and the outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as applicable;
(3) Zoning district boundaries, if required;
(4) The general drainage plan, flow line of existing watercourses, existing drainage structures, and ultimate destination of water; and
(5) Letter of authorization signed by the property owner or agents authorized to act on behalf of the property owner in the form set out in exhibits attached
hereto. If a letter of authorization is signed by an agent acting on behalf of the property owner, the letter must be accompanied by a letter from the property
owner authorizing the agent(s) to act on his behalf. (The letter of agent authorization from the property owner shall be in the form set out in exhibits attached
hereto.)
(6) Where existing buildings are involved on the lot being created, a drawing showing the location of the buildings and related parking shall be submitted.
Sufficient parking shall be demonstrated to match existing needs but not less than that amount required by current zoning code.
(f) Processing of preliminary subdivision plat.
(1) The development department and other city staff shall check the preliminary subdivision plat as to its conformity with the master plan, major street plan,
land use plan, zoning district(s) and the standards and specifications set forth herein or referred to herein.
(2) Within sixty (60) days after the preliminary subdivision plat is formally submitted and is determined to be a complete submittal, staff shall conditionally
approve or disapprove such subdivision plat or conditionally approve it with modifications. If appropriate, staff will solicit the recommendations of the council.
If council or staff conditionally disapproves or conditionally approves with modifications, staff shall inform the subdivider, in writing, of the reasons at the time
such action is taken:
(A) Conditional approval of a preliminary subdivision plat by council or staff shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the
preliminary subdivision plat as a guide to the installation of streets, water, sewer and other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of
the final, or record subdivision plat. Conditional approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat,
automatic or otherwise; and
(B) Conditional approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall be effective for one (1) year unless further reviewed by the city engineer at the request
of the city in light of new or significant information which would necessitate a revision of the preliminary subdivision plat. If the city engineer should deem
changes in a preliminary subdivision plat to be necessary, he shall so inform city staff, who shall inform the subdivider, in writing; and
(C) If, during the review process and prior to preliminary approval, subdivider fails to come into substantial conformance as determined by the city
within six (6) months, the subdivision plat shall be considered withdrawn and all applicable filing fees shall be retained by the city.
(3) The applicant may petition the city for one (1), six-month extension of the preliminary approval which may be approved if there have not been material
changes in the city's development or policies.
(4) The preliminary subdivision plat shall be considered expired if the developer has not secured from the city:
(A) Approval of a final subdivision plat within the one-year preliminary subdivision plat approval effective time; or
(B) A six-month extension of preliminary subdivision plat approval.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.502; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.202)
Sec. 10.02.203 Final subdivision plat and accompanying data
(a) General. The final subdivision plat and the accompanying data shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Within thirty (30) days after the final subdivision
plat is formally filed and has been determined by city staff as being in substantial conformance with this article, the council shall approve or disapprove such subdivision
plat.
(b) Copies required. The subdivider shall submit seven (7) copies of the final subdivision plat, together with two (2) mylar reproducibles, one (1) of which is an original.
(c) Form and content.
(1) The final subdivision plat shall conform to the preliminary subdivision plat as conditionally approved by the city incorporating any and all changes,
modifications, alterations, corrections and conditions recommended by the city.
(2) The final subdivision plat shall be drawn in India ink on linen tracing cloth or mylar sheets at a scale of 100 feet to one (1) inch on sheets eighteen (18)
inches wide and twenty-four (24) inches long with a binding margin of not less than 2-1/2 inches on the left side of the sheet and margins of not less than 3/8
inches on the other three (3) sides.
(A) Where more than one (1) sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire computed area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an
appropriate scale shall be attached to the subdivision plat.
(B) The final subdivision plat shall contain all of the features required for preliminary subdivision plats in section 10.02.202 above and shall also
include the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/349
(i) The exact location, dimension, name and description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public
rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundary or forming such boundary, with accurate dimensions, bearing or
deflecting angles and radii, computed area, and central angle, tangent distance and length of all curves, where appropriate;
(ii) The exact location, dimension, name and description of all proposed streets, alleys, parks, other public areas, reservations, easements or
other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, monuments, and other sites within the subdivision with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflecting angles and
radii, area, and central angles, tangent distance and length of all curves, where appropriate. All lot corners shall be marked with monuments in
accordance with the requirements of the Texas Board of Professional Land Surveying but not less than with one-half inch diameter by two (2) feet
long iron pins;
(3) Flood insurance regulations.
(A) All subdivision plats must conform to federal flood insurance program regulations. All subdivision plats shall reflect the 100-year base flood
elevations as determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency “FEMA,” where applicable;
(B) Where the 100-year floodplain elevations have not been established by FEMA, the applicant's engineer shall provide hydraulic studies for city's
approval and thereafter reflect limits of the floodplain on subdivision plat;
(C) For developments containing more than fifty (50) lots or more than five (5) acres, or when requested by the city and after verification by the
applicant's engineer, the following certificate will be annotated on the subdivision plat: “No part of the property contained within this subdivision plat is
within the 100-year floodplain as shown on the city's flood insurance rate map”; and
(D) Drainage improvements which reduce the base flood elevations will require the developer to process revisions to FEMA maps through FEMA at
the developer's sole cost, such FEMA map revision (C.L.O.M.R.) must be completed prior to council consideration of the plat.
(4) Subdivision plat certificates. Subdivision plats will be annotated with the certificates set out in exhibits attached hereto in addition to any other required
annotations indicated by this article.
(d) Accompanying data. When filed, the final subdivision plat shall be accompanied by the following site improvement data: (All plans and calculations shall bear the
live seal of the engineer.)
(1) Streets, alleys, and sidewalks.
(A) Five (5) copies of plans and profiles of all streets, alleys and plans for sidewalks.
(B) Five (5) copies of construction specifications and detailed cost estimates which shall include provisions for fifteen percent (15%) engineering and
contingency calculations. Plans are to be drawn at a scale of no larger than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, longitudinal, and one (1) inch equals five
(5) feet, vertical; with benchmarks using United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) data.
(C) All streets with a pavement width larger than 30 feet shall be provided with a geotechnical soil evaluation and pavement design analysis. The
recommendation of the pavement design shall be incorporated into the final plans.
(2) Sanitary sewers.
(A) Five (5) copies of plans and profiles of proposed sanitary sewer lines indicating type, sizes, depths, and grades of lines. Plans shall be to a scale
of no larger than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, longitudinal, and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet, vertical and shall show existing as well as proposed
sewers.
(B) Five (5) copies of construction specifications and detailed cost estimates which shall include a fifteen percent (15%) engineering and contingency
calculations.
(3) Water lines.
(A) Five (5) copies of plans of all proposed water lines and fire hydrants, showing type and sizes of the lines. The plan shall be prepared at a scale of
no larger than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, longitudinal, and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet, vertical; with benchmarks using U.S.G.S. datum.
(B) Five (5) copies of construction specifications and detailed cost estimates and which shall include fifteen percent (15%) engineering and
contingency calculations.
(4) Storm drainage (see exhibit “w”).
(A) Five (5) copies of the storm drainage plan, prepared to a scale of no larger than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, longitudinal, and one (1) inch
equals five (5) feet, vertical; with benchmarks using U.S.G.S. datum. Plans shall indicate:
(i) All street widths and grades;
(ii) Runoff figures on the outlet and inlet side of all drainage ditches and storm sewers;
(iii) Runoff figures at all points in the street at changes of grade or where the water enters another street, storm sewer, or drainage ditch, if
requested by the city engineer; and
(iv) Drainage easements.
(B) A general location map of the subdivision showing the entire watershed (United States Geological Survey Quadrangle is satisfactory).
(C) Calculations showing the anticipated stormwater flow, including watershed area, percent runoff, time of concentration, base flood elevations, and
limits of flooding. When a drainage ditch or storm sewer is proposed, calculations shall be submitted showing the basis for the design.
(D) Where required by the city engineer or by site considerations, the storm drainage plan shall include provisions for stormwater retention and/or
pollution control elements.
(E) Five (5) copies of complete plans, profiles, and specifications (when a drainage channel or storm sewer is proposed) showing complete
construction details.
(5) Tax certificates from the city, school district and county, which indicate that all ad valorem taxes have been paid, up to and including the current year, on
all land included within the final subdivision plat.
(6) A utility layout sheet or other document signed by all affected utility companies indicating their approval of the subdivision plat and provision for service.
The utility layout sheet will show the location of each proposed utility and the type of backfill, which shall conform to the requirements of the city's right-of-way
management manual. Streetlights will be provided for the subdivision. The location of streetlights will be shown on the layout sheet.
(7) A letter of review approval from the Texas Department of Transportation if the subdivision plat abuts a state highway system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/349
(8) A performance bond, site trust agreement, cash, cashier's check or letter of credit, in a format as described in this article and which is sufficient to
guarantee that the subdivider will complete any and all required public improvements shall be submitted prior to filing of plat.
(9) The developer will provide the city with evidence that the design and construction phase of the proposed work is under the control and supervision of an
engineer familiar with the work. This evidence will consist of a submittal to the city of an executed and funded professional services agreement.
(e) Processing of final subdivision plat.
(1) If desired by the subdivider and approved by council after recommendation from the city engineer, the final subdivision plat may constitute only that
portion of the approved preliminary subdivision plat which he proposes to record and develop; however, such portion shall conform to all requirements of this
article.
(2) Except for subdivision replats or amending subdivision plats, no final subdivision plat will be considered unless a preliminary subdivision plat has been
submitted.
(3) A final subdivision plat of an approved preliminary subdivision plat or a portion thereof shall be submitted to the council within twelve (12) months of the
date of approval of preliminary subdivision plat; otherwise, the approval of the city shall become null and void, unless a one-year extension of time is applied
for and granted by council. If, during the review process and prior to final approval, subdivider fails to come into substantial conformance as determined by
the city within six (6) months, the subdivision plat shall be considered withdrawn and all applicable filing fees shall be retained by the city.
(4) If the final subdivision plat is disapproved, the city shall inform the subdivider, in writing, of the reason(s) at the time such action was taken.
(5) After the final subdivision plat has been approved and the subdivider has filed the guarantee of performance and maintenance bond as hereinafter
provided and after all fees and charges have been paid and all conditions required by the council have been satisfied, the city shall cause the final subdivision
plat to be recorded with the county clerk.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.503; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.203)
Sec. 10.02.204 Vacating a subdivision plat
(a) The force and effect of a recorded subdivision plat may be destroyed by properly executing and recording an instrument declaring such subdivision plat to be
vacated. The instrument shall be substantially in the same form as the applicable vacating declaration, Form “A” or Form “B”, set out in exhibits attached hereto. The
executed vacating declaration shall be filed with the city together with five (5) copies of the subdivision plat to be vacated, and, following approval by council, the
declaration shall be recorded in the plat and deed records of Bexar County.
(b) If the vacating declaration is filed with the city prior to the sale of any lot on the subdivision plat being vacated, a declaration in substantially the same form as the
declaration “Form A” herein (exhibit (i.1)) must be signed and acknowledged by the owners of the land covered by the subdivision plat being vacated.
(c) In cases where lots have been sold, the subdivision plat or any part thereof may be vacated upon the execution and recordation of a declaration in substantially the
same form as the declaration “Form B” herein (exhibit (i.2)). Such declaration requires the signature and acknowledgment of all the owners of lots in the subdivision plat
being vacated.
(d) Upon filing the vacating declaration form, a filing fee equal to the Bexar County recordation fee shall be paid to the city, along with all other city charges prescribed
by ordinance.
(e) The resubdivision of the land covered by a subdivision plat that is vacated shall be platted in the same manner as is prescribed by these regulations for an original
subdivision plat.
(1) A copy of the applicable vacating declaration form shall be submitted with the resubdivision plat.
(2) When processed simultaneously, the resubdivision plat shall be annotated generally as follows:
“The area being resubdivided in this subdivision plat had been previously platted on a subdivision plat which is recorded in Volume _____, Page
_____, Bexar County Plat and Deed Records, and was vacated through a vacating declaration being recorded on the same date as this
resubdivision plat.”
(3) When processed separately (vacating filed in advance), the resubdivision plat shall be annotated generally as follows:
“The area being resubdivided in this subdivision plat had been previously platted on a subdivision plat which is recorded in Volume _____, Page
_____, Bexar County Plat and Deed Records, and was vacated through a vacating declaration being recorded on ___________ (date) as this
resubdivision plat.”
(1972 Code, sec. 24.504; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.204)
Sec. 10.02.205 Replatting without vacating preceding subdivision plat
(a) Conditions. A subdivision or a portion thereof may be replatted without vacating the preceding subdivision plat of such subdivision under the following conditions:
(1) Replat must be signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the particular properties being replatted;
(2) Replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions;
(3) Replat must be approved by the council after a public hearing in relation thereto at which interested parties and citizens shall have had an opportunity to
be heard;
(4) If any of the area to be replatted was, during the preceding five (5) years, limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for
not more than two (2) residential units per lot, or if any lot in the preceding subdivision plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than
two (2) residential units per lot, the procedures outlined in section 10.02.205(b)(3), below shall be followed before the approval of the council can be given;
and
(5) If all of the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for use other than for single- or two-family use by notation on the last legally recorded
subdivision plat or in the legally recorded deed restrictions applicable to such subdivision plat, the procedures outlined in section 10.02.205(b)(2), below, shall
apply.
(b) Procedures.
(1) The procedures and specifications pertaining to subdivision plats contained within this article shall also apply to a replat.
(2) Additional requirements for certain replats: The following procedures and specifications shall apply to a replat to which the conditions stated in section
10.02.205(a)(4), above, do not apply:
(A) A certificate in the same form as the applicable certificates as shown in exhibits attached hereto as Form “C,” “D,” or “E” (exhibits (j), (k), (l)) shall
be affixed to the replat.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/349
(B) The replat shall be annotated generally as follows:
“The area being replatted had been previously platted on a subdivision plat which is recorded in Volume _____, Page _____, Bexar County Deed
and Plat Records.”
(C) When the replat is filed with the city, the council will, at its next regular meeting, set a date on which to hold a public hearing pertaining to the
replat; such date not to be sooner than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date on which the council takes such action. Council will
cause due notice of such public hearing to be given.
(D) At the time the replat is filed with the city for processing, the subdivider shall pay to the city all applicable fees as defined by ordinance.
(3) If the conditions stated in section 10.02.205(a)(4), above, do apply to a proposed replat, the following procedures and specifications (in addition to those
contained elsewhere in this article) shall apply:
(A) The subdivider shall provide to the city written notice of intention to file with the council a replat to which the conditions stated in section
10.02.205(a)(4) apply. The notice shall be accompanied by a certified list of the owners of lots that are in the original subdivision and that are within 200
feet of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in the case of a subdivision within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction, the most recently approved county tax roll of the property upon which the replat is requested.
(B) The city shall set a date for a public hearing in relation to the proposed replat and shall cause a notice of such public hearing to be published at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled date of the proposed public hearing in an official paper or a paper of general circulation in Bexar County.
(C) The city shall provide notice of the public hearing to the owners of lots contained on the list submitted by the subdivider by depositing such notice
properly addressed and postage paid in a post office or postal depository within the city limits of the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled
date of the public hearing. A copy of the Local Government Code, chapter 212, section 212.015(c), shall be included with the notice.
(D) If the proposed replat requires a variance and is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed replat must receive, in order to be
approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members present of the council. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the
owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed replat and extending 200
feet from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the council prior to the close of the public hearing.
(E) In computing the percentage of land area under section 10.02.205(b)(3)(D), above, the area of streets and alleys shall be included.
(F) The proposed replat itself shall not be considered to be filed with the city prior to the date on which the public hearing referred to in section
10.02.205(b)(3)(B), above, is held.
(G) The replat will be annotated:
(i) By a certificate substantially in the same form as the applicable certificate, Form “C,” “D,” or “E,” attached herein; and
(ii) Generally as follows: “The area being replatted had been previously platted on a subdivision plat which is recorded in Volume _____, Page
_____, Bexar County Plat and Deed Records.”
(H) At the time the notice referred to in section 10.02.205(b)(3)(A), above, is provided to the city, the subdivider shall pay to the city a fee for public
hearing as described by ordinance.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.505; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.205)
State law references–Replatting without vacating preceding plat, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.014; additional requirements for certain replats, V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code, sec. 212.015.
Sec. 10.02.206 Amending subdivision plat
(a) The city may approve and issue an amending subdivision plat, which may be recorded and is controlling over the preceding subdivision plat, without vacation of
that subdivision plat if the amending subdivision plat is signed by the owner(s) only and is solely for one (1) or more of the following purposes:
(1) To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding subdivision plat;
(2) To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding subdivision plat;
(3) To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding subdivision plat;
(4) To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
(5) To show the proper location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or
character on the preceding subdivision plat;
(6) To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving subdivision
plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded subdivision plats;
(7) To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots on the preceding subdivision plat if:
(A) Both lot owners join in the application for amending the subdivision plat;
(B) Neither lot is abolished;
(C) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(D) The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the subdivision plat;
(8) To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement;
(9) To relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots if:
(A) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the subdivision plat;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
(C) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; or
(10) To make necessary changes to the preceding subdivision plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by
the preceding subdivision plat if:
(A) The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/349
(B) The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
(C) The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the appropriate governing body of the municipality has zoned for residential use.
(11) To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
(A) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
(B) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
(C) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
(D) The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities.
(b) Public notice, public hearing, and the approval of other lot owners are not required for the approval and issuance of an amending subdivision plat.
(c) A subdivider wishing to amend an approved subdivision plat shall file with the city the amending subdivision plat, together with a copy of the subdivision plat being
amended and a statement detailing the amendments being proposed. City staff will determine the extent to which the amending subdivision plat will require review by
the various city departments and/or agencies. Following such review as is necessary, the subdivision plat will be considered for approval by the council.
(d) All fees required by ordinance, to include filing fee, shall be paid to the city at time amending subdivision plat is filed with council.
(e) The amending subdivision plat will be clearly marked:
“Amending Subdivision Plat of ____________ Subdivision. This subdivision plat amends the subdivision plat previously recorded in the Plat and Deed
Records of Bexar County, Volume _____, Page _____.”
(f) The amending subdivision plat shall then be recorded, if approved.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.506; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.206)
Secs. 10.02.207–10.02.250 Reserved
Division 6. Subdivision Standards
Sec. 10.02.251 Applicable standards and specifications
No preliminary or final subdivision plat shall be approved by the council and no completed improvements shall be accepted by the city unless and until the following
standards and specifications have been met:
(1) General.
(A) The master plan shall be considered by the subdivider and city council for subdivision conformity.
(B) Provision for future subdivisions. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow the
opening of future streets.
(C) Reserve strips are prohibited and will not be used for controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use.
(D) Residential R-1, R-2 and R-6 lots shall not have driveway access to collector or larger streets.
(E) Buildings shall not be constructed across lot lines.
(F) As applicable, the subdivider shall be fully responsible for compliance with all city, state and federal regulations and shall bear all costs thereof
expended toward the development, including the cost of any city professional staff efforts and approvals as needed from all other regulatory agencies.
(2) Streets.
(A) Street layout (also see exhibits “s” and “dd”).
(i) Adequate streets shall be provided by the subdivider, and the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of each shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public safety and convenience, and in their appropriate
relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets and to the city master plan.
(ii) The street layout shall be devised for the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood.
(B) Relation to adjoining street system. Where necessary to the neighborhood pattern, existing streets in adjoining areas shall be continued and shall
be at least as wide as such existing streets and in alignment therewith.
(C) Projection of streets. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall make provision for the proper
projection of streets into such unsubdivided areas.
(D) Street jogs. Whenever possible, streets with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet will be avoided.
(E) Half or adjacent streets. In the case of collector, minor, or marginal access streets, no new half-streets shall be platted unless approved by the
city.
(F) Street intersections. Intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable, giving due regard to terrain and topography.
(G) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as short stubs to permit future expansion.
(H) Cul-de-sacs.
(i) Except with the prior written approval of the city engineer, cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 500 feet in length, and shall have a turnaround of not
less than 100 feet in diameter in residential areas, and not less than 200 feet in diameter in commercial and industrial areas.
(ii) Where cul-de-sac ended streets are proposed which are longer than 500 feet in length in residential areas, the cul-de-sac shall have a
property line diameter of at least 140 feet and a pavement diameter of 120 feet.
(I) Marginal access streets.
(i) The creation of marginal access streets is prohibited except where allowed by the city engineer after review of the access and intersection
control measures being proposed and of the general traffic safety and circulation plan for the area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/349
(ii) Council may determine that such marginal access streets are not desirable under the facts of a particular case for adequate protection of the
lots and separation of through and local traffic.
(J) Streets on master plan. Where a subdivision embraces a street as shown on the master plan of the city, the location and width as indicated by the
master plan, shall be considered in the planning of such subdivision.
(K) Minor streets. Minor streets shall be laid out so as to discourage their use by through traffic.
(L) Pavement widths and rights-of-way. Pavement widths and rights-of-way shall be as follows:
(i) Primary streets shall have a right-of-way of at least 110 feet, pavement width of at least seventy-two (72) feet, and a fourteen-foot curbed
divider in the center.
(ii) Secondary streets shall have a right-of-way of at least eighty-six (86) feet and a pavement width of at least sixty (60) feet.
(iii) Collector streets shall have a right-of-way of at least sixty (60) feet and a pavement width of at least forty-four (44) feet.
(iv) Minor streets shall have a right-of-way of at least fifty (50) feet and a pavement width of at least thirty (30) feet.
(M) Pavement width and rights-of-way of streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision (adjacent) shall be as follows:
(i) The subdivider shall dedicate a right-of-way of forty-three (43) feet in width for new adjacent secondary streets, and twenty-two (22) feet of
such right-of-way shall be paved and curbed.
(ii) New adjacent collector, minor or marginal access streets shall conform to paragraph (2)(L) of this section.
(iii) Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or half-street that does not conform to paragraph (2)(L) of this section, the
subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient to make the full right-of-way width conform to such paragraph, and there shall be paved and
curbed so much of such right-of-way as to make the full pavement width comply with such paragraph. Before any pavement is laid to widen
existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be cut back two (2) feet to assure an adequate subbase and pavement joint.
(N) Medians.
(i) Center island median. Streets which have center island medians shall be curbed and provide for a minimum lane width adjacent to the
median of twenty (20) feet on each side.
(ii) Openings. Medians shall be continuous. Openings in the median may be provided at all public streets if the centerline spacing of said public
street is at least 400 feet. If said spacing is less than 400 feet, the median shall be open for the street with the higher functional classification. All
other openings shall be made in accordance with current standards set by the city engineer. When medians are open, safety bays and median
radii shall be provided and curbed unless approved otherwise by the city engineer.
(iii) Special purpose medians. Dividers constructed for aesthetic purposes (i.e. entrances for subdivisions) shall be permitted and such dividers
shall normally be fourteen (14) feet in width. The divider shall maintain the full width for a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet after which an
appropriate transition shall be provided. The nose or rounded portion of the divider shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet off the edge of the
traveled roadway of the intersecting street and the turning radius of vehicular traffic shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet.
(iv) Landscaping and signing. No signs, walls, or fences shall be placed in the median area other than approved traffic-control devices unless
approved by city staff. No trees, shrubs or other ground cover shall be placed in the median which will obstruct the driver's sight distance. With the
approval of the city, trees, shrubs, and ground cover may be planted in the median and divider area provided the full-grown tree or shrub trunk
diameter does not exceed four (4) inches in diameter. In addition, appropriate maintenance agreements shall be made with the city.
(v) Crosswalk area. Where a median or traffic divider projects across a crosswalk, the median shall be opened for six (6) feet at the projection of
the crosswalk. This six-foot opening shall be paved to the grade of the existing surface to permit wheelchair and mobility impaired persons
utilization of the crosswalk.
(O) Curbs and sidewalks (see exhibits “t” and “u”). Curbs and sidewalks shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all interior streets, and on
the subdivision side of all streets forming part of the boundary of the subdivision. The street frontage on all sides of all lots must be provided with
concrete sidewalks of at least four (4) feet in width and four (4) inches in thickness. All sidewalks and driveways shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the requirements of the city and the Americans with Disabilities Act. Utility meter boxes or fire hydrants shall not be incorporated into
the sidewalk area.
(i) Sidewalk deferred construction. A developer may petition the city to defer construction of sidewalk along the frontage of lots in residential
developments and if approved, sidewalks would be constructed as a building permit requirement (developer remains responsible for construction
of the rear sidewalks on lots having double street frontage and over drainageways).
(ii) Sidewalks shall, in general, be placed near the property line. Where the city permits the sidewalk to abut the curb on collector streets, the
sidewalk width will be six (6) feet.
(P) Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be installed where required by city and shall thereafter be maintained by the property owner.
(Q) Ramps. Where the development abuts existing curbed streets, with or without sidewalks, the developer shall install ramps as required to conform
with the Americans with Disabilities Act and/or as directed by the city.
(R) Street names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets, unless the new streets are
continuation of or in alignment with existing streets; in which case names of existing streets shall be used.
(S) Street signs. Reflective street name signs shall be installed by the subdivider in a uniform manner throughout the subdivision at all intersections
within or abutting the subdivision and will be of the size and type specified by the city. (Subdivider shall consult with a designated city official as to the
plan of placement thereof prior to the installation of such street signs and all street signage will conform to the size and type specified by the city.) Stop
signs and other traffic-control signs will be furnished and installed by the city.
(T) Electronic signalization. If the city determines the traffic volume generated by the proposed subdivision will create safety problems or hazardous
driving conditions, the developer may be required to install or modify existing appropriate electronic signalization devices in the locations specified.
(U) Traffic impact analysis. As the city determines appropriate, developer shall provide a traffic study prepared by a qualified traffic engineer which
addresses specific traffic impacts caused by the development.
(V) Specifications. The City of San Antonio Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction are adopted for reference, except as modified by
the city engineer.
(3) Alleys. Alleys will not be allowed in the city except under special circumstances. When permitted, alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way width of
sixteen (16) feet with ten (10) feet of concrete pavement in residential areas and eighteen (18) feet of right-of-way and pavement in commercial areas, as
shown in exhibit “C” [exhibit (s)], attached hereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/349
(A) Intersecting alleys. Where two (2) alleys intersect or turn at right angles, a cutoff of not less than fifteen (15) feet from the normal intersection of
the property or easement line shall be provided along each property or easement line.
(B) Dead-end alleys. Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted.
(C) Overhang easements along alleys. Along all alleys and where otherwise requested by the city, overhang easements allowing for aerial
encroachments, as required by any public or private utility, shall be provided.
(D) Alleys which do not connect on a straight course. An easement shall be provided for alleys which do not connect on a straight course for the
placing of guy wires on lot division lines in order to support poles set on curving or deviating rights-of-way or alleys (i.e. alleys are not straight within
each block or the same do not connect a straight course with the alleys of adjoining blocks).
(E) Cutbacks. Where alleys intersect a street right-of-way, a fifteen-foot right-of-way cutoff shall be provided.
(4) Easements. When required, drainage easements will be allowed for proper drainage or topographic requirements. Gas, electric and telephone
easements may be provided within each lot with no increase in the standard lot size unless deemed necessary by the city. Water and sanitary sewer
easements will not be located at the rear of lots except with prior city approval. All easements for city use will have a minimum width of ten (10) feet, except
sanitary sewer easements which shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in width.
(5) Water installation.
(A) Water supply and distribution (see exhibit “bb”).
(i) All subdivisions shall be provided with water supply, water distribution, and fire protection systems as approved by the city engineer and in
compliance with other parts of this code and the building code (see article 3.02, division 2 of this code).
(ii) Minimum construction and design standards of the San Antonio water system shall be used except as modified by the city, to include:
a. Valves shall open left;
b. C-900 class 150/200 PVC pipe may be used in lieu of ductile iron;
c. Use of asbestos cement pipe is prohibited; and
d. In all construction plans, the developer will incorporate city provided special conditions in the form of general notes set out in exhibits
attached hereto.
(iii) All subdivisions containing more than sixteen (16) lots or housing units and as otherwise required by the city shall be provided with looped
water mains. The loop shall be sufficient to create fire flows required by the fire marshal.
(iv) Apartment (multiple-family) or commercial areas will be metered in accordance with city requirements and dual or sub-metering (internal city
meters beyond the city's master meter) will not be allowed.
(B) Backflow protection. Metering will include backflow prevention devices in accordance with city code requirements.
(C) Fire hydrants.
(i) Fire hydrants shall be of the Mueller Improved type or approved equal compatible with the city's firefighting equipment and installed with a
separate gate valve as follows:
a. Single-family, two-family, and townhouse dwelling areas.
1. Fire hydrants in a single- or two-family dwelling area shall be located throughout the distribution system so that every building site
is within 500 feet of a fire hydrant; except in the townhouse areas, which shall be within 400 feet.
2. Sufficient fire hydrants shall be provided so that not more than 550 feet of hose laid along public rights-of-way will be required to
reach from a fire hydrant to any building site within the area served.
b. All other land use areas.
1. Fire hydrants in all areas other than single-family, two-family or townhouse dwelling areas shall have a maximum spacing of 300
feet.
2. Sufficient fire hydrants shall be provided so that not more than 500 feet of hose will be required to reach from a fire hydrant to
cover all portions of the first floor of all structures.
3. Hose lay is measured along public streets, fire lanes, and access roadways for fire department vehicles; plus not over 150 feet of
pulling hose by hand shall be required.
(ii) No fire flow credit is allowed for hydrants which are obstructed as to make their use impractical (i.e., including but not limited to hydrants
across limited access highway, expressways, primary thoroughfares, or hydrants blocked by walls/buildings).
(iii) Fire hydrants shall be located along the public right-of-way or along fire access roadways; preferably at intersections or on islands
separating parking areas which cannot be obstructed by parked vehicles.
(iv) Fire hydrants shall be located as directed by the city engineer and the city fire marshal. In general, hydrants shall be located a minimum of
eight (8) inches and a maximum of seven (7) feet from the back of the curb. The steamer connection shall be a minimum of 1-1/2 feet and a
maximum of two (2) feet above grade.
(v) The area around fire hydrants shall be kept unobstructed for a distance of two (2) feet and six-inch steel guard posts shall be provided
around the hydrant where curbs are not provided and where otherwise required by the city engineer.
(vi) Fire hydrants shall face the curb except as otherwise directed by the city.
(6) Sewers (see exhibit “cc”).
(A) All subdivision lots will be provided with connections to the city's organized sanitary sewage disposal system. Where necessary, the developer will
extend the city's collection system mains to the subdivision at his cost. Where existing on-site sewage disposal systems are in place, these will be
closed down in accordance with procedures prescribed by regulatory authorities. New on-site sewage disposal facilities will not be permitted (see article
14.05 (sewers) of this code). Where the sewer main will serve other properties beyond the proposed plat, the sewer will be extended across the
developer's property at his cost.
(B) The design and construction of sewage collection systems will be in accordance with the city's regulations. The San Antonio water system
standards for design and construction are adopted for reference except as modified by the city engineer. The subdivider will incorporate the city's
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/349
special conditions in the design in the form of general notes set out in exhibits attached hereto and the requirements of the state's regulatory agencies
will also be adhered to.
(C) Television videotape. In addition to other prescribed tests, the subdivider will videotape sewage collection mains after the facilities have been
installed for thirty (30) days and before preliminary acceptance by the city.
(D) Sewage lift station. Lift stations are prohibited. All developments will provide gravity service sewage systems.
(7) Utility lines.
(A) All utility lines that pass under a street or alley shall be installed before the street or alley is paved. When it is necessary that utility lines pass
under the street or alley pavement, they shall be installed to a point of at least four (4) feet beyond the edge of the pavement and all telephone, cable, or
underground electric lines under paved streets or alleys shall be installed in conduit. Sanitary sewer services shall extend to the property line.
(B) All utilities installed within the street right-of-way shall be properly backfilled with trench compaction approved by the city. Utility construction
permits must be obtained for this work.
(C) Where new subdivisions are being created, all new utility services including telecommunications, cable service and electrical services shall be
installed underground. Additionally, where replats of existing lots occur, underground utility service shall be provided if feasible as determined by the city
engineer.
(8) Drainage.
(A) Drainage easement/right-of-way. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel or stream, there shall be
provided an easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such watercourse, plus additional width to accommodate future
needs and maintenance.
(B) Drainage facilities. Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed by the developer in accordance with approved plans as submitted under
section 10.02.203. The subdivider will design and construct improvements in these drainageways which facilitate maintenance, prevent flooding and
eliminate nuisance. All such designs and improvements will conform to the city's regulations and federal and state requirements. The City of San
Antonio regulations regarding design and construction are adopted for reference, except as modified by the city engineer, depending upon particular
circumstances regarding the proposed development.
(C) Detention facilities. Water detention facilities shall be provided where, in the opinion of the city engineer, the subdivision stormwater runoff will
adversely affect sensitive downstream properties. Detention facilities shall be designed so as to allow stormwater runoff at a rate equal to preconstruction
conditions of the land. The design of such detention ponds or other detention facilities shall meet with city engineer approval and shall be
constructed along with all other required drainage facilities prior to issuance of any building permits for the project.
(9) Requirements for park land dedication or payment of fees in lieu thereof.
(A) Purpose.
(i) The council has determined that recreational areas in the form of neighborhood parks are necessary and in the public's welfare, and that the
only adequate procedure to provide for the same is by integrating such a requirement into the procedure for planning and developing properties
and subdivisions in the city when such development consists of unplatted residential property.
(ii) It is also declared that section 10.02.201 of this article be administered in conjunction with the Leon Valley parks and recreation plan. The
park zones established by the Leon Valley parks and recreation plan shall be prima facie proof that any park located therein is within a convenient
distance from any residence located therein and the following subsection, “General requirements,” are adopted to effect the purposes stated.
(B) General requirements.
(i) Where a final subdivision plat is submitted for approval of any residential subdivision, such subdivision plat shall contain a clear, fee simple
dedication of an area to the city for park purposes.
a. The area to be dedicated shall be one (1) acre of park land for each 133 allowed dwelling units. The number of allowed dwelling units
shall be determined according to minimum lot size and maximum density standards set forth in article 15.02 (zoning ordinance) of this code,
except that, in those cases where the zoning code restricts the number of dwelling units allowed per lot, the actual number of lots can be
used to determine the number of allowed dwelling units. Where phased development occurs; the first unit shall include the full park
dedication required of the entire development and/or all of the developer's land.
1. At the discretion of the council, after receiving recommendations from the city manager, the required park land dedication can be
reduced when the subdivider demonstrates that the actual density of the proposed subdivision will be significantly less than the allowed
density in the respective zoning district.
2. In cases where a subdivision plat contains land in more than one (1) zoning district, park land dedication shall be determined
according to the acreage in each zoning district wholly or partially contained within the subdivision.
b. The required dedication of this subsection may be satisfied by a payment of money in lieu of land, when permitted or required by other
provisions of this section.
(ii) All subdivisions of land which create dwelling units shall provide for park land improvements. Where existing subdivisions are being replatted
or vacated and are recreated as residential units which increase the potential number of dwelling units, then the provisions of this section shall
apply. Where land is being developed in the R-5 (manufactured homes) and R-3A (multiple-family retirement community) areas, the ratio of one
acre for each 133 allowed dwelling units shall be applied to the cottage or manufactured homes anticipated.
(iii) Where the completed development or subdivision has less than 133 allowed dwelling units the developer will at the discretion of the city,
either:
a. Dedicate not less than one-half acre of park land (with the smallest dimension being 140 feet) or;
b. Pay the city the amount required as per ordinance, as amended, for each dwelling unit being created.
(iv) Where the dwelling units being created are R-3 (multiple-family dwelling), R-5 (manufactured home) and R-3A (multiple-family retirement
community) development areas, the developer may elect to satisfy the park land dedication by providing a one-acre reserved area within his
development at a location approved by the city. otherwise provided. [sic] Such areas shall be owned and maintained by the owner of the
development. Developers not making this election must otherwise satisfy the parkland dedication requirements. Such reserve area will be
annotated on the subdivision plat “Area reserved for park purposes.” These areas will be in addition to the required landscaping, green spaces,
pool and recreation building area otherwise provided. Such areas shall be owned and maintained by the owner of the development. Developers
not making this election must otherwise satisfy the parkland dedication requirements.
(v) Park land dedication requirements shall be based on the contiguous acreage of land owned by the developer. All park area dedications shall
be completed in conjunction with or prior to final subdivision plat approval of the first unit of development. Parkland dedications shall [be] at
distance and location specified and approved by the city engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/349
(vi) In instances where an area of less than five (5) acres is required to be dedicated, the city shall have the right to accept the dedication for
approval on the final subdivision plat, or to refuse the same, and to require payment of cash in lieu of land in the amount provided by section
10.02.251(9)(B).
a. The refusal by the city of a dedication of one (1) acre or more, but less than five (5) acres, shall be based on one (1) or more of the
following factors:
1. City determines that sufficient park area is already in the public domain in the area of the proposed subdivision;
2. City determines the recreational potential for a particular park zone would be better served by expanding or improving existing
parks;
3. City determines that a combination of factors, related to the status and condition of the overall city park system, make a payment
in lieu of park land dedication more desirable for the overall park needs of the citizens of the city;
4. The land proposed for dedication is undesirable for use as a public park; and/or
5. The proposed dedication is not in conformance with the city parks and recreation plan.
(vii) The dedication required by this section shall be made by submitting a final subdivision plat for council approval, and subsequent recordation
with the Bexar County clerk, unless additional dedication is required subsequent to the filing of the final subdivision plat.
(viii) If the actual number of completed dwelling units exceeds the figure upon which the original dedication was based, additional dedication
shall be made by payment of the cash in lieu of land amount provided in section 10.02.251(9)(B), or by the conveyance of an entire numbered lot
to the city in conformance with the standards set forth herein.
(C) Money in lieu of land.
(i) Subject to veto of the council, a land owner responsible for dedication under this section may elect to meet the requirements of section
10.02.251(2) [10.02.251(9)(B)] in whole or in part by a cash payment in lieu of land, in the amount set forth herein. Such payment in lieu of land
shall be made at or prior to the time of final subdivision plat approval of the first unit of development.
(ii) The city may, from time to time, decide to purchase land for parks in or near the area of actual or potential development. If the city does
purchase park land in a particular park zone, subsequent park land dedications for that zone could be required in cash only.
(iii) The amount of money accepted in lieu of land shall be determined by obtaining a fair market appraised value of lands in the immediate area
of the development. The real estate appraisal shall be initiated by an appointee, acceptable to the city.
(D) Dedicated funds; transfer of funds; right of refund. residential fences [sic]
(i) There are four (4) neighborhood park zones and one (1) community park zone established in the parks and recreation plan for the city.
(ii) When a fee in lieu of park land dedication is collected by the city, relative to the filing of a subdivision plat, said monies shall be placed in a
dedicated fund to be used to serve the park zone(s) in which the subdivision is located.
(iii) If the city is not able to purchase suitable land or otherwise spend the collected monies in a manner it deems appropriate to provide park
services for the respective park zone(s), then the monies may be used for any park within the city.
(iv) The city shall account for all sums paid in lieu of park land dedication under this section with reference to the individual subdivision plats
involved. Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first in, first out accounting basis.
(v) If the funds are not spent within three (3) years detailed above, the owners of the property on the last day of such period may be entitled to a
prorated refund of such sum, computed on a square foot basis. The owners of such property must request such a refund within one (1) year of
entitlement, in writing, or such right shall be barred.
(vi) The funds may be used for improvements to the city's community parks; acquisition of park; or to improve access to the community park by
construction of pedestrian access improvements such as sidewalks, pedestrian bridges, crosswalk ways and crosswalk traffic control or other such
park improvements.
(E) Additional requirements.
(i) Any land dedicated to the city under this section must be suitable for park and recreational uses. The city alone shall make this determination
of suitability using the following and other guides as may be needed:
a. Any area primarily located in the 100-year floodplain, as shown on FEMA maps or other generally accepted flood area maps will
generally not be suitable. In some cases, the city may accept an area located in the 100-year floodplain for park land dedication if said land
was dedicated at a ratio of two (2) acres of floodprone park land dedication to each one (1) acre of park land dedication as required by this
section; or
b. Any areas of unusual topography or slope which renders land unusable for organized recreational activities may be excluded from
consideration.
(ii) Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a park if the channel is constructed in accordance with city engineering standards, and if a
significant area (ten percent or more of the park) is not cut off from access by such channel and if the park user is not thereby exposed to
dangerous conditions.
(iii) Each park must have frontage on a public street and be properly shown as a lot on a subdivision plat with the appropriate plat certificate
designating the dedication. All such property shall conform to the city subdivision regulations.
(10) Blocks. Block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet, nor be less than 220 feet.
(11) Crosswalk ways. Crosswalk ways six (6) to ten (10) feet in width, as determined by the city, shall be dedicated where deemed necessary by the city to
provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities, or to provide pedestrian circulation.
(12) Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be required as deemed necessary by the city and shall be at least twenty (20) feet in width with the road edge closest to the
structure at least ten (10) feet from the structure, being designed and constructed to accommodate the city's firefighting equipment. Fire lanes connecting to
public streets, roadways, or private streets shall be provided with curb cuts extending at least two (2) feet beyond each edge of the fire lane and fire lane area
is to remain free and unobstructed of parked vehicles or other obstacles at all times.
(13) Lots.
(A) Corner lots. Corner lots shall be at least seventy (70) feet wide and when said lot(s) abut on crosswalk ways, shall be treated as corner lots.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/349
(B) Frontage. Each lot shall front upon a public street. Lots of irregular shape shall not be allowed unless a street curb frontage of at least forty (40)
feet is provided.
(C) Front and side setbacks. The front and side setbacks required by article 15.02 (zoning ordinance) of this code, shall be shown on the subdivision
plat. Where garages are installed on the side or rear of lots, the garage shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet (but not less than the required
setback) from the access street property line.
(D) Side lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines.
(E) Extra depth and width in certain cases. Where a lot in a residential area backs up to a railroad right-of-way, high-pressure gasoline, oil or gas line,
arterial street, industrial area, or other land use which has a depreciating effect on the residential use of property, and where no marginal access street
or other street is provided at the rear of such lot, additional depth shall be required by the city. In no case shall a depth in excess of 150 feet be required.
Where a lot sides to any of the above, additional width shall be required, but in no event shall a width in excess of 100 feet be required.
(F) Flag lots. Flag lots will not be allowed, except where in the opinion of the city, this is the only possible layout. Normal city services, including fire
and police protection and garbage collection, must be facilitated. Flag lots must have a minimum street frontage of forty (40) feet.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.601; Ordinance 06-046, secs. 2, 3, adopted 10/3/06; Ordinance 08-001, sec. 1, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 09-020 adopted 4/21/09; 2008 Code,
sec. 10.02.251)
Sec. 10.02.252 Inspections and charges
(a) Review. The city engineer, or his authorized representative, shall review all subdivision plats and designs for public improvements and inspect all subdivision site
work for conformance to city regulations. The subdivider shall be fully responsible for compliance with all city, state and federal regulations and shall bear all costs
thereof, including the cost of any city professional staff efforts expended toward the development.
(b) Services provided. The city engineer and the consulting engineer, his deputies and substitutes, shall carefully keep itemized and separate records of all charges
and expenses for services they provide which are to be reimbursed by the developer.
(1) No final approval or acceptance of such subdivision, or the streets thereof, or any site work therein, or any part thereof, shall ever be made until the
subdivider has reimbursed the city in full for all costs and fees incurred by the city toward the development. Neither the mayor nor any city official, elected,
appointed, employed or retained, shall have any authority to waive such requirement, in whole or in part, in any case whatsoever. Such waiver can only be
made by the council at a regular meeting by written ordinance or resolution wherein the reasons for such waiver shall be fully set out in writing.
(c) Laboratory testing. Testing will be performed by an approved, independent testing laboratory. Cost of all testing is the responsibility of the developer and copies of
test results will be furnished to the city engineer before final approval of the subdivision is given. The following test schedule will be adhered to:
(1) Streets.
(A) Subgrade moisture, density test: One (1) per each block (not to exceed 500-foot spacing).
(B) Flexible base: Plasticity index, liquid limit and gradation of material used; moisture, density test on same spacing as subgrade.
(C) Asphalt density: In-place density test to ensure that a density of between 95 percent to 100 percent of the laboratory method (THD test method
type 206-5) is achieved. One (1) test per 1,000 square yards and repeat of failures; report on thickness is required.
(D) Concrete structures: Concrete cylinder test sets shall be taken for curbs, drainage structures and sidewalks, and other concrete structures, at a
frequency acceptable to the city.
(E) Proof rolling: All subbase and each lift of base material shall be proof rolled to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The developer's contractor
shall assist in this inspection by furnishing the necessary equipment and operators and soft and yielding areas discovered will be corrected by the
developer.
(d) Pre-construction conference and notice to proceed. Prior to beginning work at any subdivision site, the contractor and city staff shall have a pre-construction
conference. The contractor shall arrange with staff for such conference at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of requested meeting time.
(e) Preliminary acceptance.
(1) Upon completion of the work, the contractor will arrange for a preliminary acceptance inspection by the city by coordinating with city staff at least seven
(7) days in advance of the inspection.
(2) Developer will furnish all equipment and manpower to facilitate preliminary acceptance inspection which consists of the following:
(A) Visual inspection of all sewers (including manholes and inlets);
(B) Flow test of all fire hydrants and water meter services;
(C) Flow test of sanitary sewer mains; and
(D) Television video of sewer mains (furnish tape copy);
(E) Vacuum or hydraulic test of sewer manholes.
(3) Upon satisfactory completion of the improvements as determined by the city, the developer shall petition the city for preliminary acceptance of public
improvement(s) using the petition form specified herein, no less than ten (10) working days prior to the council meeting date on which preliminary acceptance
is to be considered.
(A) Developer shall furnish the city with the required accompanying data as listed in the petition for preliminary acceptance of public improvements
herein.
(f) Warranty. The developer shall cause the public improvement(s) within the development to be maintained in good condition for a period of twelve (12) months from
the date of preliminary acceptance by the city. This warranty shall include defects in materials and workmanship, soil shifting and springs.
(g) Final acceptance.
(1) After the improvements have been maintained by the developer in good condition for the required 12-month period, the developer, using the abovedescribed
procedure, shall again cause the improvements to be inspected by the city.
(2) After making final repairs, developer shall petition the city for final acceptance using the petition form attached herein no less than ten (10) working days
prior to the council meeting date on which final acceptance is to be considered. Developer shall pay all city costs incurred in this effort.
(3) After satisfactory completion, the city shall consider the petition for final acceptance of public improvement(s) and thereafter be responsible for future
maintenance if accepted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/349
(1972 Code, sec. 24.602; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.252)
Sec. 10.02.253 Where subdivision part of larger tract
Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned by the subdivider which is intended to be subsequently subdivided as additional units of the
same subdivision, the preliminary and final subdivision plats shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area at a scale of not more than 400 feet to one (1) inch,
showing the tentative proposed layout of streets, blocks, lots, drainage, and other improvements for such areas. The overall layout, if approved by the city engineer, shall
be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the city. Thereafter, subdivision plats of subsequent units of such
subdivision shall conform to such approved overall layout, unless changed by the city engineer. The council may change such approved overall layout only when the
council finds:
(1) That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will hinder the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with provisions of
this article; or
(2) That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or will be injurious to other property
in area.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.603; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.253)
Sec. 10.02.254 Flood hazard requirements
The subdivision shall comply fully with requirements of FEMA (see article 3.03, floodplain damage prevention, of this code). (1972 Code, sec. 24.604; 2008 Code, sec.
10.02.254)
Secs. 10.02.255–10.02.300 Reserved
Division 7. Design Criteria
Sec. 10.02.301 Street, alley, and crosswalk way improvement plans
Submitted plans and profiles for street, alley, crosswalk way and drainage easement improvements shall include the following information:
(1) Typical sections showing the proposed pavement width, type, thickness, and crown; the proposed curb or curb and gutter type; location in relation to
centerline and exposure; the proposed sidewalk dimensions and location in relation to curbs and property lines and the proposed parkway grading slopes.
(This information shall be given for each different type of street and alley in the subdivision and construction details of all drainage structures, to include
dimensions, reinforcing and components such as grates and manhole covers shall also be provided.)
(2) Alignment of each street, alley, crosswalk way and drainage easement showing the beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the
centerline and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of
intersection of each intersection with another street, alley or drainage easement; the station and radius of each curb return; the location of adjacent right-ofway
lines; the location and limits of sidewalks and curbs of each street; the location of each drainage structure; the location and size of all storm sewers; and
the location of monuments.
(3) Location, description, and elevation of benchmarks; the top of curb grade at each curb return; the centerline grade at each end and at each fifty-foot
station of alleys and drainage ditches; the gradient of each tangent grade and the location and length of each vertical curve; the direction of storm drainage
flow at each intersection; and the flow line elevation of each storm sewer at each point of change of grade and each end and the intervening gradients. (The
profiles of streets, alleys, and drainage ditches shall show the natural ground at adjacent property lines and the proposed centerline.)
(4) Scale, north arrow and date. Plan and profile shall be drawn to scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontally and one (1) inch
equals five (5) feet vertically on sheets twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches in dimension.
(5) The seal of a registered professional engineer shall be provided on all profiles and street and alley plans.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.701; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.301)
Sec. 10.02.302 Design and construction standards
The design and construction standards for street, alley, and crosswalk way improvements shall conform to current City of San Antonio design standards with the
following exceptions:
(1) Residential alleys shall be constructed of reinforced concrete as shown in exhibit “C” [exhibit (s)], attached hereto;
(2) Only bar steel or flat plate steel reinforcement shall be used in concrete structure;
(3) Street widths shall conform to section 10.02.301(2) [10.02.251(2)];
(4) Pavement for each street or alley shall be designed and constructed in accordance with an engineered design section based on representative
geotechnical information taken from the proposed subdivision (the minimum acceptable design section is as shown herein and properly designed reinforced
concrete pavements are acceptable);
(5) Privately maintained streets within manufactured home park subdivisions shall conform to these specifications for design and construction.
(A) The project engineer shall submit pavement designs based on the American Association of State Highway Officials minimum design methods for
H-20 loading and not less than designs to support the city's firefighting apparatus (concrete pavements shall be accompanied by proper joint layouts
and details);
(6) Other changes as directed by the city engineer and as set out in exhibits attached hereto; and/or
(7) At each intersection, the curb and the property line at each block corner shall be rounded with a radius “R,” varying with the interior angle as specified in
the table of intersection returns attached in exhibits herein.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.702; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.302)
Sec. 10.02.303 Sanitary sewers
(a) Design criteria.
(1) Gravity sewers shall be constructed of SDR 26 plastic pipe.
(2) Design and materials used must comply with the City of San Antonio criteria for public works construction except as modified by the city engineer.
(3) Size of sewer main shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in diameter. Service connections shall be six (6) inches in diameter.
(4) The following criteria shall be used in formulas for design of sanitary sewer systems:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/349
(A) Flow from contributing population.
Flow From Contributing Population
Type of Residential Area Peak Contribution per
Person in Gallons, per Day
Average Daily Flow
Gallons per Person per
Day
Residential 240 156
Multiple-family 180 117
(B) Infiltration.
Infiltration
Source of Infiltration Amount of Infiltration Gallons per Day,
per Acre
Residential area, level to 7% land slope 700
Residential area, 7% to 15% land slope 500
Totally undeveloped areas 360
High water table, creek beds, lake areas 1,450
Business and industrial areas 1,000
(5) All plans and specifications for all sewage collection systems must be submitted to the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality “TCEQ” for review
and approval prior to construction.
(6) During the construction and testing phase of the sewage collection system, full-time inspection under the direction of design engineer is required by
TCEQ.
(7) All notices, reports, certifications required for the project by the TCEQ shall be provided by the design engineer. Copies of all test results shall be
submitted to the city and to the TCEQ. Upon completion of construction, the design engineer or other Texas registered professional engineer appointed by the
developer shall certify, to the TCEQ, that the entire installation has passed the deflection test. This certification may be made in conjunction with the notice of
completion required in section 317.19(e)(1) of the TCEQ regulations. This certification shall be provided for TCEQ to consider the requirements of the
approval to have been met.
(b) Testing. All testing required by the TCEQ and other regulatory agencies shall be complied with to include the following:
(1) Low pressure air test of mains and services;
(2) Deflection testing (Mandrel); and
(3) Manhole test.
(c) Erosion control. Erosion or sedimentation control that minimizes the effects of runoff shall be provided during the construction phase of a project. This requirement
will be reviewed by the TCEQ on a case-by-case basis.
(d) Alignment. Sewers shall be laid in straight alignment with uniform grade between manholes. Upon completion the contractor shall provide the city with a videotape
recording, which shows the line to be in good condition and without sags.
(e) Construction methods.
(1) The director of public works shall be advised before any construction is begun in order to arrange for adequate city inspection to be provided;
(2) Sewers shall be located in the centerline of streets and four (4) feet from the north or east lines where in alleys, or as otherwise approved by the city
engineer. Where directed by the city, the sewer main will extend across the frontage of the property being provided service.
(3) All sewer lines shall be placed to line and grade as directed by the city engineer and state regulations;
(4) All sanitary sewer services shall extend through to the property line;
(5) All joints shall be compression type joints;
(6) Manholes shall be spaced not more than 400 feet apart;
(7) Manholes shall be provided at intersecting streets or alleys where there is a possibility of future extensions and where required by the city;
(8) Construction requirements set out in exhibits attached hereto shall be adhered to;
(9) Minimum grades permitted shall be sufficient to produce a velocity of two (2) feet per second;
(10) Outfall mains shall be of sufficient size to service the maximum anticipated flow from all areas tributary to this line and must conform with the sanitary
sewer plan recommendations of the city engineer; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/349
(11) Plans for construction of sanitary sewer mains must conform to the requirements of the TCEQ.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.703; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.303)
Sec. 10.02.304 Storm drainage
(a) Design criteria.
(1) Runoff calculations. Runoff rates shall be computed as not less than the following:
Percent Runoff Coefficient*
Character of Area Up to 1% Up to 3% Up to 5% Over 5%
Business or commercial area (90%
or more impervious) 95 96 97 97
Densely developed area (80% to
90% impervious) 85 88 91 95
Closely built residential area 75 77 80 84
Undeveloped area 68 70 72 75
Average residential area 65 67 69 72
* In all cases, wet antecedent conditions shall be assumed. Runoff rates shall be computed on the basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed contributing
runoff water to the proposed subdivision. For determination of time of concentration, velocities shall be assumed on the basis of concrete-lined channels and streets
carrying stormwaters in the contributing watershed area. Rainfall intensities shall be obtained from the rainfall intensity chart set out in exhibits attached hereto. The
actual time of concentration will be used to devalue the intensity, except that the minimum time will not be less than ten (10) minutes.
(2) Drainage facilities.
(A) Streets may be used for stormwater drainage only if the calculated stormwater flow does not exceed the curb height of the street in the event of a
25-year storm frequency, or the velocity does not extend ten (10) feet per frequency [sic]. Where streets are not capable of carrying stormwaters as
stated, drainage detention ponds, ditches or storm sewers shall be provided. Street width shall not be widened beyond widths determined by street
classification.
(B) Concrete-lined channels. The design of such channels shall be based on 100-year frequency and are subject to the approval of the city engineer
and shall comply with the following general requirements:
(i) The concrete lining shall extend one (1) foot beyond the height of the design flow line of the channel. From the top of the concrete lining to
the top of the ditch, a side slope not steeper than four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical with mulch sodding, will be allowed;
(ii) Vertical concrete walls will be properly fenced or enclosed; and
(iii) Easements for such channels shall extend a minimum of six (6) feet on both sides of the extreme limits of the concrete lining. In the
alternative, the area between the fence and the top of the concrete lining shall be concrete and the space reduced to two (2) feet on each side
(minimum easement width shall be ten (10) feet).
(C) Earth sodded channels. The design of such channels shall be based on a 100-year frequency, subject to approval of the city engineer, and shall
comply with the following general specifications:
(i) The mulch sodding shall be placed over the entire surface area of the channel;
(ii) The side slope shall not be steeper than four (4) horizontal to one (1) vertical;
(iii) Easements for such channels shall extend a minimum of fifteen (15) feet on both sides of the extreme limits of the channel, when such
channel does not abut an alley or roadway. When such channel abuts an alley or roadway, this area may be used as part of the easement; and
(iv) The design velocity for earth channels shall not exceed six (6) feet per second. A reinforced concrete pilot channel at least five (5) feet wide
shall be provided.
(D) Storm sewers. Storm sewers shall be designed on a 100-year frequency and shall be subject to approval of the city engineer.
(E) Drainage retention pond requirements. Where the city engineer determines that it is needed or where state drainage laws otherwise require, the
developer will provide either downstream off-site drainage improvements or retention ponds to limit the amount of increased stormwater runoff rates to
preexisting conditions.
(F) Alleys. Alleys shall be designed to accommodate a five-year frequency rainfall runoff and shall be subject to approval of the city engineer.
(G) All-weather crossings. Such crossings at streets or private access driveways shall be designed on a 25-year frequency.
(H) Spring flow. The developer will put into place a system of French drains connecting the storm sewer where there is evidence of spring flows in the
subdivision streets.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.704; Ordinance 08-001, sec. 2, adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.304)
Sec. 10.02.305 Variances by council
(a) The council may authorize a variance from these regulations when in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance,
the council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/349
(b) The council may consider the following guidelines in making their decision to authorize or not authorize a variance from these regulations:
(1) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would
deprive the applicant of reasonable use of this land;
(2) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant;
(3) That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and
(4) That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
(c) Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured
and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
(d) Persons requesting variances to these regulations shall do so using the city-prescribed form set out in exhibits attached hereto. Person shall provide information,
to include the nature of the proposed use of the land involved; existing uses of land in the vicinity; number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision;
and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.705; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.305)
Secs. 10.02.306–10.02.350 Reserved
Division 8. Guarantee of Performance
Sec. 10.02.351 Performance guarantee submission and public improvement acceptance procedure
When public improvement(s) are required by the city, the following shall apply:
(1) Prior to recording of the final subdivision plat, the subdivider will provide a financial guarantee acceptable to the city. The subdivision plat shall not be
recorded unless the subdivider has filed with the city acceptable forms of performance guarantee to ensure completion of the public improvements.
(A) The financial guarantee shall be in an amount equal to the cost of public improvement(s) as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the city
engineer, conditioned that the subdivider will complete such required improvement(s) within the time allowed by this article. The guarantee shall include
a 15% engineering and contingency value.
(i) If public improvements are not satisfactorily completed, the funds deposited will be forfeited to the city who will proceed to construct the
facilities to the extent possible with the available funds.
(B) The financial guarantee is to be approved by the city engineer. The subdivider shall remain obligated on said guarantee until the obligations of the
bond have been met as determined by the city.
(2) Additionally, prior to the recording of the final subdivision plat and with the petition for preliminary acceptance of public improvement(s), the developer
shall provide to the city a maintenance bond (an acceptable financial guarantee of the type approved for performance guarantee).
(A) The amount of maintenance bond shall equal ten percent (10%) of the total cost of the alley(s), curb(s), drainage, sidewalk(s), street(s), water
main(s) and sewer(s), traffic-control signs/signal, and similar infrastructure, required to be constructed in said subdivision, and approved by city
engineer.
(B) Maintenance of public improvement(s) shall be at the developer's expense, as evidenced by the petition for preliminary acceptance, for a period
of at least one (1) year after date of preliminary acceptance of improvement(s) by the council of the completed construction and until final acceptance of
public improvement(s) thereof by the city.
(3) Council shall not accept such public improvement(s) on behalf of the city until developer has completed the developer petition for preliminary
acceptance of public improvement(s) as certified by the city engineer.
(4) Building permit(s) for residential housing, excluding multiple-family dwellings, will not be issued until all public infrastructure, excluding sidewalks, are in
place. Building permit(s) for up to three (3) model homes may be issued prior to preliminary acceptance, however no final building inspection may be
performed without preliminary acceptance of the public improvement(s) and recordation of the subdivision plat.
(A) In the event the city determines public improvement(s) are necessary for the use of the facility being constructed, the final building inspection for
the structure will not be performed until the facilities are in place. If the city determines that fire protection or other safety aspects require the public
improvement(s) to be in place, the building permit may be conditional on these facilities being constructed (see preliminary and final acceptance).
(5) Council shall not give final acceptance to such streets and utilities until developer has executed and submitted the developer petition for final
acceptance of public improvement(s) and not then unless and until the city engineer again certifies that improvements have been maintained in good
condition for said period of one (1) year and are in good condition at such time.
(A) The city shall accept such streets and utilities only by written ordinance or resolution duly passed at a regular or legally called special council
meeting, and the subdivider shall remain responsible for the maintenance of such improvement(s) until thus legally accepted by city. Maintenance of the
streets is to include, but is not limited to, items such as damage by others; spilled concrete on streets; mud/debris on streets; unknown springs; and
similar maintenance items.
(6) Where good cause exists, council may extend the period of time for completion for an additional period of time, not to exceed six (6) months, if the
subdivider has not completed the required site improvement(s) or completed such improvement(s) in compliance with this article. No such extension shall be
granted unless additional security of the type provided in paragraph (1) is first provided by the subdivider to cover the extended period of time.
(7) In lieu of posting the required performance guarantees the developer may proceed with development of the infrastructure. In that instance, the plat may
not be recorded except upon satisfactory completion of the work and preliminary acceptance by the city.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.801; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.351)
Sec. 10.02.352 Performance guarantees
(a) Acceptable performance guarantees are as follows:
(1) Performance bond.
(A) A bond for performance, executed by a surety company licensed to do business in the State of Texas, in an amount equal to the cost estimate as
approved by the city of all improvement(s) required by this article, with the condition that the subdivider shall complete such improvement(s) and have
them accepted by the council within twenty-four (24) months from the date of subdivision plat approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/349
(B) A performance bond shall be substantially in the same form as the bond instrument set out in exhibits attached hereto and the city manager is
authorized to sign the bond instrument on behalf of the city.
(2) Trust agreement.
(A) The subdivider shall cause to be placed in a trust account on deposit in a bank or trust company or with a qualified escrow agent selected by the
subdivider and approved by the city manager, a sum of money equal to the cost estimate, as approved by the city, of all site improvement(s) required by
this article.
(B) The trust agreement (account) shall be established by agreement which shall be substantially in the same form as the trust agreement set out in
exhibits attached hereto and the city manager is authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the city.
(3) Irrevocable letter of credit.
(A) The subdivider shall provide an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount equal to the cost estimate, as approved by the city, of all site
improvement(s) required by this article.
(B) The irrevocable letter of credit, properly executed, shall be substantially in the same form as the irrevocable letter of credit set out in exhibits
attached hereto and the city manager is authorized to sign the agreement on behalf of the city.
(4) Cash or cashier's check.
(A) The subdivider shall provide to the city cash or cashier's check in an amount equal to the cost estimate, as approved by the city, of all site
improvement(s) required by this article. These funds will be held by the city in a non-interest-bearing account until the satisfactory completion and
preliminary acceptance of public improvement(s) by the city, and then refunded to the developer. Partial payments will not be made out of these funds.
(B) Should developer fail to construct the public improvements within the required time period, the city shall provide the developer written notice of
this default and thereafter shall proceed to install the public facilities to the extent of the available funds.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.802; 2008 Code, sec. 10.02.352)
Division 9. Figures, Tables, and Exhibits
Exhibit (a). Owner's Acknowledgment
Exhibit (a). Owner's acknowledgment is as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
The owner of the land shown on this subdivision plat, and whose name is subscribed hereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, dedicates to the City of
Leon Valley, Texas, for the use of the public forever, all streets, alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements, and the water and sewer lines in all of the aforesaid
public places and all other public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed.
Property Owner/Agent's Signature
Date
Printed Name of Property
Owner/Agent
Address
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purposes and consideration therein expressed, and in the capacity therein stated.
GIVEN under my hand and seal of office this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
My Commission expires: ____________
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (a))
Exhibit (b). Certification of Surveyor
Exhibit (b). Certification of the surveyor (responsible for preparing the subdivision plat survey information attesting to its accuracy) is as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/349
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
I hereby certify that this subdivision plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground.
(Surveyor's Seal)
Registered Public Surveyor
Sworn to and subscribed before me this the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
Notary Public
Bexar County, Texas
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (b))
Exhibit (c). Certificate by Engineer
Exhibit (c). Certificate by the engineer (responsible for the preparation of the engineering and supporting data for the final subdivision plat attesting to its accuracy) is as
follows:
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
I hereby certify that proper engineering consideration has been given to this subdivision plat to the matters of streets, lots, and drainage layout.
(Engineer's Seal)
Registered Professional Engineer
Sworn to and subscribed before me this the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
Notary Public
Bexar County, Texas
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (c))
Exhibit (d). Certification by City Engineer
Exhibit (d). Certification by city engineer is as follows:
The City Engineer of the City of Leon Valley hereby certifies that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City as to which
his approval is required.
City Engineer
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (d))
Exhibit (e). Approval of City Council
Exhibit (e). Approval of the city council of the city is as follows:
This subdivision plat of __________________ has been submitted to and considered by the City Council of the City of Leon Valley, Texas, and is hereby approved by
such City Council.
Dated this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
By:
Mayor
By:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/349
City Secretary
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (e))
Exhibit (f). County Clerk's Recording Acknowledgment
Exhibit (f). County clerk's recording acknowledgment is as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
I, ____________, County Clerk of said County, do hereby certify that this subdivision plat was filed for record in my office, on the ______ day of ____________, A.D.
20___, at ____.M. and duly recorded the day of ______, A.D. 20___, at ____.M. in the Records of Deeds and Plats of said county, in book Volume ______, on Page
______.
In testimony whereof, witness my hand and official seal of office, this the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
Country Clerk,
Bexar County, Texas
By:
Deputy
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (f))
Exhibit (g). Letter of Authorization
Exhibit (g). Letter of authorization is as follows:
TO: THE CITY OF LEON VALLEY
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
RE: Lot/Block/CB/Subdivision
I am the owner/agent acting on behalf of the owner** (choose one) of the above referenced property and I hereby authorize and request that the City of Leon Valley file
with the Clerk of Bexar County the subdivision plat of the above referenced property being submitted by me.
I have coordinated with a member of the City staff the date of ____________ to have the approval of the subdivision plat considered by the City Council. I respectfully
request that:
1. A variance be granted to the following required actions (write “NONE” if no variances are requested).
a. ______________________________________________________
b. ______________________________________________________
c. ______________________________________________________
d. ______________________________________________________
2. The subdivision plat be approved subject to the condition that [the owner] provide the following items, in the form required by the City, no later than thirty (30) days
from the date of the Council's conditional approval (write “NONE” if conditional approval is not requested).
a. ______________________________________________________
b. ______________________________________________________
c. ______________________________________________________
d. ______________________________________________________
I understand that if the variance(s) requested are not granted by Council, the subdivision plat may be denied or conditionally approved subject to satisfaction of those
items by me or my agents, in the form required by the City.
I understand that this request for conditional Council approval is a courtesy extended to subdividers for the purpose of expediting subdivision plats which have minor
deficiencies. I recognize the courtesy may not be extended in cases where major objections exist.
Furthermore, I understand that if the items listed in Section 2 above are not provided within the required 30-day time period, that my subdivision plat is disapproved and
subsequently must be resubmitted to the City for approval at such time as all pending deficiencies are resolved.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/349
I understand and agree that should the Council approve the plat, the original plat drawings shall remain in the custody of the City until recorded. If the plat is withdrawn
for correction by the surveyor or engineer the approved plat will be voided if not returned within ten (10) days.
Sincerely,
NAME
DATE
MAILING ADDRESS
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED before me this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
Notary Public in and for the State of
Texas
My Commission Expires: ___________________
(**If an individual or agency is acting on behalf of the property owner(s), then a signed, notarized letter authorizing such individual or agency to act on his behalf must
accompany this letter.)
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (g))
Exhibit (h). Letter of Agent Authorization
Exhibit (h). Letter of agent authorization is as follows:
TO: THE CITY OF LEON VALLEY
RE: Lot/Block/CB/Subdivision
I am the owner of the above referenced property and I hereby authorize ____________ to act on my behalf in filing a subdivision plat with the City of Leon Valley for the
above referenced property. I also authorize the City to deliver this subdivision plat to the Bexar County Clerk for recordation.
Sincerely,
SIGNATURE
PRINTED NAME
DATE
COMPANY/PARTNERSHIP (if any)
MAILING ADDRESS
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED before me this the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
Notary Public in and for the State of
Texas
My Commission Expires: _____________________
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (h))
Exhibit (i). Vacating and Amending Forms
Exhibit (i). Vacating and amending forms are as follows:
1. Form “A” (used prior to property sale):
VACATING DECLARATION
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/349
VACATING DECLARATION FOR __________________ SUBDIVISION PLAT.
Know all men by these presents that I (we) the undersigned hereby acknowledge that I am (we are) the proprietor(s) of all the land embraced by the subdivision plat
known as ____________, (a copy of which is attached hereto), approved by the City Council of the City of Leon Valley on ____________, and recorded in Volume
______, Page ______, Bexar County Deed and Plat Records.
In accordance with Chapter 212.013 of the Texas Local Government Code and Section 10.02.204(b) of the City of Leon Valley Subdivision Regulations, the undersigned
hereby declare such subdivision plat known as ____________ Subdivision to be vacated. It is the intent of the undersigned to nullify the force and effect of the
recordation of the above referenced subdivision plat by filing this vacation instrument in the Bexar County Deed and Plat Records. It is understood by the undersigned
that the filing of this instrument in the Bexar County Deed and Plat Records shall cause the Bexar County Clerk to write the word “Vacated” in plain, legible letters across
the subdivision plat so vacated.
Executed this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
BY:
Signature of Owner's Duly Authorized Agent
Printed Name of Owner's Duly Authorized Agent
Title
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public for the State of Texas, on this day personally appeared ____________ known to me to be the person whose
name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purpose and consideration therein expressed.
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this the _____ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
Notary Public in and for the State of
Texas
My Commission expires:
(There shall be a signature space for each proprietor and an acknowledgment for each signature; if there is more than one (1) page, the pages shall be numbered Page
______ of ______, Vacating Declaration for Subdivision Plat.)
This Vacating Declaration for ____________ Subdivision Plat has been submitted to and considered by the City Council of the City of Leon Valley, Texas, and is hereby
approved by such Council.
Dated this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
By:
Mayor
By:
City Secretary
2. Form “B” (used after property sale):
VACATING DECLARATION
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
VACATING DECLARATION FOR __________________ SUBDIVISION PLAT
Know all men by these presents that I (we) the undersigned, acknowledge that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the lots embraced by the subdivision plat known as
____________ (a copy of which is attached hereto) approved by the City Council of the City of Leon Valley on ____________, and recorded in Volume ______, Page
______, Bexar County Deed and Plat Records.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/349
In accordance with [Section] 212.013 of the Texas Local Government Code and Section 10.02.204(c) of the City of Leon Valley Subdivision Regulations, the
undersigned hereby declare such subdivision plat known as ____________ to be vacated.
It is the intent of the undersigned to nullify the force and affect of the recordation of the above referenced subdivision plat by filing this vacation instrument in the Bexar
County Deed and Plat Records.
It is understood by the undersigned that the filing of this instrument in the Bexar County Deed and Plat Records shall cause the Bexar County Clerk to write the word
“Vacated” in plain, legible letters across the subdivision plat so vacated.
Executed this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
BY:
Title
(Owner or owner's duly authorized representative)
LOT: ___________________________
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, a Notary Public for the State of Texas, on this day personally appeared ____________, known to me to be the person whose
name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purpose and consideration therein expressed.
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this the _____ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
NOTARY PUBLIC IN AND FOR THE STATE OF TEXAS
My Commission expires:
(There shall be a signature space for each owner and an acknowledgment for each signature if there is more than one (1) page, pages shall be numbered Page ______
of ______, Vacating Declaration for ____________ Subdivision Plat.)
This Vacating Declaration for ____________ Subdivision Plat has been submitted to and considered by the City Council of the City of Leon Valley, Texas, and is hereby
approved by such Council.
Dated this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
BY:
Mayor
BY:
City Secretary
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (i))
Exhibit (j). Form “C” (Owner's Certification)
Exhibit (j). Form “C” (owner's certification) is as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
I (we) the owner(s) of the land shown on this replat hereby certify that this replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions.
Owner
Owner's Duly Authorized Agent
Sworn to and subscribed before me this the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/349
NOTARY PUBLIC IN AND FOR THE STATE OF TEXAS
My Commission expires: _____________________
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (j))
Exhibit (k). Form “D” (Owner's Certification)
Exhibit (k). Form “D” (owner's certification) is as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
I (we) the owner(s) of the land shown on this replat hereby certify that this replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; I (we) further certify
that no portion of the proposed area to be replatted was limited within the preceding five (5) years by any interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for
not more than two (2) residential units per lot; I (we) further certify that no lot covered by ____________ subdivision plat, approved by the City Council of the City of Leon
Valley on ____________, was limited by deed restriction to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot.
Owner
Owner's Duly Authorized Agent
Sworn to and subscribed before me this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
My Commission expires: _____________________
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (k))
Exhibit (l). Form “E” (Owner's Certification)
Exhibit (l). Form “E” (owner's certification) is as follows:
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
I (we) the owner(s) of the land shown on this replat hereby certify that this replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions. I (we) further certify
that all of the proposed area sought to be replatted or resubdivided was designated or reserved for usage by notation on the last legally recorded subdivision plat or in
the legally recorded restrictions applicable to such subdivision plat.
Owner
Owner's Duly Authorized Agent
Sworn to and subscribed before me this the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
My Commission expires: _____________________
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (l))
Exhibit (m). Performance Bond
Exhibit (m). Performance bond, permitted by section 10.02.351(1) above, shall be in the following form:
STATE OF TEXAS X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/349
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that I (we) ____________, the undersigned subdivider, as Principal, and ____________, as Surety, do hereby acknowledge
ourselves to be held and firmly bound unto the City of Leon Valley, a municipal corporation of the County of Bexar and the State of Texas, in the full and just sum of
$____________, for the payment of which will and truly to be made, I (we) hereby bind ourselves and our respective heirs, administrators, executors and assigns, jointly
and severally, firmly by these presents.
WHEREAS, the Principal has petitioned the City Council of the City of Leon Valley for permission to develop a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the City of Leon
Valley, more particularly described as follows, to wit:
______________________________________________________ which is shown on a subdivision plat, entitled “____________ Subdivision”, heretofore conditionally
approved by the City of Leon Valley on the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___; and
WHEREAS, under the provisions of the City of Leon Valley subdivision ordinance, being Article 10.02 of the Leon Valley Code, the City Council of the City of Leon Valley
requires, as a condition precedent to the granting of such petition, that the Principal furnish a guarantee that he will construct, or cause to be constructed, according to
the requirements of such subdivision ordinance, the following site improvements within twelve (12) months after final approval of the subdivision plat of said subdivision:
______________________________________________________________________________
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the Principal shall, on or before the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___, construct, or cause to
be constructed, the following site improvements: (list)
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
in accordance with the requirements of the City of Leon Valley subdivision ordinance, and the amendments thereto, if any, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise,
the obligation made under this bond will remain in full force and effect.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, WITNESS OUR HANDS and SEAL, this ____________ day of _______________, A.D. 20___.
SUBDIVIDER and PRINCIPAL
SURETY
By:
Attorney in Fact
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED, this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
CITY OF LEON VALLEY
By: ______________________________
Title: ____________________________
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (m))
Exhibit (n). Trust Agreement in Lieu of Performance Bond
Exhibit (n). Trust agreement in lieu of performance bond permitted by section 10.02.351(1), above, shall be in the following form:
TRUST AGREEMENT IN LIEU OF PERFORMANCE BOND
This agreement is between ____________, subdivider, ____________, trustee, and the City of Leon Valley, Texas.
Subdivider has deposited (or herewith deposits) subject to the ____________ (name and location of the bank, trust company or qualified escrow agent) ____________,
Texas, the sum of $____________ for the purpose of constructing site improvements in ____________ Subdivision in Bexar County, Texas for the benefit of the public
represented by the City of Leon Valley, more particularly described as follows:
TYPE OF SITE IMPROVEMENT
(gas and electric lines not included)
Estimated Cost
Alleys $
Sewer $
Sidewalks $
Storm Drainage $
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/349
Streets $
Water $
Other Improvement (name) $
Trustee agrees to authorize expenditures from such trust account, execute checks, drafts and other orders of withdrawal only for the purpose of paying for the cost of
constructing such site improvements and such orders shall show thereon the purpose of the withdrawals. The expenditures for each type of site improvements [shall be
made] within five (5) days of their authorization.
Subdivider shall, within five (5) days after any single withdrawal of $1,000.00 or more, or a combination of withdrawals of $1,000.00 or more has been made, furnish an
affidavit showing that the sums of money so withdrawn were expended by subdivider on prescribed site improvements completion and estimating the date of site
improvements completion. Said affidavit shall be submitted substantially in the following form:
AFFIDAVIT
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
Before me, the undersigned authority in and for the State and County aforesaid, on this day personally appeared ____________ who, being by me first duly sworn, upon
his oath deposes and says:
I, ____________, subdivider of the ____________ Subdivision under date(s) of ____________ A.D. 20___, withdrew the sum(s) of $____________, from the trust
account heretofore deposited with, ____________ trustee, and created for such use and purpose, and expended said funds so withdrawn on prescribed site
improvements to said Subdivision as follows:
Site Improvement
Amount
Percentage of
Completion
$
$
$
$
$
With the expenditure of these funds, it is estimated that the prescribed site improvements will be completed by ____________, A.D. 20___.
Subdivider
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED BEFORE ME this ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
Notary Public in and for Bexar County, Texas
My Commission expires: _________________________
Until this affidavit is accomplished, no further withdrawals shall be made from said trust account. The trustee shall be authorized to release further funds to the
subdivider only after receipt of written notification therefor from the designated City official so to do.
Subdivider agrees to construct all site improvements within twelve (12) months from the date of final approval of the subdivision plat of said subdivision. Upon the failure
of the subdivider to provide such site improvements in such subdivision, a resolution of the City Council of the City of Leon Valley declaring that such site improvements
have not been completed as required by applicable subdivision regulations shall be final and conclusive on the parties to this agreement. Payment to the City shall be
made on the order of the trustee without the necessity of joinder by the subdivider.
A certificate that the sum required herein is on deposit in the above named bank, trust company or qualified escrow agent, subject to withdrawal only as provided herein,
signed by an authorized official thereof, is attached hereto.
A copy of this contract has been supplied to the bank, trust company or qualified escrow agent named by the undersigned trustee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/349
Subdivider
By:
Trustee
Date of Execution:
By:
CITY OF LEON VALLEY
Date of Execution:
By:
Authorized City Official
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (n))
Exhibit (o). Irrevocable Letter of Credit in Lieu of Performance Bond
Exhibit (o). Irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of performance bond, permitted by section 10.02.351(1), shall be in the following form:
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT IN LIEU OF PERFORMANCE BOND
TO: CITY OF LEON VALLEY
LEON VALLEY, TEXAS
Gentlemen:
The ____________ (Lender Institute) has established on this ______ of ____________, A.D. 20___, a commitment to lend sums to our customer, ____________ to
provide for the entire cost of installing the public improvements required by the City of Leon Valley for the ____________ Subdivision.
Said funds, as approved by the City Engineer, are to be in the amount of:
A. $____________ for alleys;
B. $____________ for sanitary sewers;
C. $____________ for sidewalks;
D. $____________ for storm drainage facilities;
E. $____________ for streets;
F. $____________ for water systems;
G. $____________ for other public improvement(s) -name-
Subtotal $____________
$____________ 10% Maintenance Warranty
Total $____________*
*Includes fifteen percent (15%) engineering and contingency amounts.
During construction, the commitment evidenced hereby shall be reduced periodically, no more often than monthly, upon receipt and approval by the City of certified
statements by lender substantiated by the project engineer's periodic partial payment estimate for work completed and with a ten percent (10%) retainer, as to the
amounts paid out for work done, by the amount of such payments; provided, however, that if the contract price under any construction contract for the construction of
any part of the facilities exceeds the City's estimated costs for the work remaining to be done under such contract then no reduction shall be permitted until such time as
110 percent of the remaining contract price for the work remaining to be done under such contract is less than the City's estimated costs for the work remaining to be
done under such contract.
1. Regardless of anything contained herein to the contrary, the sum allocated for construction of these improvements shall not be reduced to less than twenty-five
percent (25%) of the contract price until such time that:
a. said facilities have been completed and approved by the City as being installed in accordance with plans and specifications; and
b. a one-year warranty bond or substitute letter of credit has been filed with, and accepted by, the City in the amount of ten percent (10%) of actual contract
price of the facilities.
2. At such time as all of the subdivision improvements in said subdivision have been completed and accepted by the City for maintenance or either a warranty bond or
substitute letter of credit has been filed as required above, the commitment evidenced hereby shall automatically terminate, and this letter of credit shall forthwith be
returned to the issuer.
This commitment is made with the understanding that the City can draw any part of the total amount stated hereinabove, subject to the terms and conditions hereof, if
necessary, to provide for any or all of the facilities or maintenance thereof, and that any part of all of the total amount of this credit may be applied by the City to any one
or more, separately or jointly, of the facilities, or maintenance thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/349
I (we) also understand and agree that the only requirement necessary for drawing any part of [or] all of the total amount of this credit is receipted by us, at least ten (10)
days in advance of the date on which funds are requested, of a letter request from the City of Leon Valley, signed by the City Manager, stating that one (1) or more of the
following conditions exists:
3. All of the following have occurred:
a. two (2) years has elapsed since the date of the City's approval of the subdivision plat;
b. the facilities have not been completed, the failure to complete such facilities is not due to weather, acts of God, strikes, or other reasons beyond
customer's control, and due diligence in the opinion of the City, is not then being used in efforts to complete; and
c. We have not, after receipt of written notice to us of our customer's default, assumed in writing the obligation to complete such facilities to the extent of
the remaining balance of the Letter of Credit, or, having assumed such obligation, have not within 60 days thereafter, commenced efforts to complete such
facilities as provided hereinafter; or
4. The City has valid doubt that the lender's letter of credit may not be properly secured by an appropriate reserve of funds such as a certificate of deposit; or,
5. All of the following have occurred: The ____________ (Lender) has given written notice, at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of this credit, to the City at
the address given below, by certified mail return receipt requested, that this credit is about to expire and that the public improvements have not been completed and
finally acceptable by the City.
No further substantiation of the necessity of the draw is required by this credit. At the option of the City, a substitute Letter of Credit, in this same form is [as] an amount
equal to the total sum stated hereinabove, subject to any reductions, if any, which have been made hereunder, may be substituted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
expiration date of this credit;
In addition, if default has occurred, the only requirement necessary for drawing any part or all of the total amount of the ten percent (10%) retainer is receipt by us, at
least ten (10) days in advance of the date on which funds are requested, of a letter request from the City of Leon Valley signed by the City Manager, stating that the
following condition exists:
1. The facilities or portions thereof have failed within one (1) year of acceptance by the City for maintenance due to a defect in materials or workmanship as
determined by City.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, before requesting a draw of any part or all of this credit because of default by our customer to perform maintenance, the
City shall notify in writing advising us of this failure and allowing us ten (10) working days to assume the obligations of the customer.
Where the City declares that an emergency exists involving the public safety or welfare, this obligation to notify us prior to making emergency maintenance repairs is
waived.
This Letter of Credit shall be subject to and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas and particularly the Texas Business and Commerce Act.
I (we) further state that this credit is irrevocable prior to the expiration date unless all parties, including for all purposes the City of Leon Valley, consent to such revocation
in writing. I (we) further agree to provide written notification at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of this credit, to the City of Leon Valley, sent by certified mail
return receipt requested, that this credit is about to expire.
Lender's Signature
Lender's Printed Name
(Corporate Seal, if any)
Authorized Officer's Signature
Authorized Officer's Printed Name
ATTESTED BY:
Signature
Printed Name
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (o))
Exhibit (p). Maintenance Bond
Exhibit (p). Maintenance bond, required by section 10.02.352, above, shall be in the following form:
MAINTENANCE BOND
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/349
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, that I (we), ____________, the undersigned subdivider, as Principal, and ____________, as Surety, do hereby acknowledge
ourselves to be held and firmly bound unto the City of Leon Valley, a municipal corporation of the County of Bexar and State of Texas, in the full and just sum of
$____________ (being ten percent (10%) of the estimated cost of the hereinafter enumerated site improvements) for the payment of which will and truly to be made, I
(we) hereby bind ourselves and our respective heirs, administrators, executors and assigns, jointly and severally, firmly by these presents.
WHEREAS, the Principal has petitioned the City Council of the City of Leon Valley for permission to develop a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the City of Leon Valley
more particularly described as follows to wit:
_______________________________________________ which is shown on a subdivision plat, entitled ____________ Subdivision, heretofore conditionally approved
by the City of Leon Valley on ____________, A.D. 20 ___; and
WHEREAS, under the provisions of the Leon Valley Code, Article 10.02, “Subdivision Ordinance,” the City Council of the City of Leon Valley requires, as a condition
precedent to the granting of such petition, that the Principal furnish a guarantee that he will maintain and cause to be maintained, according to the requirements of such
subdivision ordinance, the following site improvements for a period of one (1) year after the approval of the construction thereof by the City: (list)
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the Principal shall maintain, and cause to be maintained, the above mentioned improvements in
accordance with the requirements of the City of Leon Valley Code, Article 10.02, and the amendments thereto, if any, for the period of one (1) year after the approval of
the construction thereof by the City of Leon Valley and until the final approval of the City of Leon Valley, and until the official acceptance thereof by the City Council, then
this obligation shall be void; otherwise, the obligations made under this bond will remain in full force and effect.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, WITNESS OUR HAND and seal, this ______ of ____________, A.D. ______.
Subdivider and Principal
Surety: ______________________
By:
Attorney in Fact
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED, this the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
CITY OF LEON VALLEY
By: _________________________
Title: ________________________
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (p))
Exhibit (q). Development Petition for Preliminary Acceptance of Public Improvements
Exhibit (q). Developer petition for preliminary acceptance of public improvements, required by section 10.02.301(2) [10.02.252], above, shall be in the following form and
is as follows:
No. _______
CITY OF LEON VALLEY
PART I
DEVELOPER PETITION FOR PRELIMINARY ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
STATE OF TEXAS X
COUNTY OF BEXAR X
CITY OF LEON VALLEY X
WHEREAS, ____________, hereinafter called Owner, the owner of the land described as ____________ Subdivision, desires to file this, Petition, with the City Council
of the City of Leon Valley. This petition is being filed in accordance with the terms and provisions of the current regulations.
NOW THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS: ____________ respectfully files this, Petition, with the City Council of the City of Leon Valley for
preliminary acceptance of the following described public improvements (list):
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
(Improvement projects shall have limits defined by street, alley between streets, and/or across easements by description of the property.)
OWNER, in filing this petition, sets forth the following information as required in current regulations:
A. Attached is Exhibit “A”, a true and correct copy of the itemized construction costs of the above described project(s). Construction was accomplished by Contractor
____________ (Name) at a total cost of $______.
B. Attached is Exhibit “B”, a maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the itemized construction costs of the above public improvements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/349
C. Attached is Exhibit “C”, three (3) true and correct copies of record (i.e., “as built”) drawings certified to by a registered professional engineer.
D. Attached is Exhibit “D”, two (2) true and correct copies of field density tests and material source tests, certified by a recognized testing laboratory. (Exhibit “D” is
required only for street and alley improvements.)
OWNER GUARANTEES:
A. All materials and workmanship to be in accordance with approved plans [and] specifications prescribed by the City; and
B. To correct any and all deficiencies not in accordance with approved plan and specifications as may be noted until final acceptance by the City; and
C. All materials, workmanship and maintenance in good condition for a period of one (1) year from the date of preliminary acceptance by the City and/or until City final
acceptance. The owner, upon completion of the maintenance period, will advise the City when said improvements are ready for final inspection and concurrently request
final acceptance thereof. The acceptance of this petition based upon preliminary acceptance of the improvements listed shall not impose any duty upon the City
concerning the maintenance of the herein described project(s) until they shall be finally accepted by the Leon Valley City Council.
WHEREFORE, PREMISES CONSIDERED ____________ respectfully requests that this, Petition, be in all things accepted.
Executed on this the _____ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
Owner: ____________________________
ATTEST: By: _______________________________
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority on this day personally appeared ____________, President of ____________, a Texas Corporation, known to me to be the
person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledge to me that he executed the same for the purposes and consideration therein expressed
(in the capacity therein stated, as the act and deed of said corporation).
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE on this the ______ day of ____________, A.D. 20___.
(Seal)
Notary Public in and for Bexar County, Texas
My Commission expires: ______________________
PRELIMINARY ACCEPTANCE
The improvements listed above have been inspected as required by current regulations. I recommend the above petition be in all things granted, subject to the one-year
maintenance, in good condition and correction of the deficiencies as may from time to time be noted until final acceptance by the City Council of Leon Valley, Texas.
Date
City Engineer
APPROVED AND PRELIMINARILY ACCEPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEON VALLEY, TEXAS, SUBJECT TO FULFILLMENT OF THE OWNER'S
GUARANTEE AS RECORDED IN THE CORPORATE MINUTES BOOK NUMBER ______, PAGE ______, dated the ______ day of ____________ A.D. 20___.
ATTEST:
Mayor
City Secretary
(To be provided in triplicate)
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (q))
Exhibit (r). Developer Petition for Final Acceptance of Public Improvements
Exhibit (r). Developer petition for final acceptance of public improvements required by this article, shall be in the following form and is as follows:
No. _______
CITY OF LEON VALLEY
PART II
DEVELOPER PETITION FOR FINAL ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT(S)
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Leon Valley, Texas, approved the preliminary acceptance of the improvements listed in Part I, Petition No. ______ for
____________ Subdivision; and
WHEREAS, the Owner has maintained such improvements in good condition for at least one (1) year from date of acceptance by the City Council; and
WHEREAS, the Owner has corrected all deficiencies reported by the City.
It is therefore requested that final inspection be made of said improvements, that the final acceptance be approved by the City, and that the owner be relieved of any
further obligation to maintain or cause to maintain such improvements.
Owner: ___________________________
By: ___________________________
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/349
FINAL ACCEPTANCE
The above improvements listed in the petition have been inspected as required by current regulations, all required maintenance has been performed and all noted
deficiencies have been corrected. I recommend that the improvements described in the petition be accepted by the City of Leon Valley, Texas and all maintenance on
said improvements be assumed by the City.
Date
City Engineer
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LEON VALLEY, TEXAS, AS RECORDED IN THE CORPORATE MINUTE BOOK NUMBER
_____, PAGE _____, DATED THE _____ DAY OF ____________, A.D. 20___.
ATTEST:
Mayor
City Secretary
(To be provided in triplicate)
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (r))
Exhibit (s). Street Cross Sections
Exhibit (s). Street cross sections are as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/349
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (s))
Exhibit (t). Curb and Sidewalk Details
Exhibit (t). Curb and sidewalk details are as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/349
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (t))
Exhibit (u). House, Sidewalk, and Driveway Standards
Exhibit (u). House, sidewalk, and driveway standards are as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/349
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (u))
Exhibit (v). Utility Arrangement Plans
Exhibit (v). Utility arrangement plans are as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/349
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (v))
Exhibit (w). Storm Drainage Velocity and Capacity Charts
Exhibit (w). Storm drainage velocity and capacity charts are as follows:
0.10 1.42 17.68 1.43 23.81 1.33 22.01 1.22 9.66 1.12 9.09
0.15 1.74 21.66 1.74 29.17 1.53 26.96 1.50 11.88 1.37 11.12
0.20 2.00 24.90 2.02 33.68 1.89 31.13 1.73 13.70 1.58 12.83
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/349
0.25 2.24 27.89 2.26 37.66 2.11 34.80 1.93 15.29 1.77 14.37
0.30 2.46 30.63 2.47 41.25 2.31 38.13 2.12 16.79 1.94 15.75
0.35 2.66 32.99 2.67 44.56 2.50 41.18 2.29 18.14 2.09 16.97
0.40 2.84 35.36 2.86 47.64 2.67 44.02 2.44 19.32 2.24 18.19
0.45 3.01 37.47 3.03 50.53 2.83 46.69 2.59 20.51 2.37 19.24
0.50 3.17 39.47 3.19 53.26 2.98 49.22 2.73 21.62 2.50 20.30
0.65 3.32 41.33 3.36 66.86 3.13 61.82 287 22.73 2.62 21.27
0.60 3.47 43.20 3.50 58.34 3.27 53.92 2.99 23.68 2.74 22.25
0.65 3.61 44.94 3.64 60.72 3.40 56.12 3.12 24.71 2.86 23.14
0.70 3.75 46.62 3.78 63.02 3.53 58.24 3.23 25.58 2.96 24.04
0.75 3.88 48.31 3.91 66.23 3.65 60.28 3.35 26.53 3.06 24.85
0.80 4.01 49.92 4.04 61.37 3.77 62.26 3.46 27.40 3.16 25.66
0.85 4.13 51.42 4.17 69.44 3.89 64.17 3.56 28.20 3.26 26.47
0.90 4.25 52.91 4.29 71.45 4.00 66.03 3.67 29.07 3.35 27.20
0.95 4.37 54.41 4.40 73.41 4.11 67.84 3.77 29.86 3.44 27.93
1.00 4.48 55.78 4.52 75.31 4.22 69.61 3.86 30.57 3.53 28.66
1.50 5.49 68.35 5.53 92.25 5.17 85.25 4.73 37.46 4.33 35.16
2.00 6.34 78.93 6.39 106.52 5.97 98.44 5.46 43.24 6.00 40.60
2.50 7.09 88.27 7.14 119.09 6.67 110.06 6.11 48.39 5.59 46.39
3.00 7.76 96.61 7.83 130.46 7.31 120.56 6.69 52.98 6.12 49.59
3.50 8.39 104.46 8.46 140.91 7.89 130.22 7.23 57.26 6.61 53.67
4.00 8.97 111.68 9.04 150.64 8.44 139.21 7.73 61.22 7.07 57.41
4.50 9.51 118.40 9.68 159.78 8.95 147.66 8.20 64.94 7.50 60.90
5.00 10.02 124.75 10.10 188.42 9.43 155.65 8.64 68.43 7.90 64.15
5.50 10.51 130.85 10.60 176.64 9.89 163.24 9.06 71.76 8.29 67.31
6.00 10.98 136.70 11.07 184.49 10.33 170.50 9.46 74.92 8.85 70.24
6.50 11.43 143.30 11.52 192.03 10.76 177.46 9.85 78.01 9.01 73.16
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/349
7.00 11.86 147.66 11.95 199.28 11.16 184.16 10.22 80.94 9.35 75.92
7.60 12.28 152.89 12.37 206.27 11.55 190.63 10.58 83.79 9.68 78.60
8.00 12.68 157.85 12.78 213.04 11.93 196.88 10.93 86.57 9.99 81.12
8.50 13.07 162.72 13.17 219.59 12.30 202.94 11.26 89.15 10.30 83.64
9.00 13.46 167.45 13.55 225.96 12.66 208.82 11.59 91.79 10.60 88.07
9.50 13.82 172.06 13.93 232.15 13.00 214.54 11.91 94.33 10.89 88.43
10.00 14.18 176.54 14.29 238.18 13.34 220.12 12.22 96.78 11.17 90.70
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (w))
Exhibit (x). Rainfall Intensities
Exhibit (x). Rainfall intensities are as follows:
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (x))
Exhibit (aa). General Notes
Exhibit (aa). General notes are as follows:
GENERAL NOTES
1. The Contractor shall comply with OSHA Standards including confined space entry and provide all devices, manpower and certified personnel.
2. Due to Federal Regulations Title 49, Part 192.181, access to gas valves must be maintained at all times. The Contractor must protect and work around any gas
valves that are in the project area.
3. The Contractor shall warrant all work for one (1) year.
4. The Contractor shall provide insurance listing City as an additional insured before working in public right-of-way.
5. The Contractor shall remove and restore traffic signs as needed (no separate pay item).
6. Ten (10) days prior to beginning work, Contractor shall arrange, with the City, for a preconstruction conference to be held at the City and shall thereafter secure a
City permit.
7. The Contractor shall notify the City of Leon Valley Public Works Department at 681-1231 prior to placing backfill or concrete and prior to any testing. The Contractor
shall request inspection 24 hours in advance. (No inspections are available between 12:00 p.m. and 1:00 p.m. or after 4:00 p.m. daily, weekends or City holidays.)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/349
8. It is the Contractor's responsibility to see that all signs and barricades are properly installed and maintained. All locations and distances will be decided upon in the
field by the Contractor, using the TEXAS MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES. The City's construction inspector and the traffic engineering
representative will only be responsible to inspect barricades and signs. If in the opinion of the traffic engineering representative and the construction inspector, the
barricades and stops do not conform to established standards or are incorrectly placed or are insufficient in quantity to protect the general public, the construction
inspector shall have the option to stop operations until such time as the conditions are corrected.
9. Contractor and/or Contractor's independently retained employee or structural design/geotechnical/safety/equipment consultant, if any, shall review these plans and
available geotechnical information and the anticipated installation site(s) within the project work area in order to implement Contractor's trench excavation safety
protection systems, programs and/or procedures for the project described in the contract documents. The Contractor's implementation of these systems, programs
and/or procedures shall provide for adequate trench excavation safety protections that comply with as a minimum, OSHA standards for trench excavations. Specifically,
Contractor and/or Contractor's independently retained employee or safety consultant shall implement a trench safety program in accordance with OSHA standards
governing the presence and activities of individuals working in and around trench excavation.
10. All gas, electrical, cable or streetlight piping or wiring which will be located under paved areas or above drainage facilities shall be placed in properly sized
(minimum 2" diameter) Schedule 80 PVC conduit with pull strings.
11. Prior to preliminary and final acceptance of the public improvements by the City, Contractor shall arrange for a field inspection to be conducted with City forces.
The Contractor shall provide equipment and manpower sufficient to open all manholes (which shall promptly be closed), rotate all valves and open all fire hydrants and
water services. These inspections will be arranged by giving seven (7) days' prior notice to the City of this need.
12. The Contractor shall furnish the City with three (3) copies of submittal data on all water or sewer materials to be incorporated into the work for their approval prior
to beginning construction.
13. All requirements of the Texas Department of Transportation will be adhered to where applicable.
14. The Contractor shall notify all utility companies in accordance with the Texas One Call System (1-800-545-6005), prior to excavation (existing underground
facilities are shown as reflected in visible surface features and records of the various utility companies). The Contractor shall verify the location and grade of the utilities
well ahead of excavation operation and shall be responsible for the protection of same during the course of construction.
15. The Contractor shall contact the telephone company cable locator 48 hours prior to any excavation at 650-8228 and protect and support telephone company plant
during construction.
16. The Contractor shall contact the following utility companies at least 48 hours prior to any excavation operation:
a) San Antonio Water System (SAWS) (210) 225-7461
b) Leon Valley Public Works (210) 681-1232
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (aa))
Exhibit (bb). Water System Notes
Exhibit (bb). The water system notes are as follows:
WATER SYSTEM NOTES
1. The materials and construction standards of the Standard Specifications for Water Works Construction of the San Antonio Water System are adopted for reference
and all work shall comply with these standards, except as modified herein.
2. All work and materials shall comply with the requirements of the American Water Works Association and the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission.
3. When sewer lines are installed in the vicinity of water mains, such installation shall be in strict accordance with the requirements of the Texas Natural Resource
Conservation Commission.
4. The Contractor shall construct water mains six feet (6') from the property line, unless otherwise noted.
5. Chlorination will be by the Contractor unless otherwise stated.
6. Ductile iron water mains shall be Class 50 with polyethylene sleeve; C-900 PVC Class 200 (6- or 8-inch diameter) or Class 150 (12-inch diameter) may be used.
The use of asbestos cement pipe water mains is not allowed.
7. The Contractor shall disinfect and hydrostatically test mains in accordance with San Antonio Water System Standards and conduct all bacteriological sampling and
testing. Furnish test results to City before connecting to existing main. The City is to be present during testing and interconnection.
8. The Contractor shall furnish the project engineer with final measurements for all pipe installation, the location and size of all taps, and length of service connections.
9. All single and dual services shall be one-inch copper.
10. Excess material shall be disposed of as directed by the project engineer.
11. Thrust blocks are to be installed for each fitting.
12. Fire hydrants shall be Mueller Super Centurion 200 5-1/4 inch No. A-423 mechanical joint, with 2-1/2 inch National Standard nozzle threads and 4-1/2 inch
National Standard pumper threads, open left, painted red, with gate valve and joint restraints. (Set valves flush with top of curbs when in parkway.) Fire hydrants shall be
placed so as to avoid future driveway locations.
13. All gate valves shall be resilient seat, left hand open, Mueller A-2370 valves.
14. Eight-mil polyethylene wrapping will be required on all fittings and valves.
15. All fittings shall be mechanical joint with concrete blocking, unless otherwise noted. Short Short Body (SSB) fittings may be used.
16. The Contractor shall provide 24-hour notice to homeowners and City prior to discontinuing service to make connection. Service outage shall be limited to the
period of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. and the Director of Public Works or his authorized representative shall be present when the main valves are closed. Nighttime
connections may be required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/349
17. The Director of Public Works or his authorized representative shall be present during all sampling, testing, or tie-ins by the Contractor (no exceptions).
18. All fittings, pipes and services shall have an initial bed of gravel four (4) inches thick and twelve (12) inches of gravel backfill above pipe unless otherwise shown or
authorized in writing by the City Engineer.
19. No blasting is allowed.
20. Backfill in areas under or within three (3) feet of curbs or pavements shall be machine tamped gravel to a point within twelve (12) inches of the surface. Water
jetting will not be allowed in these areas.
21. Cast iron meter boxes supported by bricks shall be installed on all services.
22. The Contractor shall provide all temporary flush valves and jumper connections needed.
23. Meter boxes shall be located at a position of one foot (1') from the front of the box to the back of the curb and shall be coordinated by the Contractor to avoid being
located in wheelchair ramps and sidewalks. Where sidewalks are to be located near the curbline, the meter box shall be located so as to be behind the sidewalk. All
service saddles shall be brass and all corporation and meter stops shall be ball valve type.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (bb))
Exhibit (cc). Sanitary Sewer Notes
Exhibit (cc). The sanitary sewer notes are as follows:
SANITARY SEWER NOTES
1. Except as modified herein, the current specifications of the City of San Antonio Standard Specifications for Public Works are adopted for reference. All work shall
also comply with the regulations of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, Chapter 217.
2. Manhole tops shall be set to the elevation provided by the Engineer. Manholes shall have not more than five (5) throat rings for adjustments. All manhole covers in
paved areas are to be finished flush with top of finished pavement. All manhole covers outside of paved areas shall be finished four (4) inches above natural ground.
Bolt-down, watertight manhole covers are required outside of pavement area and in all unsupervised paved areas such as alleys/easements and in all areas subject to
flooding.
3. The Contractor shall preserve all construction stakes, marks, and so forth. If any are destroyed or removed by the Contractor or his employees, they shall be
replaced at the Contractor's expense.
4. The minimum radius of curvature for any pipe is to be either 200 feet, or the manufacturer's recommendation, whichever is greater. (This requirement is in no way
intended to relieve the Contractor of his responsibility to successfully pass the air testing requirements.)
5. When sewer lines are installed in the vicinity of water mains, such installation shall be in strict accordance with the Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission “Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems” (1995 or any revisions thereto).
6. All sewer pipes shall be compression joint PVC SDR 26 pipe.
7. Y's or T's shall be manufactured Y's and T's.
8. No blasting is allowed.
9. Manholes shall be either monolithic, cast-in-place or precast.
10. Manholes, including rings and covers, shall be constructed so that they are watertight.
11. The Contractor may use precast manholes (provide City with submittal on product). Contractor shall grout all connection boot cavities inside manhole to prevent
exposed gaskets by using silicone or other flexible sealant.
12. Any caverns or solution channels encountered during construction shall be reported to the Engineer and to the City.
13. The Contractor shall contact the following utility companies at least 48 hours prior to any construction/excavation operation:
a) San Antonio Water System (SAWS) (210) 225-7461
b) Leon Valley Public Works (210) 681-1232
and shall notify the Texas State One Call System (1-800-545-6005) in accordance with these rules.
14. The Contractor shall pay for fire hydrant meter deposit which will be refundable upon return.
15. The Contractor shall be responsible for ensuring that no illegal sewage discharges occur during construction, to include raw sewage in trenches. The Contractor
shall submit a plan at the preconstruction conference detailing his method of ensuring no illegal discharges during the construction of the sanitary sewer mains
(acceptable means are to pump around sections being constructed or to use tanker trucks).
16. Confined Space Entry - OSHA regulations require that any person entering a confined space obtain a permit daily for entry into any confined space as defined by
OSHA regulations. Basic requirements include competent person training, rescue equipment, atmosphere monitoring and testing. Contractor must present City
documents certifying the above.
17. Existing underground facilities are shown as reflected in visible surface features and records of the various utility companies. The Contractor shall verify the
location and grade of the utilities well ahead of excavation operation and shall be responsible for the protection of same during the course of construction.
18. The Contractor shall be responsible for restoring to its original or better condition any damage done to existing grass areas, curbs, sidewalks or concrete
driveways and trenches in grass areas shall be sodded.
19. Whenever power poles are adjacent to the proposed trench, the Contractor shall provide proper shoring or other suitable support during construction of the utility
which methods must be approved by the utility company.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/349
20. Existing street pavements and base shall be replaced in kind, but not less than with 8 inches of flexible base and 1-1/2 inches of hot mix asphaltic concrete (type
“D”) pavement.
21. Secondary backfill under areas to be paved and within three (3) feet thereof shall be machine tamped gravel or base as shown.
22. The Contractor has the option to tunnel under existing curbs and/or remove and replace curbs damaged during construction.
23. All testing will be provided by the Contractor at his cost.
24. Mains must pass air test per Item 518, City of San Antonio Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and Texas Natural Resource Conservation
Commission regulations, prior to acceptance by Leon Valley.
25. Passage of an approved Go-No-Go deflection testing mandrel shall be required for final acceptance of flexible conduit. The test shall be conducted after the final
backfill has been in place at least 30 days and no pipe shall exceed a deflection of five percent (5%). If the deflection test is to be run using a rigid ball or mandrel, it shall
have a diameter equal to 95% of the inside diameter of the pipe. The test shall be performed without mechanical pulling devices and the City and the design engineer's
inspector shall be present during all required inspections. The Contractor shall provide prior notice of this need.
26. Manholes shall be tested for leakage separately and independently of the wastewater lines by hydrostatic exfiltration testing, vacuum testing, or other methods
acceptable to the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission.
27. All sewer mains shall be laid to grade and shall not sag or otherwise stand water in the main or in the manhole invert section.
28. The sewer system, including stub-outs, shall be tested under the supervision of the City of Leon Valley at the time of installation and shall be certified to the City to
meet or exceed the requirements of the latest revision of the City of San Antonio “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction,” Item 518, or its equivalent,
relative to establishing a minimum infiltration/exfiltration rate.
29. Utility trench compaction shall achieve 90% proctor density and shall be proof-rolled prior to approval of the utility.
30. Thirty (30) days after installation of the sewer mains and prior to preliminary acceptance of public improvements, the Contractor shall cause the mains to be
videotaped in color and shall furnish the City with a copy. This activity shall be conducted in the presence of the City inspector.
31. Sewer service laterals shall be six-inch PVC, SDR 26, and be installed per existing guidelines. Contractor to furnish engineer with an as-built plan indicating the
location and length of each sewer lateral. All sewer service lines shall extend to the property line.
32. Sewer service laterals and utility conduits shall be marked and located as follows:
a. Upon backfilling, a 2" x 4" stake shall be driven a maximum of two (2) feet from the pipe end(s) (stakes shall extend above the ground surface by at least
four (4) feet and shall be painted blue for utility conduit and green for sewer laterals);
b. Marking ribbons with the word “sewer” shall be tied securely around the pipe end(s) and shall extend above the ground level and shall continue along
the 2" x 4" stake from the base, over the top, down the back of the stake, and attached with weatherproof tape wrapped around the stake near the top and the
bottom (nails, tacks or staples are not acceptable).
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (cc))
Exhibit (dd). Street Notes
Exhibit (dd). The street notes are as follows:
STREET NOTES
1. The requirements of the City of San Antonio Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction are adopted for reference, except as otherwise modified herein.
2. The Contractor shall install lay down curbs at driveway locations.
3. Handicapped wheelchair ramps along with all sidewalks over drainage facilities and where otherwise shown shall be installed with the initial street work.
4. All concrete shall be Class A (3,000 psi at 28 days) and meet the material requirements of “Concrete” (Natural Aggregate) of the specifications.
5. All reinforcing steel shall be Grade 40 and meet the material and construction requirements of “Reinforcing Steel” of the specifications. The use of wire mesh in
sidewalk, concrete pavements, riprap or driveways is prohibited.
6. Curing shall be made by the impervious membrane method and shall meet the material and construction requirements of “Membrane Curing” of the specifications.
7. All concrete construction shall meet the requirements of “concrete work” of the specifications.
8. Manholes shall be broken down below finish grade level until base is completed and then restored.
9. The engineer will stake the streets one (1) time only and furnish cut sheets to the Contractor. Any construction stakes removed or destroyed by the Contractor or
his employees will be replaced at the Contractor's expense.
10. Laboratory testing shall be performed by an approved independent testing laboratory. All cost of testing and retest shall be paid by the Contractor. The following
test schedule shall be adhered to:
a. Subgrade moisture density test at the rate of three (3) per each block, not to exceed 500-foot spacing (one proctor test);
b. Flexible Base - P.I., L.L., and graduation of material used, moisture density test on same spacing as subgrade, quality control test on materials to be
used;
c. Asphalt Density - in place density test to ensure that a density of between 95 percent and 100 percent of the laboratory method (THD) test method type
706-5) is achieved (furnish three (3) tests and repeat of failures, and report on thickness - laboratory control personnel shall be present at start of asphalt lay
down to confirm density, thickness and compaction effort);
d. Concrete Structure - one (1) concrete compressive strength test of 4 cylinders each shall be provided per each structure as shown on the drawings;
e. Concrete Curb - provide one (1) set of cylinders per each 500 linear feet of curb;
f. Concrete Sidewalk - provide one (1) set of cylinders per each 500 feet of sidewalk; and
g. All fill in street areas to be select low P.I. material (less than 15) compacted in 6-inch lifts to ninety percent (90%) density (furnish test on compaction in
12-inch lifts each 500 feet);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/349
11. Proof-Rolling - All subgrade and each lift of base material shall be proof-rolled to the satisfaction of the City. The Contractor shall provide the necessary equipment
and operators for proof-rolling and soft and yielding areas discovered shall be corrected by the Contractor.
12. Surface structures such as mailboxes, street signs, fences, driveways, sidewalks, landscaping, and so forth, are shown on the plans as visible at the time of the
survey. It is the Contractor's responsibility to safeguard and maintain any and all surface structures during the course of work and to replace or repair those items which
are damaged by the Contractor with like or better quality.
13. The Contractor is required to adjust all existing manholes (see “Adjusting Existing Manholes” of Specifications) and water valves to match the grade of the street
section or to the elevation specified on the plans or by the Engineer.
14. Concrete curb shall be marked at ten-foot intervals with steel approved marking tool. Expansion joints shall be placed at beginnings of all radii and as directed by
the Engineer.
15. The Contractor shall be responsible for restoring to its original or better condition, any damages done to existing fences, concrete islands, curbs or concrete
driveways (no separate pay item).
16. Concrete sidewalks shall have tooled weakened plane joints every four (4) feet and doweled expansion joint with 1/4-inch bitumastic material 75 feet o/c and
abutting existing structures. (Only bar-type steel reinforcement may be used.)
17. The City shall furnish and install street name signs and developer shall reimburse City for material cost. All other traffic signage (stop and yield signs, and so forth)
will be furnished and installed by City at no cost.
18. The Contractor shall apply curing compound and install contraction/expansion joints on all concrete work.
19. Secondary backfill under areas to be paved and within three (3) feet thereof shall be machine tamped gravel or base as shown.
20. Existing asphalt to be joined to new asphalt shall be saw cut.
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (dd))
Exhibit (ee). Table of Intersection Returns
Exhibit (ee). Table of intersection returns is as follows:
Interior
Angles
Two Local Local &
Collector
Two Collector Local Collector
w/Arterial
Two Arterial
Degrees CR PLR CR PLR CR PLR CR PLR CR PLR
150-145 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 25 15
145-140 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 20 10
140-135 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 30 20
135-125 15 5 15 6 20 10 25 15 35 25
125-85 15 5 15. 6 20 10 25 15 30 25
85-75 20 10 20 11 25 15 30 20 50 40
75-65 25 15 25 16 30 20 35 25 80 70
65-55 30 20 30 21 35 25 40 30 90 80
55-45 35 25 35 26 40 30 45 35 110 100
45-00 35 25 35 26 40 30 45 35 150 140
(1972 Code, sec. 24.900; 2008 Code, art. 10.02, div. 9, exh. (ee))
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/349
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAX*
Sec. 11.02.001 Assessor designated
The county tax assessor-collector is hereby authorized and directed to act as the tax assessor of the city as provided by section 6.23(a) of Vernon's Tax Code. (1972
Code, sec. 25.101; 2008 Code, sec. 11.02.001)
Sec. 11.02.002 Assessment
(a) All property in the city subject to taxation is to be assessed at the same value as it is assessed for taxing purposes by the Bexar Appraisal District.
(b) All provisions of Vernon's Tax Code are hereby adopted to the full extent applicable.
(1972 Code, secs. 25.102, 25.102.1; 2008 Code, sec. 11.02.002)
State law reference–Appraisal districts, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 6.01 et seq.
Sec. 11.02.003 Goods in transit
The goods in transit, as defined by Texas Tax Code section 11.253(a)(2), as amended by Senate Bill 1, enacted by the 82nd Texas Legislature in Special Session, shall
remain subject to taxation by the city. (Ordinance 11-027 adopted 10/18/11; 2008 Code, sec. 11.02.003)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods-in-transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAX†
Sec. 11.03.001 Telecommunications services
(a) Tax authorized. A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of communications
services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin
cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) Rate. The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the
legislature of the state.
(1972 Code, sec. 25.200; 2008 Code, sec. 11.03.001)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.210.
Sec. 11.03.002 Sale of gas and electricity for residential use
(a) A tax is hereby authorized and imposed on all receipts from residential use of gas and electricity within the city, as is provided for by state law.
(b) The exemption provided for in section 321.105, Tax Code, V.A.T.C.S., is hereby vacated by the city as authorized by section 321.105 thereof.
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of
the state.
(d) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States registered mail a copy of this ordinance along with a copy of the minutes of the city
council's vote on this ordinance.
(e) This section shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city, and this section shall not operate to repeal or affect any such other
ordinances. The tax provided for hereunder shall not serve as an offset to, be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to the city pursuant to any franchise,
street use ordinance, charter provision, or statute or, without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, otherwise payable by any provider of gas or electricity within the
city, it being the express intent hereof that all such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction
or limitation hereby.
(f) This section is to be liberally construed to achieve its remedial purposes.
(Ordinance 06-030 adopted 8/15/06; 2008 Code, sec. 11.03.002)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Sec. 11.03.003 Sales tax elections
Ordinances calling elections as well as those certifying election results for the imposition of sales and use taxes are on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance
adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.04.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
Consideration. The cost of the room in such hotel, not to include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to
the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings, trailer or other facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels,
motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, guest houses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but
“hotel” shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to use or possess, any room or rooms, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel under any lease, concession,
permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel under
any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or other facility in a hotel, apartment or
condominium for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during a calendar year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel.
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being
the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/349
and December.
Tax collector. Any city official, or any official of any agency contracted to collect taxes for the city, designated by the city council.
(Ordinance 1196, sec. 1, adopted 10/7/86; 2008 Code, sec. 11.04.001)
Sec. 11.04.002 Levy; exemptions
(a) There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at a rate of two dollars
($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent (7%) of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel.
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(c) The United States government and its employees, including military personnel, traveling on official business are exempt from local hotel occupancy taxes.
(Ordinance 1196, sec. 2, adopted 10/7/86; Ordinance 96-025, sec. 1, adopted 8/20/96; 2008 Code, sec. 11.04.002)
Sec. 11.04.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in this article for the city. (Ordinance 1196, sec. 3, adopted 10/7/86; 2008
Code, sec. 11.04.003)
Sec. 11.04.004 Required records
Every person who is required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein shall have a record of the following information:
(1) The names and addresses of all occupants of the establishment;
(2) The period of time for which each room is rented;
(3) The consideration paid for such rental.
(Ordinance 1196, sec. 4, adopted 10/7/86; 2008 Code, sec. 11.04.004)
Sec. 11.04.005 Filing of reports; payment of tax collected
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required hereby to collect the tax imposed by this article shall file a report with the tax
collector showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax collected on the city's behalf on such occupancies, and any
other information as the tax collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay over the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall
also be furnished to the tax collector of the city, at the time of the payment of such tax, a copy of the tax report filed with the state comptroller in connection with the state
hotel occupancy tax. (Ordinance 1196, sec. 5, adopted 10/7/86; 2008 Code, sec. 11.04.005; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 11.04.006 Rules and regulations; access to records
The tax collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall, upon reasonable notice,
have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under
the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 1196, sec. 6, adopted 10/7/86; 2008 Code, sec. 11.04.006)
Sec. 11.04.007 Penalty for violation
(a) If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein, and pay to the tax collector the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such
tax, shall fail to file such report, or shall fail to pay such tax, or if such person shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and be
subject to a fine.
(b) Each violation of this article shall be punished by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code, unless some other fine is specifically prescribed for a
particular violation. Each day any violation occurs or continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ordinance 1196, sec. 7, adopted 10/7/86; 2008 Code, sec. 11.04.007; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 11.04.008 Penalty for failure to file reports or pay tax; interest on delinquent tax
If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall fail to pay the tax collector the tax imposed herein when such report or payment is due, he shall pay five
(5) percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after thirty (30) days he shall pay an additional five (5) percent of such tax; provided, however, that the penalty shall
never be less than one dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due.
(Ordinance 1196, sec. 8, adopted 10/7/86; 2008 Code, sec. 11.04.008)
Sec. 11.04.009 Use of proceeds
(a) The proceeds of the tax herein levied shall be allocated to the following purposes:
(1) The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center
facilities, including, but not limited to, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, civic theaters, museums, and parking areas or facilities for the
parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances located at or in the immediate vicinity of the convention center facilities;
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants;
(3) Advertising for general promotional and tourist advertising of the city and its vicinity and conducting a solicitation and operating program to attract
conventions and visitors, either by the city or through contracts with persons or organizations selected by the city;
(4) The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including music (instrumental and vocal), dance, drama, folk art, creative
writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, television, radio, tape and sound
recording, and the arts related to presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms;
(5) Historical preservation and restoration projects or activities at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or historical preservation and
restoration projects or activities located elsewhere in the city that would be frequented by tourists and visitors to the city.
(b) One-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%) of a hotel tax equal to less than three percent (3%), or one percent (1%) of a hotel tax greater than three percent (3%), shall be
reserved for the purpose of advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public meeting and convention facilities, and for promotion
of tourism and advertising of the city and its vicinity either by the city or through contract with persons or organizations selected by the city.
(c) Any revenues collected from the hotel tax in excess of four percent (4%) of the consideration paid by the occupant to the hotel shall be used for the purposes
specified in subsections (a)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of this section, except that no more than one percent (1%) of such revenues shall be used for the purposes specified in
subsection (a)(4) of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/349
(Ordinance 1196, sec. 9, adopted 10/7/86; 2008 Code, sec. 11.04.009)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Definitions and rules of construction
(a) Words, phrases, and terms defined in this chapter shall be given the defined meaning.
(b) Words, phrases, and terms not defined in this chapter but defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 541 shall be construed as defined.
(c) Words, phrases, and terms neither defined in this chapter nor in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 541 shall be given their usual and customary meanings
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(d) The text of the chapter shall control captions and titles.
(e) The word “shall” is mandatory and not permissive; the word “may” is permissive and not mandatory.
(f) Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.
(g) Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words used in the future tense include the present tense.
(h) Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings given herein:
Barricade. Every barrier, obstruction or block placed upon or across any road, street, or highway of this city by an authorized person for the purpose of preventing the
passing of motor vehicles over such street, road, or highway during a period of construction, hazard, or repair to said street, road, or highway.
City. The City of Leon Valley, Texas.
Class 8 or higher truck. Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, and whose vehicle class is rated 8 or higher and weighs 33,000 pounds or
more.
Driveway. Entrances to and exits from private premises where it is possible to park completely off the street, and which are not open for vehicular traffic except by
permission of the owner of such private premises.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Pole trailer. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by
being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural
members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
Private road. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not
by other persons.
School crossing zone. A reduced speed zone designated upon any street by local authority to facilitate safe crossing of the street by children going to or leaving from a
public or private elementary or secondary school, or any combination thereof, at a time when the reduced speed limit applies.
School or other institution of learning. Any public or private organization giving regular instruction and having an average daily attendance of fifty students or more.
School zone. Each and every street and all public property or ways within one thousand feet (1000') of the boundaries of any school or other institution of learning and
as otherwise designated.
Semitrailer. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and
so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purpose of
vehicular traffic.
Trailer. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
Truck tractor. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than as part of the weight of the
vehicle and load so drawn.
Warning sign. Every sign, signal, marking and device erected or placed upon any street, road, highway or barricade, or erected or placed upon any street, road, or
highway within the city which is under construction or being repaired, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic or otherwise stating the conditions under
which traffic by motor vehicle may be had upon such street, road, or highway. A warning signal shall include, but shall not be limited to, a flagman placed upon any
street, road, or highway for the purpose of directing traffic around or upon such street, road or highway as is under construction or in the process of being repaired.
(1972 Code, secs. 26.100-26.104; 2008 Code, sec. 12.01.001)
Sec. 12.01.002 Duty of police to enforce traffic laws; authority of officers of police and fire department to direct traffic
(a) It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all of the traffic provisions of this code
and all of the state vehicle and traffic laws applicable to street traffic in this city.
(b) Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in
conformance with traffic laws; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic, or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department
may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
(c) Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire or other emergency, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.201; 2008 Code, sec. 12.01.002)
Sec. 12.01.003 Trucks dropping load on street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/349
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a truck of any kind within the city on or over any of its public streets, roads, or other right-of-way to cause or permit any
substance loaded thereon or therein, such as gravel, dirt, rock, cement, ash, brush, grass, hay, garbage, trash, lumber, scrap, or debris of any kind, to be deposited on
such public street, road, or right-of-way from such truck, or to drop therefrom, for any reason whatever. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1201; 2008 Code, sec. 12.01.003)
State law reference–Transportation of loose materials, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 725.
Sec. 12.01.004 Idling limitations
(a) The city endorses the TCEQ Idling Limitations Rule as published in the Texas Administration Code, title 30, part 1, chapter 114, subchapter J, Operational Controls
for Motor Vehicles, division 2, Locally Enforced Motor Vehicle Idling Limitation.
(b) The city approves the adoption and implementation of the TCEQ Idling Limitation Rule by reference.
(c) The city authorizes the city manager to execute a memorandum of agreement, attached to the ordinance from which this section derives, with the TCEQ for the
purposes of local enforcement of the Idling Limitation Rule in the city.
(Ordinance 16-011 adopted 4/5/16)
ARTICLE 12.02 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 12.02.001–12.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Electric Full Signal Operation Intersections
Sec. 12.02.051 Designated; duties of driver entering intersection
The electric traffic-control signals at the intersections of Interstate Highway 410 frontage roads with State Highway 16 (Loop 410 at Bandera Road), State Highway 16
(Bandera Road) with Timco West, State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) with Wurzbach Road, State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) with Seneca Drive, State Highway 16
(Bandera Road) with El Verde Road, State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) with Poss Road, State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) with Grissom Road, State Highway 16
(Bandera Road) with Huebner Road, State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) with Reindeer Trail, Huebner Road with Evers Road, Exchange Parkway with Wurzbach Road,
and Grissom Road at Shadow Mist are hereby established as official electric full signal operations at such street intersections. Such traffic controls are hereby expressly
found to conform to the state department of transportation's manual and specifications. It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle into or through
said intersections except while the traffic-control signal facing said driver is electrically lighted green in color and when such driver may safely enter the intersection
without interference or collision with other traffic using such intersection. (Ordinance 03-001 adopted 1/7/03; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.051)
Secs. 12.02.052–12.02.080 Reserved
Division 3. Dual Left Turn Lane Intersections
Sec. 12.02.081 One lane left only and one lane left or straight ahead
(a) Two (2) directional signs, one (1) pointing left only and the other pointing both left and straight ahead, are hereby authorized at the following locations to control
traffic as stated:
(1) Going west on the north frontage road of Interstate Highway 410 at State Highway 16 (Bandera Road);
(2) Going east on the south frontage road of Interstate Highway 410 at State Highway 16 (Bandera Road);
(3) Going east on Wurzbach Road at State Highway 16 (Bandera Road); and
(4) Going west on Wurzbach Road at State Highway 16 (Bandera Road).
(b) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to proceed in the direction specified by the directional sign for his lane of traffic at the location set out in
subsection (a) above.
(1972 Code, secs. 26.502; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.081)
Sec. 12.02.082 Both lanes left only
(a) Two (2) directional signs, both pointing left only, are hereby authorized at the following locations to control traffic as stated:
(1) FM 471 (Grissom Road) at State Highway 16 (Bandera Road); and
(2) State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) at FM 471 (Grissom Road).
(b) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to fail to proceed in the direction specified by the directional sign for his lane of traffic at the location set out in
subsection (a) above.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.503; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.082)
Secs. 12.02.083–12.02.110 Reserved
Division 4. Stop Intersections*
Sec. 12.02.111 Manner of stopping at stop sign
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any of the streets designated in this division as stop sign streets, and onto or across the intersection of any
such street and any street designated in this division as a through street, without first bringing such vehicle to a full stop upon such stop sign street within ten feet (10') of
the near curbline before entering such through street. Thereafter, such driver shall proceed in a cautious manner, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles not so obligated to
stop which are within the intersection or are approaching so closely thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, and then may proceed. (1972 Code, sec. 26.601; 2008
Code, sec. 12.02.111)
State law references–Manner of stopping at stop sign, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.010; vehicle entering stop intersection, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.153.
Sec. 12.02.112 Through streets and stop sign streets designated
(a) The following streets are designated as through streets at the intersections mentioned or referred to, and all streets mentioned or referred to which intersect, cross
or form a junction with such designated through streets are designated as stop sign streets:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/349
Through Street Stop Sign Street
Adair Countess Adria
Autumn Chase Strawberry Park
Balky Canterfield Road and Forelock Drive
Belmont Place Pavona Ridge
Blacksmith Wagonspoke
Canterfield Road Halter Lane, Hoof's Lane, Stable Drive, Trotter Lane, Pacer Trail
Caraway Bend Poppy Seed Run
Chaparral Lane Deer Lane
Charles Field Avedisian
Chenal Point Fontana Point
Cherryleaf Drive Pepperwood
Conestoga Settlers Ridge
Cornplanter Echo Hill
Crownpiece Drive Saddlebow Lane
Echo Hill Handsome Lake
Evening Sun Drive Setting Sun and Sunlight Drives
Evers Road At all intersections in the city except at its intersection with Huebner
Road
FM 471 (Grissom Road) Poss Road and Shadow Mist
FM 1517 (Eckhert Road) At all intersections in the city not otherwise controlled
Forelock Drive Stable Drive and Pacer Trail
Forest Bend Forest Haven
Forest Bend North Forest View
Forest Brook Forest Knoll and Forest Mill
Forest Crest North Forest Gate and Ponderosa
Forest Leaf Forest Grove
Forest Grove Forest Bend, Forest Court, Forest Gate, and Forest View
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/349
Forest Haven Forest Mont and Forest Leaf
Forest Ledge Forest Brook
Forest Meadow Evening Sun, Sunlight Drive, Forest Haven, Walking Gait Drive,
Saddlebow Lane, and Stirrup Lane
Forest Mont At all intersections in the city except at its intersections with Forest
Haven
Forest Pine Forest Wood
Forest Ridge Forest Way and Ernie Kovak
Forest Way At all intersections in the city except with its intersection with Forest
Ridge
Grass Hill Drive Pickering Drive, Mary Jamison, William Rancher Road
Grass Valley Drive At all intersections in the city except its intersections with Bandera
Road, Evers Road and Strawflower
Halter Lane Bridle Path
Handsome Lake Drive Long House Court
High Stepper Lane Checkrein Drive
Hoofs Lane Forelock Drive
Huebner Road At all intersections in the city except at its intersection with State
Highway 16 (Bandera Road), Timberhill, Millstream and Weathered
Post
Linkcrest Linklea, Linkmeadow, Linkview, and Linkside
Linkhaven Linkmeadow, Linkview, and Linkside
Linkway Lane At all intersections in the city except its intersections with Eckhert
Road
Lobo Lane Robin Drive and Bluebird Drive
Locker Lane Mike Nesmith
Loop 410 frontage road At all intersections in the city
Mill Stream Cades Cove
Parsley Hill Poppy Seed Run
Pavona Ridge Ellerby Point and Chenal Point
Pecan Acres Chenal Point
Poss Road Peachtree Drive and Cherryleaf Drive
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/349
Redbird Lane Deer Lane
Robin Drive Lobo Lane
Rue Francois At all intersections in the city except its intersection with Evers
Road and Bandera Road
Rue Liliane Rue Marielyne
Rue Marielyne Rue Des Amis
Rue Sophie Prosser Lane
Saddle Bow Trace Buckle and Horsewhip
Sawyer Road Mill Stream
Seneca Drive Cornplanter Drive, Desert Sun, Edinborough, Mary Jamison,
Pickering Drive, Royal Sun, Sun Dial, Sun Hollow
Shadow Mist Avedisian
State Highway 16 At all intersections in the city not otherwise controlled
Stirrup Lane High Stepper Lane, Whithers Lane, Crownpiece Drive, and Forest
Pine
Strawflower Drive Grass Valley Drive
Sulky Lane Halter Lane
Sunlight Drive Evening Sun and Setting Sun Drives
Timberhill Drive Conestoga
Timco West Timco East
Walking Gait Drive High Stepper Lane, Whithers Lane, Crownpiece Drive, Trace
Buckle, and Horsewhip
Watercress Drive At all intersections in the city except at its intersection with
Wurzbach Road, Thistle Road, and Hurley Drive
Weathered Post General Store
William Rancher Road Kinman Drive, Rimkus Drive, and Seneca Drive
Wurzbach Road Watercress Drive
(b) The intersection of Bluebird Drive and Lobo Lane is hereby designated as a two-way stop, and stop signs will be located on each of these streets as they merge
into Bluebird Drive.
(c) The junction of Poss Road and Trotter Lane is hereby designated as a two-way stop, and stop signs will be located on each of these streets.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to enter such intersection without first coming to a full stop at such intersection or junction. Upon making a full stop thereat, the
driver of any such vehicle shall have the right-of-way over any other vehicle that has since arrived and stopped at such intersection, and if two or more vehicles arrive at
such intersection and stop simultaneously, the driver of the vehicle or vehicles on the right-hand, in relation to the other vehicles, shall have the right-of-way to proceed
first into or across such intersection, if said driver may proceed to enter said intersection without interference or collision with traffic using the different street or roadway.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.602; Ordinance 00-038, sec. 1, adopted 10/3/00; Ordinance 05-028, sec. 1, adopted 9/6/05; Ordinance 08-061 adopted 12/16/08; 2008 Code, sec.
12.02.112; Ordinance 2017-16, sec. 1, adopted 5/16/17; Ordinance 2018-75 adopted 9/18/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/349
Sec. 12.02.113 Three- and four-way stops
(a) The intersections formed by the following streets are hereby designated to be intersections at which both of the intersecting or joining streets are stop sign streets:
(1) Three-way stops:
Autumn Chase at Timberhill.
Forest Crest at Forest Way.
Forest Ridge at Forest Brook.
Huebner Road at Millstream.
Huebner Road at Weathered Post.
Linklea at Linkhaven.
Rue Francois at Mike Nesmith.
Stebbins Drive and Bluebird Lane.
Stebbins Drive at Chaparral Lane.
Stebbins Drive at Redbird Lane.
Thunderbird at Stebbins.
Watercress Road at Thistle.
(2) Four-way stops:
Blacksmith at Timberhill.
Evers Road at Forest Way/Seneca Drive.
Evers Road at Poss.
Forest Grove at Forest Crest.
Forest Way at Forest Bend.
Linkcrest at Linkwood.
Linkwood at Linkhaven.
Pavona Ridge at Chenal Point.
Rue Francois at Rue Marielyne.
Rue Francois at Rue Sophie.
Seneca at Rue Sophie.
Seneca Drive at Handsome Lake.
Timberhill Drive at Huebner Road.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to enter such intersections without first coming to a full stop at such intersection or junction. Upon making a full stop thereat, the
driver of any such vehicle shall have the right-of-way over any other vehicle that has since arrived and stopped at such intersection, and if two or more vehicles arrive at
such intersection and stop simultaneously, the driver of the vehicle or vehicles on the right-hand, in relation to the other vehicles, shall have the right-of-way to proceed
first into or across such intersection, if said driver may proceed to enter said intersection safely without interference or collision with traffic using the different street or
roadway.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.603; Ordinance 98-034 adopted 10/6/98; Ordinance 00-029, sec. 2, adopted 9/5/00; Ordinance 00-038, sec. 2, adopted 10/3/00; Ordinance 05-028,
sec. 2, adopted 9/6/05; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.113; Ordinance 2017-16, sec. 2, adopted 5/16/17)
Sec. 12.02.114 Signs declared official traffic-control devices
All stop sign traffic-control devices situated at the street intersections mentioned in this division bearing or including the word “STOP” in lettering plainly visible for a
distance of at least one hundred feet (100') along the street upon which such signs are situated are hereby established as, declared to be, and adopted as lawful and
official traffic-control devices requiring and giving notice to drivers to stop and otherwise conform to the provisions of this division. All of said stop sign traffic-control
devices situated at said street intersections conform to the manual and specifications for uniform traffic-control devices as adopted by the state department of
transportation. (1972 Code, sec. 26.604; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.114)
Secs. 12.02.115–12.02.140 Reserved
Division 5. Yield Intersections*
Sec. 12.02.141 Manner of stopping at yield sign
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any of the streets designated in this division as a yield sign street, and onto or across the intersection of any
such street, and any street hereafter designated as a through street, without first slowing down and yielding the right-of-way to traffic on such through street. Thereafter,
such driver shall proceed in a cautious manner, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles not so obliged to yield which are within the intersection or approaching so closely
thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, and then may proceed. (1972 Code, sec. 26.701; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.141)
State law references–Manner of stopping at yield sign, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.010; vehicle entering yield intersection, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.153.
Sec. 12.02.142 Locations
The following streets are designated as through streets at the intersections mentioned or referred to, and all streets mentioned or referred to which intersect, cross, or
form a junction with such designated through streets are designated as yield sign streets:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/349
Through Streets Yield Sign Streets
Cades Cove Mill Wheel and Cades Cove Circle
Cloverbend Wildfern
El Verde Road Jeff Loop (East) and (West)
Evening Sun Drive Sunview
Forest Crest Forest Park
Forest Moss Forest Rose and Forest Circle
Forest Park Forest Gate
Forest Wood Forest Moss
Horsewhip Walking Gait
Locker Lane Cammie Way
Pepperwood Cloverbend
Pickering Drive Kinman and Rimkus Drives
Rue Liliane Rue Sophie
Samaritan Drive Grass Hill Drive
Strawflower Drive Tealeaf Drive
Sunlight Drive Sunview and Tealeaf Drives
Thistle Drive Watercress Drive
Trone Trail Locker Lane and Rue Liliane
Trotter Lane Sulky Lane and Bridle Path
Watercress Drive Blackberry
(1972 Code, sec. 26.702; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.142; Ordinance 2018-75 adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. 12.02.143 Median crossovers and ramps on State Highway 16
All median crossovers on State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) within the city limits are hereby designated as yield sign streets and both the northbound and southbound
lanes of State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) are hereby designated as through streets, as such terms are defined in section 12.02.141. The ramp coming off westbound
State Highway 410 is hereby designated as a yield sign street at State Highway 16, which is hereby designated as a through street. (1972 Code, sec. 26.703; 2008
Code, sec. 12.02.143)
Secs. 12.02.144–12.02.170 Reserved
Division 6. One-Way Streets*
Sec. 12.02.171 Traffic movement
Upon those streets and parts of streets enumerated in this division, vehicular traffic shall move only in the direction indicated where signs indicating the direction of traffic
are erected and maintained at such intersections. (1972 Code, sec. 26.801; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.171)
Sec. 12.02.172 Locations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/349
The following streets are designated as one-way streets:
Street Extent Direction
Lobo Lane Robin Drive eastbound to Bluebird Drive Eastbound
Loop 410 southbound frontage road Northern boundary to southern boundary of city limits Southbound
Loop 410 northbound frontage road Southern boundary to northern boundary of city limits Northbound
Robin Drive All inclusive Southbound
State Highway 16 northbound lane Southern boundary to northern boundary of city limits Northbound
State Highway 16 southbound lane Northern boundary to southern boundary of city limits Southbound
Hodges Street All inclusive Northeast bound
Althea Drive All inclusive Northeast bound
(1972 Code, sec. 26.802; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.172; Ordinance 16-043, sec. 1, adopted 11/1/16; Ordinance 2017-7 adopted 4/4/17)
Sec. 12.02.173 Signs declared official traffic-control devices
All one-way traffic-control devices situated at each intersection designated in this division bearing or including the word “one-way” in lettering plainly visible for a distance
of at least one hundred feet (100') along the street upon which a sign is situated are hereby established as and declared to be and adopted as lawful and official trafficcontrol
devices requiring and giving notice to the drivers of all vehicles to conform to the provisions of this division. (1972 Code, sec. 26.803; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.173)
Secs. 12.02.174–12.02.200 Reserved
Division 7. Speed Limits*
Sec. 12.02.201 Maximum speed generally
As the result of traffic and engineering surveys heretofore conducted by and/or for the city police department as to each of the streets and thoroughfares within the city
limits, without any exception whatsoever other than those state highways and city streets referred to specifically in this division, the prima facie maximum reasonable or
prudent speed limit on all streets and public thoroughfares in the city shall be thirty (30) miles per hour, with the further exception that, on all streets and public ways
adjacent to or within 0.20 of one mile of any school, public, private or parochial, the prima facie maximum reasonable or prudent limit shall be twenty (20) miles per hour
when signed as a school zone. (Ordinance 11-013 adopted 8/2/11; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.201)
Sec. 12.02.202 Speed limit on alleys and easements
It shall hereafter be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle in any public alley, utility easement or other public easement within the city at a speed greater than fifteen (15)
miles per hour. (Ordinance 11-013 adopted 8/2/11; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.202)
Sec. 12.02.203 Speed limits on specific streets
(a) Interstate Highway 410 and frontage roads. As a result of traffic and engineering surveys heretofore conducted by and/or for the state department of
transportation, in accordance with its “Procedure for Establishing Speed Zones,” it is determined that the prima facie maximum and minimum speed limits which are
reasonable and prudent on Interstate Highway 410 within the city are as follows: The maximum prima facie speed limit on the main lanes of Interstate Highway 410 is
hereby established at sixty-five (65) miles per hour; the minimum prima facie speed limit on said main lanes is hereby established at forty-five (45) miles per hour; the
maximum prima facie speed limit on all frontage and connector roads which are a part of said highway shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(b) State Highway 16 and Spur 421. As the result of traffic and engineering surveys heretofore conducted by and/or for the state department of transportation, in
accordance with its “Procedure for Establishing Speed Zones,” it is determined that the prima facie maximum speed limits and speed zones for motor vehicles on State
Highway 16 and Spur 421 within the city shall be as follows:
(1) The maximum lawful speed limit on both the northwest- and southeast-bound lanes of State Highway 16 from the northwest city limits southeasterly to
Interstate Highway 410 is hereby fixed at forty-five (45) miles per hour; and
(2) The maximum lawful speed limit on both the southeast- and northeast-bound lanes of Spur 421 from the intersection of Interstate Highway 410
southeasterly to the southeast city limits is hereby fixed at forty-five (45) miles per hour.
(c) Farm-to-Market Highway 471 (Grissom Road). As the result of traffic and engineering surveys heretofore conducted by and/or for the state department of
transportation, in accordance with its “Procedure for Establishing Speed Zones,” it is determined that the prima facie maximum lawful speed limit on Grissom Road, also
known as Farm-to-Market Highway No. 471, within the corporate limits of the city shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour from the west city limits line on said highway to
State Highway 16 (Bandera Road).
(d) Huebner Road east of State Highway 16. As a result of a traffic survey heretofore conducted by the city police department on Huebner Road east of State Highway
16, within the city limits, the prima facie maximum reasonable or prudent speed limit thereon is fixed at thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
(e) Wurzbach Road. As a result of a traffic survey heretofore conducted by the city police department on Wurzbach, within the city limits, the prima facie maximum
reasonable or prudent speed limit thereon is fixed at forty (40) miles per hour.
(f) Monte Robles Subdivision. As the result of a traffic survey heretofore conducted by the city police department as to each of the streets, Bluebird Lane, Chaparral,
Deer Lane, Lobo Lane, Redbird Drive, Robin Road, Stebbins, and Thunderbird Drive, within the Monte Robles Subdivision, the prima facie maximum reasonable or
prudent speed limit on all streets shall be twenty (20) miles per hour.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/349
(g) S. R. Hodges Subdivision. As the result of a traffic survey heretofore conducted by the city police department as to each of the streets, Hodges and Althea, within
the S. R. Hodges Subdivision, the prima facie maximum reasonable or prudent speed limit on all streets shall be twenty (20) miles per hour.
(Ordinance 11-013 adopted 8/2/11; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.203; Ordinance 16-043, sec. 2, adopted 11/1/16)
Secs. 12.02.204–12.02.230 Reserved
Division 8. School Crossing Zones
Sec. 12.02.231 Designated
The following school crossing zones and speed limits therefor are hereby designated in the city:
(1) Forest Ridge from a point three hundred feet (300') northwest from a point in the center of the intersection of Forest Ridge and Ernie Kovak to the
center of the intersection of Forest Way and Forest Park, on Forest Way one hundred sixty feet (160') from the southwest terminus of Forest Way at Forest
Ridge, on Forest Park one hundred thirty feet (130') from the southwest terminus of Forest Park at Forest Ridge, and on Ernie Kovak from the southwest
terminus of Ernie Kovak to the city limit thereof, when signed as a school zone, shall have a prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limit of twenty (20)
miles per hour.
(2) Huebner Road from a point fifty feet (50') east of a point on the east right-of-way of Hoofs Lane where it joins the south right-of-way of Huebner Road,
five hundred eighty feet (580') easterly therefrom along Huebner Road, when signed as a school zone, shall have a maximum prima facie reasonable and
prudent speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(3) Huebner Road at the main entrance driveway of Leon Valley Elementary School, 7111 Huebner Road, from a point five hundred feet (500') in each
direction on Huebner Road from a point in the center of the intersecting point of Huebner Road and such main entrance driveway of said school, when signed
as a school zone, shall have a maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour.
(4) Evers Road at Canterfield Road from a point five hundred feet (500') in each direction on Evers Road from a point in the center of the intersection of
Evers Road with Canterfield Road, when signed as a school zone, shall have a maximum prima facie reasonable and prudent speed limit of twenty (20) miles
per hour.
(Ordinance 98-033 adopted 10/6/98; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.231)
Sec. 12.02.232 Driving through zone when pedestrians are present
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle or other vehicle into or through any school crossing zone at a time when there is a pedestrian or
pedestrians within same on any school day (regular, special, or summer) between the hours 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., or at any
time when a zone is designated as in effect through the use of flashing lights. (1972 Code, sec. 26.403; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.232)
Sec. 12.02.233 Appointment and duties of school crossing guards
(a) Positions created. There is hereby created the position of school crossing guard, and the council, by ordinance or resolution, may hereafter establish the number
of positions and appoint as many guards above the age of twenty-one (21), and of good moral character, to such positions as may be needed from time to time and as
allowed under Local Government Code chapter 343, Municipal Provision of School Crossing Guards.
(b) Duties. Such school crossing guards shall, when on duty, serve at school crossing zones at times and places heretofore or hereafter designated by ordinances
establishing such school zones and regulating same, and according to schedules and assignments prepared by the chief of police and under his supervision and control.
Such school crossing guards shall have no powers of arrest, but shall take the license number of any motorist who shall violate any traffic ordinance of the city in their
presence, or who shall fail to obey their signals to stop or start their vehicles at, in or near such school crossing zones, and they shall report the same to the chief of
police.
(c) Obedience. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor or other vehicle to fail to stop or to start up again when ordered to do so by a school crossing guard.
(d) Penalty. Each violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 06-043 adopted 10/3/06; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.233; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law references–Training of school crossing guard, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 600.004; municipal provision of school crossing guards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
ch. 343.
Sec. 12.02.234 Obedience to school crossing guards
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle or other vehicle to fail to stop when ordered to do so by a school crossing guard on duty on a school day between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. School crossing guards shall have no powers to arrest, but shall take the license number of any motorist who shall violate any
provision of this division in their presence, or who fail to obey their signals to stop or start their vehicles in or near any school crossing zone at the times set out above,
and report same to the police department. (1972 Code, sec. 26.404; 2008 Code, sec. 12.02.234)
State law reference–Obedience to lawful order or direction of police officer or school crossing guard, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 542.501.
ARTICLE 12.03 PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Presumption that vehicle owner is responsible for violation
When any person is charged with having parked or left standing a vehicle on any street in the city at a place on said street where parking of vehicles is prohibited, or with
parking such vehicle on said street in a manner which violates the manner of parking of a vehicle as designated, or with parking such vehicle for a length of time in
excess of that allowed in the space where said vehicle was parked, proof that said vehicle was, at the date of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the
offense, shall constitute prima facie evidence that said vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged by said owner, but the owner shall have the right to
introduce evidence to show that said vehicle was not parked by him as charged in the complaint. (1972 Code, sec. 26.905; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.001)
State law reference–Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.308.
Sec. 12.03.002 Parking damaged or junked vehicle on street or right-of-way
No wrecked, damaged, junked or broken down automobile vehicle of any kind shall ever be parked, placed or left in any street, alley, or public right-of-way within the city
at any time. (1972 Code, sec. 26.901(A); 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.002)
State law reference–Junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 683.071 et seq.
Sec. 12.03.003 Parking for longer than 48 hours; parking for certain purposes prohibited; parking of trailers or campers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/349
It shall be unlawful for any person to park unused vehicles of any kind in any street or public place for more than forty-eight (48) hours, or at any time for the purpose of
storage, washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle (except repairs necessitated by emergency), sale, or display of advertising signs or posters fixed to such vehicle, or
any trailer, semitrailer, horse trailer, or boat trailer not attached to a tractor or towing vehicle, or any auto-bus, motor home or camper. (1972 Code, sec. 26.901(B); 2008
Code, sec. 12.03.003)
Sec. 12.03.004 Blocking driveway
No automotive vehicle shall be parked in any manner which will block or impede free vehicular ingress and egress to all public and private driveways opening into any
street, alley, or public right-of-way in the city. (1972 Code, sec. 26.901(C); 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.004)
Sec. 12.03.005 Towing of illegally parked vehicles
The city may have any vehicle illegally parked under this article for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours towed away and impounded and keep same until the
owner, or his agent, pays all towing and storage charges and all fines and court costs adjudged against said owner (or his agent) in connection with such parking
offense. (1972 Code, sec. 26.901(D); 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.005)
Sec. 12.03.006 Parking restrictions on specific streets
The following provisions shall apply unless a permit is obtained in accordance with division 3 of this article, in which case this section shall not apply during the days
such permit is in effect:
Adair Drive. The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the north curbline of Adair Drive eighty-five feet (85') west of the
west curbline of Evers Road is prohibited.
Bluebird Drive.
(1) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, in or on both sides of Bluebird Drive starting at
Lobo Lane south to Stebbins Drive is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
(2) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on both sides of Bluebird Drive starting at Stebbins Drive
east to Deer Lane is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
Chaparral Lane.
(1) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on both sides of Chaparral Lane starting at Deer Lane
southeast to Huebner Road is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
(2) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on the north side of Chaparral Lane starting at Stebbins
Drive southeast to Deer Lane is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
(3) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on the south side of Chaparral Lane starting at a point
400 feet southeast of Stebbins Drive to Deer Lane is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
(4) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on the south side of Chaparral Lane starting at Stebbins
Drive to a point 400 feet southeast of Stebbins Drive is prohibited between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and same shall be
considered a tow-away zone.
Deer Lane. The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on both sides of Deer Lane starting at Thunderbird Drive
northeast to Bluebird Drive is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
El Verde Road. The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any part of the right-of-way of El Verde Road, from its junction
with Bandera Road west to its junction with Jeff Loop, is hereby prohibited. Also, all parking, standing or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon
any part of the right-of-way of Jeff Loop from its junction with El Verde Road south, a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150'), is likewise prohibited.
Evers Road. The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, upon the paved or main-traveled part of Evers Road from
the south city limits north to Huebner Road is prohibited.
Forest Grove. The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, at or on the west curbline of Forest Grove, between
Forest Way and Forest View, is prohibited.
Forest Meadow.
(1) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, in the 6700 block of Forest Meadow in the city is
prohibited. The 6700 block of said street is defined to be that part thereof extending west from the intersection of said street with Sunlight to the terminus or
dead-end of Forest Meadow. The prohibition includes both sides of said street together with the end thereof.
(2) The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the Forest Oaks Apartments side of the 6900 block of Forest
Meadow from their entry drive east to the first head-in parking on Forest Haven is prohibited.
Forest Way. The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, in or on the north side of Forest Way, Lots 5, 6, and 7,
Block 17 (known as 6939 Forest Way, 6943 Forest Way, and 7003 Forest Way, respectively) and Lots 6 and 7, Block 13 (known as 6742 Forest Haven and 6527 Forest
Grove) is prohibited.
Hurley Drive. The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle, at any time, at, on, or in that portion of the street in the city known as Hurley Drive, for the full
length of Hurley Drive, is prohibited.
Lobo Lane. The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, in or on both sides of Lobo Lane starting at
Thunderbird Drive east to Bluebird Drive is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
North Interstate Highway 410 frontage road. The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of
the North Interstate Highway 410 frontage road between State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) and the west city limits is prohibited.
Poss Road.
(1) The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the north side of Poss Road, except in designated areas, from
its intersection with Evers Road to its intersection with Peachtree Drive is prohibited.
(2) The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, at, in, or on both sides of Poss Road from its
intersection with Bandera Road to its intersection with Evers Road is hereby prohibited. An exception to this provision is provided to the police department,
through the direction of the chief of police, to regulate parking along the roadway during special events sanctioned or sponsored by the city.
Redbird Lane. The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on both sides of Redbird Lane starting at Stebbins Drive
southeast to Huebner Road is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/349
Sawyer Road. The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any portion of the right-of-way for the east one thousand eightynine
(1089') feet from the intersection of Bandera Road, is prohibited.
Seneca. The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, between Rue Sophie and Sun Hollow on the north
curbline of Seneca is prohibited.
South Interstate Highway 410 frontage road. The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of
the South Interstate Highway 410 frontage road between State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) and the east city limits is prohibited.
State Highway 16.
(1) The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle at any time in or on the median of State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) is prohibited.
(2) The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon both sides of State Highway 16 (Bandera Road) from its
intersection with the North Interstate Highway 410 frontage road to its intersection with Wurzbach Road is prohibited.
(3) The parking, standing or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, upon the paved or main traveled part of State Highway
16 (also known as Bandera Road) from Wurzbach Road northwesterly to the northwest city limits is prohibited.
State Spur 421 (Bandera Road).
(1) The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle, at any time, at, in, or on both sides of State Spur 421 (also known as Bandera Road) closer
than twelve feet (12') to the paved edge, from Hodges Drive northwesterly along said Spur 421 to Northwest Industrial Drive, a distance of 0.46 miles, is
prohibited.
(2) The parking, standing, or stopping of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, upon the paved or main traveled part of State Spur 421
(also known as Bandera Road) from the north right-of-way line of Interstate Highway 410 southward to the southeast city limits is prohibited.
Stebbins Drive. The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on both sides of Stebbins Drive starting at Thunderbird
Drive north to Bluebird Drive is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
Thunderbird Drive.
(1) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, in or on both sides of Thunderbird Drive starting at
Stebbins Drive north to Lobo Lane is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
(2) The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in or on both sides of Thunderbird Drive starting at Stebbins
Drive southeast to Deer Lane is prohibited, and same shall be considered a tow-away zone.
Wurzbach Road. The parking, standing or stopping of any motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, at any time, upon both sides of Wurzbach Road within the city
limit boundaries is prohibited.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.902; Ordinance 01-028 adopted 9/18/01; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.006; Ordinance 2017-9 adopted 4/4/17)
Sec. 12.03.007 Parking at bus stops
(a) The parking, standing, or stopping of any motor vehicle, at any time, on or in that position of Huebner Road set aside for VIA bus stops on both sides thereof, at
the places hereinafter described, is prohibited:
(1) On the north side of said street beginning at a point three hundred feet (300') east from its intersection with Bandera Road east for a distance of one
hundred feet (100').
(2) On the south side of said street beginning 165 feet east from its intersection with Bandera Road east for a distance of one hundred feet (100').
The provisions of subsection (b) providing for “No Parking” signs are hereby adopted for the purpose of this subsection.
(b) All traffic-control devices situated on the streets and thoroughfares set out in subsection (a) of this section bearing or including the words “No Parking,” in lettering
plainly visible for a distance of one hundred feet (100'), set along the street upon which such signs are situated, are hereby adopted as official traffic-control devices.
(1972 Code, secs. 26.903, 26.904; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.007)
Sec. 12.03.008 Parking of large trucks in residential districts or school zones
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any truck-tractor, truck, bus-trailer, semitrailer, or pole trailer having a rated capacity in excess of one (1)
ton according to the manufacturer's classification, or which is more than eighteen feet (18') in length, or seven feet (7') in width, or seven feet (7') in height, to park the
same upon any street within the following residential districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 according to the zoning regulations of the city code, between the hours of 5
o'clock p.m. and 7 o'clock a.m., or during school hours in school zones when school is in session; provided, however, this section shall not apply to the parking of said
vehicles for such time as is actually necessary to load or unload passengers, freight or merchandise. (1972 Code, sec. 26.906; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.008)
Sec. 12.03.009 Parking spaces for the disabled
(a) This section shall apply in the R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, B-1, B-2, B-3 and I-1 zoning districts.
(b) This section shall not apply to any property with fewer then twenty (20) parking spaces.
(c) This section shall require one (1) designated and marked space for each forty-nine (49) public parking spaces or portion thereof required for the building or
property in question. One (1) such space shall also be provided for a property with not less than twenty (20) nor more than forty-nine (49) regular parking spaces.
(d) A property owner or other person controlling any property in the city to which the above regulations are applicable commits an offense hereunder if such person
does not fully comply therewith for the purpose of providing parking spaces for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled person and parks
a vehicle with a handicapped person's special device or displaying a disabled person identification card in a parking space or parking area designated specifically for the
disabled.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person is neither temporarily nor permanently disabled and parks a vehicle in a parking space or parking area designated
specifically for the disabled.
(g) A peace officer or a person designated by the city to enforce parking regulations may file charges against a person who commits an offense under this section at a
parking space or parking area designated specifically for the temporarily or permanently disabled by the city or a private property owner as required above.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.907; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.009)
State law reference–Privileged parking for persons with disabilities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 681.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/349
Secs. 12.03.010–12.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Parking in Residential Areas
Sec. 12.03.051 Definitions
Whenever the following terms are used in this division, they shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them as follows:
Driveway. Shall be given its commonly understood meaning.
Front yard/side yard. Are defined in section 15.02.052.
Parked. Shall be given its commonly understood meaning.
Vehicle. As defined in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 541.
(1972 Code, sec. 14.701; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.051)
Sec. 12.03.052 Parking in front or side yard
(a) No vehicle whatsoever shall be parked in the front yard or side yard of any property zoned R-1, R-2, R-4, or R-6, except in the driveway thereof, in a garage or in a
carport. This section does not apply to vehicles when they are in the process of loading or unloading property or to street parking regulations as defined in other parts of
this chapter or code.
(b) Each violation of this section shall be punished by a penalty of a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1972 Code, secs. 14.702, 14.702.1; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.052; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 12.03.053 Parking on vacant lots
(a) No vehicle whatsoever, as defined in section 12.01.001 of this code, shall be parked on any vacant lot under any circumstances except as follows:
(1) Such vehicle or vehicles must be confined to the rear one-third of such vacant lot;
(2) Such vehicle or vehicles located on the one-third of such vacant lot must be completely screened from view on all four (4) sides by permanent fencing
to a height of six feet (6').
(b) Each violation of this section shall be punished by a penalty of a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1972 Code, secs. 14.703, 14.703.1; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.053; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 12.03.054–12.03.090 Reserved
Division 3. Permit for Temporary Parking in No Parking Zone
Sec. 12.03.091 Purpose
(a) It is hereby determined that under certain circumstances it may be appropriate to make temporary provisions for parking in a residential no parking zone as
determined under section 12.03.006, with due consideration to safety, congestion, traffic redirection and engineering design of any streets involved.
(b) An application may be made once every six months under this division for a permit allowing for parking on streets which are normally designated as no parking
zones, for special events, such permits being temporary and finite in nature, for the duration for which special provisions have been arranged for the safety of those
traversing the specific location and/or streets for which the permit is issued.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1400; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.091)
Sec. 12.03.092 Application
(a) Filing. A person seeking issuance of a parking permit shall file an application with the chief of police not less than seven (7) days, nor more than sixty (60) days,
before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the special event.
(b) Contents. The application for a parking permit shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such special event;
(2) If the event is proposed to be conducted for or on behalf of or by an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of the
organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization;
(3) The date when the special event is to be conducted;
(4) The approximate number of persons who will attend;
(5) The hours when such special event will start and terminate;
(6) The location by streets of any designated no parking zone which may be affected by such permit, considering proximity and number of guests
approximated to be in attendance; and
(7) Any additional information which the chief of police or city engineer shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
be issued.
(c) Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than
seven (7) days before the date such special event is proposed to be conducted.
(d) Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parking permit a fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance
from time to time.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1401; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.092; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 12.03.093 Standards for issuance
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder upon approval of the city engineer when:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/349
(1) From a consideration of the application and other information as may otherwise be obtained, the chief of police finds that:
(A) The issuance of such permit will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to the designated area, and
the area affected does not include any of the following routes, due to the safety issues created by congestion and heavy traffic flow: Highway 16
(Bandera Road), FM 471 (Grissom Road), Evers Road, Wurzbach Road, and Huebner Road east of Highway 16;
(B) The issuance of such permit will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the areas contiguous
thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city, such number to be determined by the chief of police;
(C) The issuance of such permit will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to any
portion of the city;
(D) The issuance of such permit will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire; and
(E) The issuance of such permit is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a
disturbance.
(2) From a consideration of the application and other information as may otherwise be obtained, the city engineer finds that traffic can safely be diverted to
other routes without overloading the design and safety standards for which those streets were intended.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1402; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.093)
Sec. 12.03.094 Notice to city officials
Immediately upon the issuance of a parking permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the city manager and fire chief. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1403; 2008
Code, sec. 12.03.094)
Sec. 12.03.095 Contents
Each parking permit shall state the following information:
(1) Date;
(2) Starting time;
(3) Ending time;
(4) The portions of the streets to be affected by such permit;
(5) Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this division; and
(6) A statement that issuance of such permit shall not be considered to be an endorsement of such event.
(1972 Code, sec. 26.1404; 2008 Code, sec. 12.03.095)
Sec. 12.03.096 Duties of permittee
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1405; 2008 Code, sec.
12.03.096)
Sec. 12.03.097 Hiring of police officers to direct traffic
Due to the inherent risks involved regarding traffic and other safety issues, both as to attendees and residents, all permit holders shall be required to hire city police
officers, at a number to be determined by the chief of police, dependent upon the specific visibility issues of street(s) involved, the width of the street(s) involved, the
number of guests and/or anticipated vehicles, and other safety concerns determined appropriate by the chief of police. Under no circumstances shall these officers be
considered to be security for the event or for the vehicles of the attendees, but shall be hired for traffic direction purposes only. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1406; 2008 Code,
sec. 12.03.097)
ARTICLE 12.04 TRUCK TRAFFIC*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 12.04.001–12.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Through Truck Traffic
Sec. 12.04.031 Definitions
For the purposes of this division:
Through truck traffic. For the purposes of this division, and with reference to the streets mentioned in section 12.04.032, is defined as the driving or entry of a truck onto
the same at any point and the proceeding of such truck upon and along the same, and the leaving of the same by such truck at any point, unless the person driving or
operating such truck has occasion to and does bring such truck to a stop at some point, place or location upon the same for the purpose of loading or unloading such
truck, or for the purpose of rendering a service at such point, place or location in connection with the business for which such truck is used.
Truck. Any and every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
(1972 Code, secs. 26.1302, 26.1303; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.031)
Sec. 12.04.032 Through truck traffic prohibited on certain streets
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, directly or through an agent, servant or employee, to use or permit the use for through truck traffic, as herein
defined, of any of the following designated streets in the city: Aids Drive; Althea Drive; Ardisana Avenue; Balky Street; Blackberry Drive; Bluebird Lane (from Stebbins to
Deer Lane); Canterfield Road; Caraway Bend; Chaparral Lane; Cherry Leaf Street; Daughtry Drive; Deer Lane; Echo Hill; El Verde Road; Forest Bend North; Grass
Valley Drive; Hodges Drive; Huebner Road (west of State Highway 16/Bandera Road); Forest Leaf; Forest Meadow; Forest Moss; Forest Pine; Hoofs Lane; Hurley
Drive; Locker Lane; Linkcrest Drive; Linkhaven Drive; Linkway Drive; Linkwood Street; Mill Stream; Peachtree Street; Poss Road (from Bandera Road to Trotter Lane);
Redbird Lane; Parsley Hill; Rue Francois; Samaritan Drive; Sawyer Road; Seneca Drive; Stebbins Drive; Sulky Lane; Thistle Drive; Thunderbird Drive (from Stebbins to
Chaparral); Timberhill (from Huebner Road to Blacksmith Lane; Watercrest Drive; and William Rancher Road. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1301; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.032;
Ordinance 2017-36, sec. 2, adopted 7/18/17; Ordinance 2018-64 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 12.04.033 Weight limits
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/349
(a) Weight limits. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck on any public street or right-of-way in the city, other than on state highways, which has a
gross weight in excess of 33,000 pounds and is designed as a class 8 or higher, unless permitted by the city to do so.
(1) In the event a permit is required, an indemnity bond may be required to be posted with the city to cover possible damage to its streets, bridges, water
crossings, culverts or drainage easements, which may be damaged by the moving of said excessive weight loads over and along these streets.
(2) The indemnity bond of no less than $50,000.00 shall remain in force and effect for ninety (90) days from the initial execution date of the permit. The
amount of the bond shall be determined by guidelines established by the city manager with reasonable consideration of the type of vehicle, the amount of
excess weight, the distance to be traveled on the streets and the condition of the streets to be traveled.
(b) Oversize/overweight permit.
(1) A permit may be issued under the direction of the city manager, or designee, for the travel of trucks over city streets within the city with loads in excess
of the load limits provided in subsection (a) above, but only when it is impossible or impractical to reduce the weight of the load or use a truck capable of
hauling the load within the prescribed limit.
(2) Such permit shall be issued for a maximum period of ninety (90) days. The city manager shall determine route of travel of said truck and the amount of
the bond, if any, but the amount shall not be less than $50,000.00. The permit shall specify the date of the trip, the license plate number of the truck and the
route of travel. A permit fee of $500.00 for the issuance of the permit shall be paid to the city by the applicant prior to issuance.
(c) Loading/unloading. In the event that a truck must completely or partially load and/or unload at a point which is in conflict with this section, the truck may proceed to
and from such points of loading and/or unloading, providing that the truck follows the shortest route from a designated truck route to and from each point of loading or
unloading or otherwise as may be specified by the city manager.
(d) Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit:
(1) The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city.
(2) The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, or contracted by the city, upon any street in the city.
(e) Enforcement of section; weighing.
(1) The city shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out streets upon which truck traffic is not permitted. The maps shall be kept on file at the city
hall and police department and shall be made available to the public. Class 8 or higher trucks are prohibited from traveling along the following streets:
(A) Sawyer Road.
(B) Althea Drive.
(C) Hodges Street.
(D) El Verde Road.
(E) Samaritan Drive.
(F) William Rancher Road.
(G) Aids Drive.
(H) Thunderbird Drive, from Stebbins to Chaparral.
(I) Stebbins Drive.
(J) Deer Lane.
(K) Redbird Lane.
(L) Bluebird Lane, from Stebbins Drive to Deer Lane.
(M) Chaparral Drive.
(2) The chief of police, or designee, shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of a truck on any of the streets in subsection (e)(1),
to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this section has been complied with.
(A) Upon such weighing, if it is determined that the truck so weighed is in excess of the load limit, then the cost of such weighing shall be immediately
due and payable by the operator of such truck and such truck may be lawfully detained by the police department until such charge has been paid.
(B) In the event that the weight of such truck is not in excess of the load limit, any charges for weighing shall be paid by the city.
(C) Any charge for weighing under the terms of this section shall be in addition to any fine imposed for a violation of its provisions.
(f) Penalty. A person violating any provision of this section shall be found guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) upon conviction.
(Ordinance 2017-36, sec. 3, adopted 7/18/17)
Secs. 12.04.034–12.04.070 Reserved
Division 3. Nonradioactive Hazardous Material Route
Sec. 12.04.071 Definitions
City. The City of Leon Valley and that physical area within the corporate boundaries of the City of Leon Valley.
County terminal. A business or other location within the boundaries of the county in which the business or location serves as a point of origination or receipt for
shipments of nonradioactive hazardous materials (NRHM).
Local delivery. Regulated material(s) transportation that originates in the county, which is bound for delivery in the county, or both.
Nonradioactive hazardous materials. Those nonradioactive materials classified as hazardous by the United States government through the Secretary of Transportation
pursuant to his or her authority under 49 U.S.C.A. section 1801 et seq. (1976).
Nonradioactive hazardous materials transportation. Motor vehicle transportation of nonradioactive hazardous materials in such quantities that the vehicle is required to
carry and exhibit placards pursuant to title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), part 172.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/349
Nonradioactive hazardous materials vehicle. A vehicle transporting regulated materials and subject to provisions and regulations of this division.
Regulated materials. Nonradioactive hazardous materials of the character regulated by this division and affected by this local nonradioactive hazardous materials route
regulation.
Requiring placards (when used to describe a vehicle). Any vehicle transporting hazardous materials in sufficient quantity to require placarding as set forth in the United
States Department of Transportation hazardous materials regulations, 49 U.S.C.A. section 1801 et seq. (1976).
Through traffic transportation. Transportation of regulated material(s) that originates outside of the county and involves no deliveries or pickups in the county.
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.071)
Sec. 12.04.072 Enforcement; penalty
(a) Violations of any of the provisions of this division shall constitute an offense punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code, to the extent
such violation may pose a fire or public health threat in accordance with Local Government Code section 54.001(b).
(b) Both officers of the fire department having citation authority under the laws of the state, and officers of the police department, are expressly authorized to enforce
the provisions of this division, as are other peace officers with jurisdiction to enforce the laws and ordinances of the city and state on public roadways within the city.
(c) This city shall be entitled to pursue all remedies, at law and in equity, including but not limited to injunctive relief, with attendant civil penalties as may be provided
under state statute, which remedies shall be cumulative of the criminal laws, none of which shall be mutually exclusive of the other.
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.072; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 12.04.073 Transport of regulated materials generally
No person shall transport, contract, or arrange or participate in the transport, contract, or arrangement to transport nonradioactive hazardous materials within the
corporate boundaries of the city unless their destination or point of departure is a county terminal and unless such transport is conducted in compliance with this division.
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.073)
Sec. 12.04.074 Permissible routes for local delivery
(a) When any NRHM vehicle (truck, trailer, motor vehicle, or any other vehicle) is carrying nonradioactive hazardous material to commercial consumers, domestic
consumers, gasoline service stations, bulk stations or other points of origin or destination located within the corporate limits of the city, the carrier must use the safest
route available by the best use of the highest classification roadways.
(b) For purposes of local delivery, classification of roadways from highest to lowest are as follows: interstate highway, U.S. highway, state highway, loop, FM road,
spur, major arterial street, minor arterial street, collector street, local street.
(c) For purposes of local delivery, the public health and safety reason for use of highest classification roadways is to reduce the risk and severity of potential harm to
persons and property that may result from a spill of regulated or hazardous material.
(d) The designated local delivery route is State Highway 16 (Bandera Road).
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.074)
Sec. 12.04.075 Permissible routes for through traffic
(a) The prohibition of section 12.04.073, pertaining to unlawful routing of regulated materials, shall not apply if the nonradioactive hazardous materials are transported
on the following permissive roadways. It shall be prohibited and unlawful for through traffic transportation of nonradioactive hazardous materials to be performed on any
routes within the city except IH 410.
(b) All provisions of this division pertaining to necessity for placarding of vehicles transporting regulated materials shall apply to transport of all such materials in the
city, regardless of route.
(c) It shall be an affirmative defense to a departure from the permissible route that the vehicle in question is immediately and directly destined for a location providing
food, fuel, rest, safe haven, or repair. NRHM vehicles are allowed to use the access, frontage, and intersecting roadways as needed to enter and leave the location
providing food, fuel, rest, safe haven, or repair.
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.075)
Sec. 12.04.076 Burden of proof to demonstrate best use of highest classification roadways
(a) It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to transport, arrange, or contract, or participate in transport, arrangement or contract, for transportation of local delivery
of nonradioactive hazardous materials, which transport is performed on any street or roadway within the jurisdiction of the city which route is not based on the best use
of highest classification roadways. It shall be the affirmative duty of any person so engaged in transport, arrangement or contract for transport of regulated materials to
determine, devise, and restrict local delivery to such restricted route for benefit of the public health, safety, and welfare. The affirmative duty includes an obligation to
make best use of highest classification roadways.
(b) Within the context of this section, “best use” of the highest classification roadway requires the responsible person to use a route that protects neighborhoods and
the traveling public from nuisance, inconvenience, or disturbance of normal sensibilities of any person, as well as minimizes exposure of neighborhoods and traveling
public to risks inherent in NRHM transport. The reason for such affirmative duty is that, by federal regulatory definition, NRHM is material which has been determined to
pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety, or property. Such unreasonable risk places a burden of proof on the responsible person to demonstrate best use of the
highest classification roadway.
(c) A formal complaint, properly drawn and corroborated as may be required by law, shall create a rebuttable presumption that the responsible person violated the
best use standard for highest classification roadway transportation or delivery of NRHM.
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.076)
Sec. 12.04.077 Empty vehicles
(a) The placarding requirements of this division shall not apply to an empty vehicle that has been used previously to transport regulated materials, provided the vehicle
meets the requisites of subsection (b) below.
(b) A vehicle that has transported nonradioactive hazardous materials in bulk packaging or in any other type of container and is required to be placarded pursuant to
title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, part 172, must and shall remain placarded when it is empty unless it is:
(1) Sufficiently cleaned of residue and purged of vapors to remove any potential hazard; or
(2) Refilled with a material requiring different placards or no placards, to such an extent that any residue remaining in the packaging is no longer
hazardous.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/349
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.077)
Sec. 12.04.078 Placards required; inspection of vehicle by operator
The operator of a vehicle used to transport hazardous materials requiring placards shall apply and display appropriate placards meeting United States Department of
Transportation specifications on each end and each side of the vehicle and, before operation, inspect the vehicle to determine that:
(1) The brakes and tires are in good working condition;
(2) The steering mechanism is in good working condition;
(3) The electrical wiring is well insulated and firmly secured; and
(4) The vehicle is in a condition adequate to safely transport hazardous materials.
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.078)
Sec. 12.04.079 Failure to display placards
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to transport or be responsible for arrangement or contract for an arrangement for the transport of nonradioactive materials
when such materials are not properly placarded in accordance with state and federal regulations and in accordance with section 12.04.078. (Ordinance 02-013 adopted
5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.079)
Sec. 12.04.080 Authority of police department to temporarily prohibit or redirect vehicles
(a) The police department may temporarily suspend the operation of some or any vehicles carrying regulated nonradioactive hazardous materials, without notice,
whenever road, weather, traffic, or other exigent circumstances warrant such action.
(b) The police department may redirect through traffic vehicles carrying regulated nonradioactive hazardous materials onto any highway or roadway, public or private,
when the through traffic route is blocked for any reason, and/or in response to any exigent circumstance, which police direction for benefit of public safety shall have
authority of law.
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.080)
Sec. 12.04.081 Parking of transport vehicles
No vehicle transporting regulated nonradioactive hazardous materials may park or stand at any location within the city except for purposes of loading or unloading, with
the following exceptions:
(1) Vehicles parked in designated truck parking areas of locations providing food, fuel, rest, safe haven, or repair; and
(2) Vehicles parked in the parking areas of businesses engaged in the transportation, storage, or production of hazardous materials.
(Ordinance 02-013 adopted 5/7/02; 2008 Code, sec. 12.04.081)
ARTICLE 12.05 GOLF CARTS
Sec. 12.05.001 Definitions
Golf cart. A motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for transporting persons on a golf course. (Ordinance 10-044 adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, sec.
12.05.001)
Sec. 12.05.002 Restrictions on operation; required equipment
(a) The golf cart must be operated by an individual with a valid commercial driver's license and who is insured to operate the golf cart. The golf cart must be used
primarily to transport property in association with a package delivery company.
(b) In order to be authorized for use on all or part of a public highway, the golf cart must have headlamps, tail lamps, reflectors, a parking brake, mirrors, and a horn
that emits a sound audible under normal conditions at a distance of at least 200 feet.
(c) A golf cart will not be operated on a roadway that has a posted speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
(Ordinance 10-044 adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, sec. 12.05.002)
ARTICLE 12.06 IMPOUND LOT
Sec. 12.06.001 Establishment of city impound lot
The city council hereby establishes a tow-in lot (“impound lot”) under the jurisdiction of the police department or its designee. Any vehicle in violation of this chapter or
the laws of the State of Texas may be towed away to the city's impound lot. Any motor vehicle towed away and impounded under this chapter or state law may be
claimed or recovered after payment to the city of all towing and storage charges. Impound fees are as established in the fee schedule provided in appendix A to this
code and hereby adopted by reference as if set forth fully herein. The city may remove or contract with one or more towing companies to remove an unauthorized
vehicle that is illegally parked, junked, or inoperable as defined in article 12.03 “Parking, Stopping and Standing” and article 8.08 “Junked Vehicles,” section 8.08.001
“Definitions” of the City of Leon Valley Code of Ordinances. The city, its agents and employees, shall not be responsible for any damage done during towing and
impoundment under this chapter or state law. (Ordinance 2017-19 adopted 5/16/17)
Sec. 12.06.002 Authority to impound vehicles
(a) Vehicles constituting a public nuisance. The police chief or any authorized city peace officer employed or whose services are contracted by the city may take into
custody and impound any vehicle constituting a public nuisance in violation of subsections (b)(1) through (9) of this section.
(b) Circumstances for impoundment. A motor vehicle may be impounded with or without citation, without giving notice to its owner, under the following circumstances:
(1) When the vehicle is impeding or is likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and/or
(2) When, in the police officer's judgment, the vehicle poses an immediate danger to the public safety; and/or
(3) When a city police officer or other agent authorized by the city has probable cause to believe that the vehicle constitutes evidence of a crime, or
contains evidence of a crime, if impoundment is reasonably necessary in such instance to obtain or preserve evidence; and/or
(4) When the person driving, operating or in physical control of the vehicle is taken into custody and the vehicle is impounded for safe keeping; and/or
(5) When the vehicle is parked in a handicap zone, and said vehicle does not properly display a handicapped parking permit; and/or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/349
(6) When a vehicle is driven on a public roadway or street in violation of the Transportation Code, title 7. Vehicles and Traffic, subtitle D. Motor Vehicle
Safety Responsibility, chapter 601. Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act; and/or
(7) When the vehicle is parked in the right-of-way of the public roadways of the city, when such rights-of-way have signs posted in accordance with
applicable state law stating that parking is prohibited in the rights-of-way; and/or
(8) When the vehicle is obstructing firefighting, or firefighting equipment; and
(9) When the vehicle is found to be a junked or abandoned vehicle on public or private property and is in violation of city ordinance, chapter 8 offenses and
nuisances, article 8.08 junked vehicles.
(Ordinance 2017-19 adopted 5/16/17; Ordinance 2018-3, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 12.06.003 Notice of impoundment
Within five business days after a vehicle has been impounded, the chief of police or his designee shall send written notice to the owner of the impounded vehicle at his
or her last known address as shown by the records of the department of public safety. If the owner is unknown to the chief of police or an address cannot be found, the
chief of police or his designee shall publish at least once in the city's official newspaper notice of the impounding, the license number of vehicle, the motor vehicle
number of the impounded vehicle, and the name and type of vehicle impounded. (Ordinance 2017-19 adopted 5/16/17)
Sec. 12.06.004 Sale of vehicle
(a) If after the expiration of thirty (30) calendar days after mailing and/or publishing the notice set out in this chapter, the vehicle is not redeemed by the owner or the
owner's agent, the city may proceed to put the vehicle into use for the city, or proceed to sell the impounded vehicle at public auction after first giving at least twenty (20)
calendar days' notice of such sale by publication in the city's official newspaper of the time and place of the sale. The notice shall describe the vehicle to be sold, with
reasonable certainty, by manufacturer's trade name or make, motor vehicle number, license number, and any other specifically identifying information, and the notice
shall state to whom, if anyone, the records of the department of public safety show the car belongs, and if the name of the owner is unknown, that fact shall be stated in
the notice. The city shall credit any money it receives, after the sale, to the city's general fund.
(b) At any time within one year after the sale, if the former owner of the vehicle which has been sold appears, upon application to the council and presentation of
satisfactory proof that the person was the owner of the vehicle sold, that person shall be paid the proceeds of such sale, less the necessary expenses thereof, and less
the towing, impounding and storage charges as the council establishes in the fee schedule provided in appendix A to this code and hereby adopted by reference as if set
forth fully herein.
(c) If the city elected to put the vehicle into city use, the vehicle may be returned to the owner or owners agent upon payment of all towing and storage fees up to the
date the city put the vehicle into use, plus any maintenance, repairs, or any and all costs the city incurred putting the vehicle into city use.
(Ordinance 2017-19 adopted 5/16/17; Ordinance 2018-3, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 12.06.005 Release of towed vehicle
(a) Once all towing and impoundment fees are paid in full, the city may release the vehicle to the registered owner. The towing company shall receive all fees incurred
in the towing of such vehicle in accordance with the terms of the towing contract with the city.
(b) The chief of police or city manager may waive the city impound fees for victims of a crime, or in the interest of justice.
(Ordinance 2017-19 adopted 5/16/17; Ordinance 2018-3, sec. 3, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 12.06.006 Auction procedures for vehicles sold from impound lot
The city council shall establish the following written procedures for conducting auto auctions for vehicles in the city's impound lot. The city shall conduct its auto auctions
in accordance with the following procedures:
(1) Attendees, whether bidding or not, shall be required to register prior to the auction. To register, attendees must be eighteen (18) years old or older, and
have a valid driver's license or a state-issued ID card. The auctioneer reserves the right to reject the bid of anyone who is not a registered bidder. The city
reserves the right to refuse any bid considered unreasonable, in its sole discretion.
(2) No city employee or city official shall be allowed to submit a bid for any vehicle being auctioned. This prohibition also applies to any family member
living in the same residence of the city employee or city official.
(3) It shall be necessary to execute a “certificate of resale” for all items purchased by dealers of resale with sales tax permit number. Failure to furnish this
information at registration will require payment of sales tax on all purchases other than titled vehicles.
(4) All city auto pound auctions will start at 10:00 a.m. Registration will be from 8:30 a.m. - 9:30 a.m. only. Registered bidders may inspect the vehicles
starting at 8:30 a.m.
(5) All items shall be sold “as is” with no warranties stated or implied. All sales are final. Neither the city nor the auctioneer is responsible for any loss or
damage.
(6) All purchases must be paid in full no later than one hour after the conclusion of the auction.
(7) Anyone failing to make payment in full on auction day shall from thereon, be required to post a deposit prior to the bidding at a city auction, in the
amount of any expected bids, or the bidder shall be banned by the city from city auctions for a minimum of six (6) months. Repeated offenses of failing to pay
for vehicles that have been bid on at city auctions shall result in a permanent ban from all city auctions as determined by the chief of police or his designee, in
his/her sole discretion.
(8) Payment is to be made by cash, cashier's check, or personal/company check, and accompanied by a Bank Letter of Guarantee. Checks must be made
payable to the City of Leon Valley, Texas. No wire transfers or bank drafts will be accepted. Bank Letter must be an original on bank letterhead and must read
as follows:
“___________ (customer's name) is a customer of this bank. This bank will guarantee unqualified payment to the City of Leon Valley on the account #
______ up to the amount of $______. This letter expires ____________ (date).”
Expiration date must be so stated at a two-week minimum (after each auction), but may, in city's sole discretion, be increased to six months or a year.
(9) The city shall verify all bank letters. There will be a return check fee as set forth in the fee schedule provided in appendix A to this code.
(10) There will be an administrative fee as set forth in the fee schedule provided in appendix A to this code charged on each vehicle auctioned off to pay for
the city's costs in conducting said auction.
(11) Auction sales receipts will be mailed to the name and address on the buyer's invoice within seven (7) to ten (10) business days after the auction for
buyers who pay cash. Auction sales receipts will be held for fifteen (15) business days for buyers who pay by check.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/349
(12) At the time of the auction, the buyer's number and price of item sold is announced by the auctioneer. No changes in price or quantity can be made by
anyone but the auctioneer or city staff in consultation with the auctioneer and at that time only. In any dispute over price between bidders, the auctioneer
reserves the right to settle any and all disputes, and his/her decision shall be final. Announcements made by the auctioneer on the day of the auction shall
prevail over any printed matter pertaining to this auction.
(13) In the event of tie-bids (two or more bidders claiming the high bid when an item is pronounced “SOLD” by the auctioneer), the bidding shall be
reopened between those that are tied and will continue until a single high bidder has been established. Only those bidders recognized by the auctioneers or
bid spotters will be involved in tie-bids.
(14) Despite the city's efforts to avoid withdrawal of items from the list after they are advertised, it may be necessary; therefore, the city reserves the right to
do so.
(15) All auction vehicles sold must be driven away or removed from the auto pound by a licensed wrecker by the close of business of the date of purchase
unless the city agrees to extend the period for removal.
(16) All items not removed by deadline will be assessed a daily storage fee as set forth in the fee schedule provided in appendix A to this code. Any
vehicle(s) not removed by the following auction will be resold at the following auction.
(17) No keys shall be provided until payment is completed.
(18) Auctions will be held as necessary and/or required.
(19) The city reserves the right to place a minimum bid on any vehicle being sold at auction.
(Ordinance 2017-19 adopted 5/16/17; Ordinance 2018-3, sec. 4, adopted 2/6/18)
ARTICLE 12.07 PHOTOGRAPHIC TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM (RED LIGHT CAMERA SYSTEM) PROGRAM
Sec. 12.07.001 Purpose, applicability, and findings
(a) It is the purpose of this article to implement a photographic traffic enforcement system program in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the city by reducing the hazards of running red lights. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of intruding upon individual liberties.
(b) This article shall apply within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(c) Based on evidence concerning the problem of motorists running red lights and the resulting increase in the number of injuries and loss of property in the
community presented in public hearings held by the city on the 18th day of January, 2017, 28th day of January, 2017, March 7, 2017, and in reports made available to
the city council, the city council finds: that a photographic traffic-control system (red-light camera system) will result in fewer accidents, injuries and property damage in
the city, and shall be implemented through a contract with a vendor of the city's choosing.
(Ordinance 2017-43, sec. I, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 12.07.002 Definitions
Words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly requires otherwise. Words and phrases
that are not defined below shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense shall include the future tense (and vice versa); words in the plural number shall include the singular number (and vice versa); and words in the
masculine gender shall include the feminine gender (and vice versa). Headings and captions are for reference purposes only.
Department. The police department of the City of Leon Valley, Texas.
Intersection. The place or area where two or more streets intersect.
Motor vehicle or vehicle. Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act (chapter 501 of the Texas Transportation Code).
Notice of violation. A notice mailed to a person identified as having violated this article and that complies with the content requirements set out in this article. A notice of
violation is not a criminal citation.
Owner. The owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the analogous department or
agency of another state or country. The term “owner” includes:
(1) A lessee of a motor vehicle under a lease of six months or more; or
(2) The lessee of a motor vehicle rented from a motor vehicle rental or leasing company, but does not include the motor vehicle rental or leasing company
itself.
Photographic traffic enforcement system or system. A system that:
(1) Consists of a camera and vehicle sensor installed to work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic-control signal; and
(2) Is capable of producing at least two recorded images that depict the license plate attached to the front or the rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated
in compliance with the instructions of the traffic-control signal.
Recorded image. An image recorded by a photographic traffic enforcement system that depicts the license plate attached to the front or rear of a motor vehicle and is
automatically produced, depicted, photographed or recorded on a photograph or digital image.
System location. The approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic enforcement system is directed and in operation.
Traffic-control signal. A traffic-control device that displays alternating red, amber and green lights that directs traffic when to stop at or proceed through an intersection.
(Ordinance 2017-43, sec. II, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 12.07.003 Offense
It shall be unlawful for a motor vehicle to proceed into an intersection when the traffic-control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal.
The owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for a violation of this article, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ordinance 2017-43, sec. III, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 12.07.004 Administration
(a) The city police department shall implement, administer, and enforce the city's photographic traffic enforcement system and shall maintain a list of system locations
where photographic traffic enforcement systems are installed.
(b) All enforcement records including, but not limited to, a recorded image resulting from a photographic traffic enforcement system shall be confidential to the extent
allowed by state law and may be used only to pursue a violation of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/349
(c) The department or the person with which the city contracts for the administration and enforcement of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system may not
provide information about a civil penalty imposed under this chapter to a credit bureau, as defined by section 392.001, Finance Code.
(d) Signs shall be posted and maintained advising motorists that photographic traffic enforcement systems are in operation. Every sign shall be clearly visible to all
directions of traffic at every intersection with a photographic traffic enforcement system.
(e) A notice of violation shall be mailed to the owner of the motor vehicle no later than 30 days after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred. The notice of
violation shall be mailed to:
(1) The owner's address as indicated on the registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation; or
(2) If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or
agency of the other state or country that is analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation.
(f) A notice of violation shall contain at a minimum the following information:
(1) A description of the alleged violation;
(2) Location of the intersection where the violation occurred;
(3) The date and time of the violation;
(4) The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation, unless the operator of the vehicle is identified, then the name and address
of the operator;
(5) The license plate number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(6) A copy of a recorded image depicting the license plate number of the vehicle;
(7) The amount of the civil penalty imposed for the violation;
(8) The date by which the civil penalty must be paid;
(9) A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil penalty;
(10) A statement that the person named in the notice may pay the civil penalty in lieu of appearing at a nonjudicial administrative adjudication by mail sent
to a specified address instead of appearing at the time and place of the administrative adjudication hearing; and
(11) Information informing the person:
(A) Of the right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty in a nonjudicial administrative hearing;
(B) The manner and time in which the civil penalty may be contested;
(C) That failure to pay the civil penalty or contest liability in a timely manner is an admission of liability;
(D) That failure to appear at a nonjudicial administrative hearing after having requested a hearing is an admission of liability;
(E) That failure to timely pay the civil penalty may result in the imposition of a late payment fee of $25.00; and
(F) That the request for a nonjudicial administrative hearing may subject the person to a $50.00 administrative hearing charge if found liable or if the
person fails to appear;
(12) A statement that, if at the time and place of the violation the vehicle was being operated by a person other than the owner, the owner may transfer
liability for the violation to the person who was operating the vehicle at that time and place if the owner submits to the department by verifiable affidavit, on a
form provided by the department, or under oath at an administrative adjudication hearing, the name and current address of the person:
(A) Operating the vehicle at the time and place of the violation;
(B) Who was the lessee of the vehicle at the time of the violation, if the vehicle was rented or leased from a person in the business or renting or
leasing motor vehicles at that time; or
(C) Who was the subsequent owner of the motor vehicle, if ownership of the vehicle was transferred by the owner before the time of violation; and
(13) Any other information the department deems prudent and necessary.
(g) If it is determined, through affidavit or oath, that the motor vehicle was being operated by a person other than the owner, the department shall reissue the notice of
violation to the actual operator within 15 days of the determination of the driver's identity.
(h) No notice of violation shall be issued and no civil penalty shall be imposed if the department determines that the motorist was arrested, was issued a criminal
citation and notice to appear, or was issued a warning by a duly authorized peace officer for a violation recorded by the photographic traffic enforcement system of a
violation of the Texas Transportation Code, section 544.007(d) traffic-control signals in general.
(i) No notice of violation shall be issued if the quality of the image captured by the system is so inferior as to prohibit positive identification of the license plate.
(j) A notice of violation under this section is presumed to have been received on the fifth (5th) day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. All notices shall be
mailed U.S. first class mail.
(k) In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may mail a warning notice to the owner that must contain the information in subsection (e) above.
(Ordinance 2017-43, sec. IV, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 12.07.005 Affirmative defense
The owner of the motor vehicle shall be responsible for a violation of this article, unless the owner can, by preponderance of the evidence, show that:
(1) The traffic-control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person;
(2) The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a police officer;
(3) The operator of the motor vehicle was part of a funeral procession;
(4) The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic-control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching
authorized emergency vehicle;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/349
(5) The motor vehicle was being operated as authorized emergency vehicle under chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code and the operator was
acting in compliance with that chapter;
(6) The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner;
(7) The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle
for which the plate has been issued;
(8) The motor vehicle was leased, rented or otherwise in the care, custody, or control of another person;
(9) The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed that made compliance with this article more
dangerous under the circumstances than noncompliance;
(10) The owner was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation; or
(11) The owner was arrested, was issued a criminal citation and notice to appear, or was issued a warning by a duly authorized peace officer for a violation
of section 544.007(d) of the Texas Transportation Code recorded by the photographic traffic enforcement system.
(Ordinance 2017-43, sec. V, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 12.07.006 Penalty; enforcement
(a) A violation of this article shall be deemed a noncriminal violation for which a civil penalty will be assessed. The imposition of a civil penalty under this article is not a
conviction and may not be considered a conviction for any purpose.
(b) The civil penalty for which the owner or, when applicable, the operator is liable is seventy-five dollars and no cents ($75.00).
(c) A person who fails to pay a civil penalty within the time allowed by this article shall be additionally liable for a late payment fee of twenty-five dollars and no cents
($25.00).
(d) A person who files a notice of appeal in writing to the city's municipal court shall pay an appellate fee of fifty dollars and no cents ($50.00). Unless the person, on or
before the filing of the notice of appeal, posts a bond in the amount of the civil penalty ($75.00) and any late fees ($25.00), an appeal does not stay the enforcement of
the civil penalty.
(e) The city attorney is authorized to file suit to enforce collection of a civil penalty assessed under this article.
(Ordinance 2017-43, sec. VI, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 12.07.007 Nonjudicial administrative hearing
(a) A person who receives a notice of violation under this article may contest the imposition of the civil penalty by requesting in writing a nonjudicial administrative
hearing within the time provided in the notice, which period may not be earlier than the 30th day after the date the notice of violation was mailed.
(b) The department shall establish an administrative process to review objections to violation notices including the selection of a hearings officer who shall preside
over the nonjudicial administrative hearing and, at a minimum, shall be a person knowledgeable in the laws governing traffic-control and enforcement with competencies
in due process, municipal law, effective writing and speaking, fair and impartial decision-making, and related areas as evidenced through application, interview and
competency-based training.
(c) Failure to pay a civil penalty or contest liability in a timely manner is an admission in the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation and
constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal under section 12.07.008 of this article.
(d) Failure to appear at a nonjudicial administrative hearing after having requested a hearing is an admission of liability for the full amount of the civil penalty assessed
in the notice of violation and constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal under section 12.07.008 of this article.
(e) The civil penalty shall not be assessed if:
(1) After the hearing, the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability; or
(2) Within the time prescribed in the notice of violation, the person against whom the civil penalty is to be assessed submits the proof described in section
12.07.004(f)(12).
(f) A person who is found liable after a nonjudicial administrative hearing or who requests a hearing and thereafter fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing
is liable for administrative hearing costs in the amount of fifty dollars and no cents ($50.00) in addition to the amount of the civil penalty assessed for the violation. A
person who is found liable for a civil penalty after a nonjudicial administrative hearing shall pay the civil penalty and costs within ten (10) days of the determination of
liability.
(g) In a nonjudicial administrative hearing, the issues must be proved at the hearing by a preponderance of the evidence. The reliability of the photographic traffic
enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the violation may be attested to in a nonjudicial administrative hearing by affidavit of an officer or employee
of the city or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of an
officer or employee of the city that alleges a violation based an inspection of the pertinent recorded image, is admissible in a proceeding under this article, is evidence of
the facts contained in the affidavit and is prima facie evidence of the violation alleged in the notice of violation.
(h) Notwithstanding anything in this article, a person who fails to pay the amount of a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is entitled to a nonjudicial
administrative hearing on the violation if:
(1) The person files an affidavit with the hearings officer stating the date on which the person received the notice of violation that was mailed to the person;
and
(2) Within the same period required for a hearing to be timely requested but measured from the date the mailed notice was received as stated in the
affidavit, the person requests a nonjudicial administrative hearing.
(Ordinance 2017-43, sec. VII, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. 12.07.008 Appeal
A person who is found liable after a nonjudicial administrative hearing may appeal that finding of liability to the municipal court by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of
the municipal court. The notice of appeal must be filed, in writing, not later than the 31st day after the date on which the nonjudicial administrative hearing officer enters
the determination of liability and shall be accompanied by the payment of an appellate fee of fifty dollars and no cents ($50.00). Unless the person, on or before the filing
of the notice of appeal, posts a bond in the amount of the civil penalty and any late fees, an appeal does not stay the enforcement of the civil penalty. An appeal shall be
determined by the municipal court trial de novo. The affidavits submitted under section 12.07.007(g) shall be submitted to the municipal judge in the trial de novo, and
the issues must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. (Ordinance 2017-43, sec. VIII, adopted 8/1/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/349
CHAPTER 13
TREE PRESERVATION
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 13.02 TREE PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Title
These regulations shall be known as article 13.02 of the city code, and will be referred to herein as “this article.” (Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.002 Purpose and effect
It is the policy of the city to preserve existing trees and habitat to the greatest extent possible and add to the tree population of the city, while allowing reasonable
development of land. The terms and provisions of this article are intended to accomplish the following public purposes:
(1) Establish rules and regulations governing the protection and preservation of native and established trees within the city and achieve the maximum
preservation of trees;
(2) Preserve trees as an important public resource that enhances the quality of life, protects habitat and the general welfare of the city, its unique character
and its physical, historical and aesthetic environment;
(3) Protect healthy trees and provide for the replacement and/or replanting of trees that are necessarily removed during construction, development or
redevelopment;
(4) Prevent the clear-cutting of land; and
(5) Address oak wilt disease and its prevention.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.003 Scope
(a) The provisions of this article shall apply to the construction, alteration, moving, repair and use of any building or parcel of land within this jurisdiction.
(b) Where, in any specific case, different sections of this article specify different requirements, the more restrictive shall govern. Where there is conflict between a
general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not apply to property belonging to the city; or to property used to provide public utilities; or work located primarily in or on a public
way, public utility towers and poles, or public utility easements, unless specifically mentioned in this article; provided that in the erection of buildings or other structures,
the city and utility companies shall attempt to conform in architectural design or otherwise as nearly as possible to the buildings permitted in the district in which they are
being erected.
(d) If any portion of this article is held invalid for any reason, the remaining portions herein shall not be thereby affected.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.004 Compliance
Except as provided in this article, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than is
permitted in the district in which such building or land is located; no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height or bulk limit herein
established for the district in which such building is located; no lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than
prescribed by this article, nor shall the yard or open spaces provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this article be considered as
providing a yard or open spaces for any other building. (Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.005 Rules of construction
(a) Words, phrases and terms defined in this article shall be given the defined meaning.
(b) Words, phrases and terms not defined in this article but defined in the building code found in chapter 3 of the city code shall be construed as defined in the building
code.
(c) Words, phrases and terms defined neither in this article nor in the building code adopted in chapter 3 shall be given their usual and customary meanings except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(d) The text of this article shall control captions, titles and maps.
(e) The word “shall” is mandatory and not permissive; the word “may” is permissive and not mandatory.
(f) Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.
(g) Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words used in the future tense include the present tense.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.006 Definitions
Arborist, certified. An individual who has a current and valid designation of “ISA Certified Arborist” by the International Society of Arboriculture.
Boundary street. A public street which is adjacent to and abutting one or more sides of the proposed site.
Buffer zone. An area zoned so as to separate conflicting uses by zoning such property with a use which is compatible with both. For example, an office district might
reasonably separate a single-family residential district from a commercial district. Dedicated park lands may shield a planned office development from nearby residential
areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/349
Buildable area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of this code and article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance) have been met.
For recreational property or uses such as golf courses and baseball, soccer, football or similar athletic facilities, and public works projects such as water or wastewater
treatment plants, pump stations, storage tanks, and public streets and drainage improvements, the buildable area of the property shall include that portion of the property
necessary for the construction of such recreational and public works improvements, including sufficient adjacent area to allow the normal operation of construction
equipment.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The word “building” includes the word “structure.”
Building code.
(1) Article 3.02, division 2 of city code, which incorporates the International Building Code.
(2) The International Building Code, promulgated by the International Code Council and adopted by the city.
Building, construction. A building used temporarily for the storage of construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to on-site permitted construction of
utilities, or other community facilities, or used temporarily in conjunction with the sale of property within a subdivision under construction.
Building, front of. That part of a building nearest the front property line.
Building height. The vertical distance above the average existing grade measured to the highest point of the building. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the
maximum height of any segment of the building.
Building line, front. A line established under article 15.02 (zoning ordinance) or article 3.02, division 2 of the city code measured from the perimeter of that portion of a
building nearest the front property line to the curbline or edge of the sidewalk and parallel thereto, or, in the case of a corner lot, the side of such building if also parallel
to a curbline or edge of a sidewalk, but in any case such measurement shall exclude open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features projecting from the
wall of the building.
Building line, rear. A line established under article 15.02 (zoning ordinance) or article 3.02, division 2 of the city code measured from the perimeter of that portion of a
building nearest the rear property line of such property. Such measurement shall exclude open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features projecting from
the wall of the building.
Building line, side. A line established under article 15.02 (zoning ordinance) or article 3.02, division 2 of the city code measured from the perimeter of that portion of a
building nearest the side property line of such property. Such measurement shall exclude open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features projecting from
the wall of the building.
Building, main. A building in which the principal use of the site is conducted.
Building permit. Authorization required for erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, conversion, or demolition of any
building.
Building restrictions. Regulations or restrictions under article 15.02 (zoning ordinance) or article 3.02, division 2 of the city code upon the materials allowed in the
construction of buildings and any provisions of federal or state law, or other city ordinances implementing the Federal Emergency Management Act or the duties of the
city for floodplain regulation, applicable to the property.
Building specialty store. Any retail facility, the primary use of which is the sale or lease of specialized building materials, such as roofing, tile, or doors.
Building, temporary. A structure which is designed or intended to be used on a nonpermanent basis, authorized for a specific period of time through a specific use
permit. Includes prefabricated structures and manufactured/mobile housing which are not used for living space.
Caliper. The diameter of a tree four feet (4') above the natural grade measured with a tree caliper instrument or a flexible tape. If a tape is used, the circumference of the
tree is measured and the result divided by 3.14 to determine diameter.
Caliper of multi-trunk trees. The caliper of the largest trunk at a point four feet (4') above the natural grade added to half of the sum of the calipers of the remaining trunks
measured at the same height. If branching occurs less than four feet (4') above the natural grade, the diameter of the trunk may be measured below the branching for a
single measurement.
Canopy. A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material supported by the building or by support extending to the ground directly under the canopy placed so as
to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other openings.
Canopy tree. A self-supporting woody plant with one (1) well-defined trunk and a distinct and definite formed crown, which attains a height of at least twenty-five (25)
feet.
Commercial. Relates to or is connected with trade and traffic or commerce in general; occupied with business and commerce.
Curb. A stone or concrete or alternative edge asphalt boundary usually marking the edge of a roadway or paved area. Refer to article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance) for
further details.
Curbline. A line differentiating between the street and the edge of real property, marking the edge of the roadway, and contiguous to the roadway, not intended for normal
vehicular traffic. Such property may include a berm, but may or may not be built up or raised.
Density. The number of dwelling units which are allowed on an area of land or the number of persons allowed in a specific unit.
Depth of the lot. The linear measurement from the front property line to the rear property line of a lot.
Dripline. The area of ground surrounding the trunk of the tree considered essential to protecting the root structure of a tree. For the purposes of this article, the dripline
shall be calculated at one foot (1') for every one inch (1") of caliper width measured at four feet (4') above natural grade level, i.e., a twelve-inch (12") tree would require
a dripline with a twelve-foot (12') radius (producing an area twenty-four feet (24') in diameter).
Driveway. A private road giving access from a public way to a building on abutting grounds.
Easement. That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement may be
for use under, on, or above said lot or lots.
Encroachment, landscape. Any protrusion of a vehicle into a landscaped area from a parking space, display area or accessway.
Extended dripline. An imaginary line on the ground equal to one point three (1.3) times the distance from the tree trunk to the dripline. In no case shall the dripline be
less than fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of the tree.
Fence. A hedge, structure, or partition, erected for the purpose of enclosing a piece of land, or to divide a piece of land into distinct portions, or to separate two (2)
contiguous properties. An enclosure around a field or other space, or around any object, especially an enclosing structure of wood, iron or other materials, intended to
prevent intrusion from without or straying from within. See article 3.05 of the city code for other specific regulations.
Frontage. The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public right-of-way measured at the front property line.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/349
Grade. The average elevation of the land around a building, or the percent rise or descent of a sloping surface.
Grade, finished. The final elevation of the average ground level adjoining a building at all exterior walls after development.
Grade, level. Roads, buildings, or structures built on the ground.
Grade, natural. The elevation of the ground level in its natural state, before construction, filling or excavation.
Gross floor area (GFA). The gross floor area of a building or lease space. The sum of the horizontal areas of floors of a building measured from the exterior face of
exterior walls or, if appropriate, from the centerline of dividing walls; this includes courts and decks or porches when covered by a roof.
Gross leasable area (GLA). The gross leasable area is the total floor area designed for both tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including both owned and leased
areas.
Ground cover. Plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at maturity.
Horticulture. The science of growing fruits, vegetables, flowers or ornamental plants.
Landscaped area. Areas of a lot, land parcel or building site devoted to and consisting of plant material, including but not limited to turf grasses, grasses-bunch, trees,
shrub forms, flowers, vines and other ground cover, native plant materials, planters, brick pavers, stone, natural forms, water forms, public art forms, stone aggregate
and other landscape features, but excluding smooth concrete, asphalt or paving for vehicular traffic; provided that the use of brick, stone aggregate or other inorganic
materials shall not be greater in total area than that of organic plant material.
Landscaping. The modification or ornamentation of a natural landscape by altering the plant cover. Landscaping shall consist of any of the following, or combination
thereof: material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, or palms; and nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping,
such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences - but excluding paving.
Lot. Any portion, piece, division or parcel of land, fractional part or subdivision of block, according to a plat or survey. A single parcel of land. A measured parcel of land
having fixed boundaries. The word “lot” includes the word “plot.”
Lot, corner. A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135 degrees.
Lot frontage. The length of the front lot line, measured at the street right-of-way line, from one corner of the property to the other.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, irregular. A lot whose opposing property lines are generally not parallel, such as a pie-shaped lot on a cul-de-sac, or where the side property lines are not parallel to
each other.
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Bexar County, or a parcel of land, the deed for
which was recorded in the office of the county clerk of Bexar County prior to the original adoption of article 15.02 (zoning ordinance) on September 21, 1965.
Lot width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at the minimum front building (setback) line.
Maintenance. To preserve from failure or decline.
Native plant. A plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to the Bexar County region which is capable of sustaining growth and reproduction under local
climatic conditions.
Naturalized plant. A plant species introduced to the region which is capable of sustaining growth and reproduction under local climatic conditions.
Open space. A land area that is not occupied by a building, structure, parking area, street, alley or required yard.
Park. A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended for outdoor active or passive recreational uses.
Park and ride facilities. Parking lots or structures located along public transit routes designed to encourage transfer from private automobile to mass transit or to
encourage carpooling for purposes of commuting, or for access to recreation areas.
Planter. A raised area containing plant material defined by a hard edge such as walls, large pots and other similar physical containment design.
Plat/plot. A plat of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual measurements, the size and location of any existing buildings or buildings to be erected, the location of the lot
in relation to abutting streets, and other such information.
Primary use. The primary or predominant use of any lot or parcel.
Public trees. Any trees, shrubs, bushes and all woody vegetation on city-owned property and rights-of-way, city parks, and in all areas owned by the city to which the
public has access.
Public way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently
appropriated to the public for public use.
Quorum. The number of member(s) or alternate(s) of a body that, when duly assembled, is legally competent to transact business.
Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by a barrier or device constructed of metal, wood, brick,
stone, block, or other suitable materials, singly or in combination. See also article 3.05 of the city code.
Setback. See “Building line.”
Site plan. A plan which outlines the use and development of any tract of land.
Street. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive, or other roadway in a city, town, or village, generally paved, and lined or intended to be lined by
structures on each side. It includes all urban ways which can be and are generally used for travel, but does not normally include service entrances or driveways leading
off from the street onto adjoining premises.
Street presumption. The condition of a street (classification and carrying capacity) as it will exist after final improvement as proposed by the city's major thoroughfare
plan or the capacity indicated by the right-of-way acquired by the city on any boundary street.
Street, private. A right-of-way or easement in private ownership not dedicated or maintained as a public street, which affords the principal means of access to two (2) or
more sites.
Street yard area. The area of a lot which lies between the property line at a dedicated street right-of-way and the actual front wall line of the building, or, if no building, to
the rear property line. Such building wall lines extend from the outward corners of the buildings as illustrated in appendix B of the zoning regulations (article 15.02).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/349
Structure. Any construction, or any production or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. That which is built or
constructed; an edifice or building of any kind.
Study area boundary. The limits of the area in which analysis is conducted or for which information is provided. This area is determined by the property owner or its
representative based on the size of the development and the peak hour trips projected to be generated by the proposed development. In the case of a Level 1 or 2 traffic
impact analysis, this area may include the site, and the area within a distance no greater than 1/4 mile along the boundary streets from the boundary of the site. In the
case of a Level 3 traffic impact analysis, this area will be determined by the property owner based on sound engineering judgment and agreed to by the city, but in all
cases shall be less than the area contained in a one-mile radius from the site. In those instances where the property owner has neither submitted preliminary plans nor
applied for an initial development permit prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the determination of the area to be studied by the property owner must be approved
by the city engineer for all levels of traffic impact analyses; and before granting approval of a Level 2 traffic impact analysis, the city engineer may require the area of the
study to exceed the maximum area prescribed above by 1/4 mile.
Subdivision. The division of a tract, lot or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land.
Tree, heritage. Any tree that has been designated by the city council, after public hearing and due notice to the owner of the tree, as a tree of notable interest and value
to the city because of its location, size, age, or historical association with the community or having a diameter of twenty-four inches (24") or greater.
Tree, large. Trees of any species that are twelve inches (12") or larger in diameter.
Tree, living. Trees having at least fifty percent (50%) of the total normal canopy intact and in a healthy condition.
Tree, medium. Trees that are eight inches (8") in diameter or larger, up to twelve inches (12").
Tree, multi-trunk. A tree having two (2) or more trunks arising from the root collar or main trunk.
Tree, small. Trees that are four to seven inches (4" to 7") in diameter, sometimes providing an underlying layer of tree canopy for medium to large and heritage trees.
Trees, shrub forms, vines, ground covers, turf grasses and grasses-bunch. Shall be defined as any of the above, such as those listed within article 15.02 (zoning
ordinance). Tree is additionally defined. In order to qualify under the provisions of this code as a tree, said tree, when planted, must be at least two (2) inches in diameter
at a height no less than twelve (12) inches above the ground. The tree diameter must be determined from a single trunk.
Turf. Continuous plant coverage consisting of grass species such as bermuda, buffalo, zoysia or any other native species of grass, designed to be drought tolerant to the
South Texas area.
Understory tree. A self-supporting wood plant with one (1) or more trunks which attains a height of no taller than fifteen (15) feet.
Unnecessary hardship. Special circumstances applicable to a piece of property, whereby a property owner may be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same vicinity and zone, and which may result in a disparity of privileges. Also known as “undue hardship.”
Use. The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied,
including all accessory uses.
Variance. An authorization to a property owner to depart from literal requirements of code regulations in utilization of his property in cases in which strict enforcement of
the code regulations would cause undue hardship because of special circumstances applicable to it, where the property owner is deprived of privileges commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone, and which adjustment remedies disparity in privileges.
Xeriscape. A landscaping method that employs drought-resistant plants and landscaping arrangements in an effort to conserve resources, especially water.
Yard. An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures except as otherwise provided in
article 15.02 (zoning ordinance).
Yard, front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto.
Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto.
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building and between the building line and the side lot line.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.007 Penalty
Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code, unless some other fine is specifically prescribed for a
particular violation. Each day any violation occurs or continues to occur shall be considered a separate offense. (Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.008 Oak wilt prevention
(a) Purpose and scope. The purpose of the oak wilt prevention regulations is to identify measures that city staff, hired contractors and their subcontractors and
property owners who remove or trim trees shall take to prevent the spread of oak wilt.
(b) Definition.
Oak wilt disease. A tree disease caused by the fungus Ceratocystis fagacearum. The fungus infects the vascular system of a tree. The vascular system contains vessels
which transport moisture throughout the tree. The vessels of an infected tree effectively become blocked by the infection of the fungus and cannot transport adequate
moisture to sustain a healthy or living tree and the end result is often the death of the tree.
(c) Prevention policy.
(1) Anyone causing a wound to an oak tree, whether from ground maintenance equipment, trimming, cutting or pruning at any time of the year, shall paint
the wounded tree with permanent sealant or nonphytotoxic tree wound dressing within thirty (30) minutes to prevent contact with contaminated nitidulid
beetles. Any wound to an oak tree caused by weather conditions, such as a windstorm, is also to be painted with permanent sealant or nonphytotoxic tree
wound dressing as soon as possible after a weather incident.
(2) Any person who discovers or suspects the presence of oak wilt should report the infected oak tree to the community development department to be
examined by a member of the state forest service for proper diagnosis and subsequent care.
(3) Whenever possible, persons should avoid trimming or pruning live oaks and red oaks (Spanish, Shumard, Texas Red and Blackjack oaks) from March 1
to June 1.
(4) An annual permit with proof of liability insurance and two (2) hours of professional training is required for commercial contractors providing tree cutting
or pruning services. See the tree preservation requirements of this article for additional permit requirements, tree removal guidelines and any applicable
exemptions.
(d) Disposal of oak trees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/349
(1) Red oaks.
(A) Removal or disposal of red oaks with oak wilt disease must be taken more seriously because they can form highly contagious fungal mats. Their
quick and proper disposal is important and necessary to prevent other oaks from being exposed or infected.
(B) If a red oak tree is diagnosed with oak wilt, the diseased red oak tree shall be promptly removed and disposed as recommended by the state
forest service.
(2) Other oaks. Other oaks do not require special disposal (i.e., live oaks and white oaks).
(e) Education and management program.
(1) The tree advisory board (TAB) is directed to implement, as resources permit, measures aimed at education and prevention of oak wilt.
(2) The tree advisory board shall use the “Eight Step Program to Oak Wilt Management” by the state forest service to promote oak wilt prevention.
(3) The code enforcement officer shall be responsible for enforcement of this article and for checking all tree trimming and/or cutting performed in the city.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Secs. 13.02.009–13.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 13.02.041 Enforcement
The community development director is hereby charged with the responsibility for the enforcement of this article and may serve notice to any person in violation thereof
or institute legal proceedings as may be required, and the city attorney is hereby authorized to institute appropriate proceedings to that end. (Ordinance 2014-01-13-03,
sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.042 Tree mitigation/replacement fund
(a) Generally. The city manager will maintain a dedicated account to be entitled “tree mitigation and replacement fund” (hereinafter the “fund”). Civil penalties collected
pursuant to these regulations shall be recorded in the fund created pursuant to this section, unless expressly prohibited by law. Likewise, all funds received from the
payment of mitigation fees pursuant to these regulations shall be recorded in the fund.
(b) Use of funds. The funds collected from civil penalties and mitigation fees in the fund shall be utilized solely to pay for the planting and maintenance of trees, the
funding of tree preservation and planting programs within the city and/or to support supplemental landscape plantings in public areas of the city and/or acquiring wooded
property that shall remain in a naturalistic state in perpetuity, to be administered by the public works director, who shall report annually to the city council with respect to
the balance of the fund and the expenditures that have been made from the fund.
(c) Funds to be kept separate. The balance of this fund shall not be transferred to the general fund at the end of each budget year, but rather, the balance remaining in
the fund at the close of the city's fiscal year shall roll over and become the beginning balance for the next fiscal year. The balance within the fund shall be recorded and
accounted for in a manner that distinguishes it from other general funds of the city and shall be disbursed in a manner that is consistent with the purposes for which this
fund has been established.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.043 Variances
Variances to the terms of this article may be granted after consideration and recommendation by the tree advisory board to the city council for final determination where
a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship. A variance request must be submitted to the community development director in
writing setting out the basis for the request along with the payment as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from
time to time. No variance can be granted unless:
(1) Such variance will not be contrary to public interest;
(2) Such variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purposes of this article;
(3) The variance is sought is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, and the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the
property and are not merely financial; and
(4) The variance will not substantially weaken the general purposes of this article.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.044 Liability
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impose any liability for damages or a duty of care and maintenance upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees. The
person in possession of public property or the owner of any private property shall have a duty to keep the trees upon the property and under their control in a safe,
healthy condition. Any person who feels a tree located on property possessed, owned or controlled by them is a danger to the safety of themselves, others or structural
improvements on-site or off-site shall have an obligation to secure the area around the tree or support the tree, as appropriate to safeguard both persons and
improvements from harm. (Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.045 Informational assistance
(a) In furtherance of the purposes and provisions hereof, the city may develop, distribute to persons making application for permits, and make available to the general
public an informational pamphlet identifying appropriately the spirit and purposes of this article, and useful facts, guidelines and how-to information relative to the
preservation, protection and replanting of trees, on the city website.
(b) The city may also develop, maintain and make available to applicants for permits and to the general public a tree species reference book to provide more detailed
information concerning tree care in general and the characteristics, soil and growth requirements and other traits of specific tree species identified in appendix A of
article 15.02.
(c) A current edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock as published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association, as applicable to the tree species
in appendix A of article 15.02, shall be maintained by the city and made available to applicants for building permits, tree removal permits or tree replanting permits and to
the general public, as only those trees meeting and planted or replanted compliance with the American Nursery and Landscape Association, “American Standard for
Nursery Stock” and ANSI Z60.1-2004 and ANSI A300 “Tree Care Standards” guidelines shall satisfy the tree planting, replanting and/or replacement standards and
requirements contained herein.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Secs. 13.02.046–13.02.070 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/349
Division 3. Requirements and Restrictions
Sec. 13.02.071 Permit required for removing or replanting trees
(a) The removal or replanting of any trees shall require the issuance of an approved tree removal or planting permit, with the exception of the following:
(1) In the event that any tree is determined by the city to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety,
and requires immediate removal without delay, written authorization for removal may be given by the zoning administrator, and such tree may then be
removed without obtaining a written permit as herein required.
(2) With the recommendation of a certified arborist, a tree determined by the city to be diseased, dying or dead may be removed.
(3) During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, storm, flood or other act of God, the requirements of this section may be waived as may be
deemed necessary by the city council.
(4) All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this section only in relation to those trees planted and growing on
the premises of said licensee, that are so planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of said licensed
business.
(5) Utility companies franchised or otherwise authorized to provide utility service may remove trees that endanger public safety and welfare by interfering
with utility service provided that the applicant demonstrates to the zoning administrator and public works director that the removal is the minimum necessary
for the utilities to function properly and no other alternative is available.
(6) The partial mowing, clearing and grubbing of brush located within or under the driplines of trees shall be allowed, provided such mowing, clearing or
grubbing is accomplished by hand or by mowers. The use of bulldozers, loaders or other construction or earth-moving equipment for this purpose shall not be
allowed.
(7) The zoning administrator may exempt certain easements and rights-of-way included on an approved plat, provided that the applicant, or city engineer in
the case of a city project, demonstrates that the removal is necessary for the rights-of-way and easements to function properly and no other alternative is
available.
(8) Platted lots occupied by an occupied single-family residence designated as a homestead and located in an area zoned residential are exempted from
these requirements except for provisions pertaining to the protection of heritage trees. However, builders, contractors and owners are subject to all
requirements established herein for all new construction prior to any person moving into and living on the homestead.
(9) The regulations in this section shall not apply to the clearing of understory necessary to perform boundary surveying of real property or to conduct tree
surveys or inventories. Clearing for surveying may not exceed a width of two (2) feet for general survey (i.e., of easement boundary, etc.) and eight (8) feet for
survey of property boundary lines. Except for surveys done in connection with residential development, no tree ten (10) inches or larger may be removed in
any manner during such boundary or general surveying.
(b) Trees to be removed, replanted or planted in a right-of-way and/or easement shall require prior approval from the city, state or utility agency having authority of or
in said right-of-way or easement.
(c) Permit fees shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.072 Application for permit; procedure
(a) Application requirements. The permit application for tree removal or planting shall state or depict the following information:
(1) Location of all existing or proposed structures, improvements such as streets, alleyways, etc., and site uses, properly dimensioned and referenced to
property lines, setbacks and yard requirements.
(2) Date, scale, north point, and the names, addresses and telephone numbers of both the property owner and the person preparing the plan.
(3) Location of existing and proposed utility easements and drainage easements on the lot.
(4) Location and dimensions of visibility triangles on the lot.
(5) Point of contact information/responsible party information, to include address, telephone number and any state registration or license numbers in the
event of a violation (i.e., P.E., RPLS).
(6) A survey identifying the building footprint, buildable area, existing topographical information, easements, rights-of-way, setbacks, property lines and all
trees over four inches (4") in diameter shall be submitted. Trees to remain shall be designated by a circle. Trees to be removed shall be designated by an “X”.
Each tree shall be numbered referencing a legend specifying the caliper or diameter, common name, and whether it is small, medium, large or “heritage.”
Driplines shall be indicated for trees to remain. The number of small trees shall be provided at the end of the legend by species. Tree information required
above shall be summarized in legend form on the plan and shall include the reason for any removals.
(7) Tree relocation plan. The plan shall exhibit the current location of all small, medium, large and heritage trees proposed for replanting and indicate the
proposed replanting location for each. The plan shall include the proposed building footprint, driveways, parking lots, topographical information, easements,
rights-of-way, setbacks, and property lines.
(8) Tree replacement plan. The plan shall exhibit the location of proposed replacement trees and remaining small, medium, large and heritage trees. It shall
include a legend indicating the common name, caliper or diameter size and height of proposed replacement trees. Replacement trees shall be designated by
a square. Remaining small, medium, large and heritage trees shall be designated by a circle. Species to be removed and/or remain shall be designated with
the same symbols. The plan shall include the proposed building footprint, driveways, parking lots, topographical information, easements, rights-of-way,
setbacks, and property lines.
(b) Application review. Upon receipt of proper application, the community development director shall review for compliance with the provisions of this article. Said
review will include a field inspection of the site by the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of a permit. The application may be referred to the city engineer and/or
city manager as deemed appropriate for review and recommendations.
(1) An application for a tree planting or removal permit will not be accepted until the following is submitted, with the application, to the zoning administrator:
(A) Application fee; and
(B) An amount sufficient to recover all of the city's costs for the services of a contract professional that are directly incurred by the city for review of the
application.
(2) The original tree survey for a tract that is provided with the original application for a tree removal permit shall be the reference by which all subsequent
tree removal permits for the tract or portions of the tract shall be considered. An applicant may not circumvent the minimum preservation requirements set
forth in this article for the tract through the filing of multiple tree removal applications.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/349
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.073 Tree pruning; roots damaging sidewalk or curb
(a) No tree shall be pruned in such a manner that would reasonably lead to the death of the tree.
(b) The city may approve pruning of a large or heritage tree in cases where it must be strategically pruned to allow construction or demolition of a structure. All pruning
of trees by franchise utility companies to insure the safe operation of utility services shall be allowed. When allowed, all pruning shall be by approved arboricultural
techniques. This section is not intended to require a permit for reasonable pruning performed by the owner of the tree when unrelated to construction activity.
(c) The city shall have the right to prune trees overhanging [a street or right-of-way] which interfere with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign or as necessary to
preserve the public safety.
(d) It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or city department to severely cut back limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within
the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other acts of God, or certain trees
under obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this article at the determination of the community development director.
(e) All broken branches and exposed roots one-half inch (1/2") in diameter or greater of small, medium, large, heritage and relocated and replacement trees shall be
cut cleanly. In the case of oak species, in order to prevent infection by oak wilt spores, wounds must be painted with an acceptable wound dressing within thirty (30)
minutes of any cutting.
(f) When roots of a tree planted within the planting area damage city curbs, gutters and sidewalks (including driveway ramps), the city shall be responsible for
appropriate corrective measures which are least damaging to the tree.
(g) Where sidewalk or curb damage due to tree roots occurs, every effort shall be made to correct the problem without removing or damaging the tree. The public
works director shall be responsible for developing or approving corrective measures in consultation with the city engineer. Corrective actions taken shall be reported to
the community development director.
(h) The city and/or its designee(s) shall have the responsibility to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the public right-of-way of all
streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, parks, and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of
such public grounds. This shall include the removal of trees that may threaten electrical, telephone, gas, or any municipal water or sewer lines, or any tree that is
affected by fungus, insect, or other pest disease.
(i) Every owner of any tree or shrub overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall, in accordance with the tree pruning restrictions, will be responsible for
the pruning of branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, will not obstruct the
passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, will not obstruct vision of traffic signs, and will not obstruct the view of any street or alley intersection. If the property owner fails to
do so, the city and/or its designee(s) shall have the right to remove or prune any tree or shrub on private property which threatens the safety of those who may use a city
street or city park.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.074 Preservation requirements
The minimum tree preservation requirements below establish the minimum diameter inches of small, medium, large and heritage trees that must be preserved or
mitigated. For single-family dwellings, developers and builders may elect to preserve trees at the platting or permitting stage; if a developer or builder elects to preserve
at the platting stage, this method must be used throughout completion of the project. Exceptions, where authorized, may be granted and variances to the city's
development regulations may be recommended to maximize the preservation of existing trees.
(1) Medium trees: For each tree removed, one tree of six (6) or more inches in diameter must be planted within each platted lot, excluding right-of-way and
easements.
(2) Large trees: For each tree removed, one tree of eight (8) or more inches in diameter must be planted within each platted lot, excluding right-of-way and
easements.
(3) Heritage trees: None can be removed.
(4) 100-year floodplain(s): 50% of small, medium and large trees and 100% of all heritage trees within the floodplain must be preserved, which shall not
apply toward preservation requirements on the remainder of the lot.
(5) Mitigation maximum: Up to 25% of all required trees may be mitigated rather than preserved, unless insufficient land area exists to plant the required
total caliper width of replacement trees as defined in this section, then the “cash in lieu” amount described above may be increased up to 50% of the required
tree replacement amount. A certified arborist shall make a written determination of the maximum total caliper width of replacement trees that may be planted
on the site.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance 2017-62, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/17)
Sec. 13.02.075 Removal, replacement or relocation of small, medium and large trees
(a) Residential properties are exempted from these requirements except for provisions pertaining to the protection of heritage trees and subsections (c) and (d) of this
section. However, builders, contractors and owners are subject to all requirements established herein for all new construction prior to any person moving into and living
on the homestead.
(b) No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or effectively destroy through damaging any small, medium or large tree on any real property
within the city without first obtaining a permit, except as permitted herein.
(c) Under no circumstances shall the clear-cutting of small, medium or large trees on any real property within the city be allowed prior to the issuance of a tree
removal permit for said tree(s). Clear-cutting is herein defined as the indiscriminate cutting or removal of more than 25 percent of all living trees on the subject property.
The definition does not include dead trees or oak trees with severe oak wilt disease or other readily discernable diseased trees. Notwithstanding the foregoing
percentages, property owners may remove up to two trees which are not heritage trees on the subject property without a permit as long as the subject property remains
in compliance with the two tree minimum.
(d) No more than 20% of small, medium or large trees may be removed in the 100-year floodplain as defined by FEMA.
(e) Site plans should accommodate medium and large trees six inches (6") in diameter or greater by providing islands in parking lots; grading and landscaping to allow
preservation of more such trees; and reasonable revision of the location of planned structures, driveways and parking lots so as to preserve as many trees of this size as
possible.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.076 Replacement trees required
(a) It shall be the responsibility of any person obtaining a tree removal permit for a tree to provide replacement tree(s).
(b) Such replacement trees shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/349
(1) Have a minimum diameter of three inches (3");
(2) Have a minimum height of at least four feet (4') when planted;
(3) When mature shall have a crown of at least fifteen feet (15') in diameter or substituted by a grouping of smaller species so as to create at maturity a
crown of at least fifteen feet (15'); and
(4) Be planted in locations shown on the approved tree replacement plan.
(c) No more than thirty-five percent (35%) of replacement trees may be of the same species.
(d) A replacement tree that dies within two (2) years of the date it was planted must be replaced by another tree in compliance with this article. A new two-year
warranty period starts for a tree used to replace a dead replacement tree.
(e) Replacement trees shall be dispersed throughout the site, particularly in parking lots.
(f) Small trees that meet the specifications of replacement trees may and are encouraged to be used in lieu of new plantings.
(g) Only those tree species found in appendix A of article 15.02 shall satisfy the tree planting and replacement standards and requirements of this section.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.077 Mitigation in lieu of replacement
(a) Money may be paid to the city instead of providing the replacement trees required by this article.
(b) This provision is limited to 25% of the required tree replacement, unless insufficient land area exists to plant the required total caliper width of replacement trees as
defined in this section, then the “cash in lieu” amount described above may be increased up to 50% of the required tree replacement amount. A certified arborist shall
make a written determination of the maximum total caliper width of replacement trees that may be planted on the site.
(c) Any such payments shall be deposited to the tree mitigation and replacement fund.
(d) The per-diameter-inch cash value for replacement trees and plantings is $100.00 per caliper inch tree. The city shall maintain a record of the current cash value of
replacement trees and plantings.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance 2017-62, sec. 2, adopted 9/19/17)
Sec. 13.02.078 Penalties for unauthorized removal of medium, large, and heritage trees
If any medium, large, or heritage trees are removed from any real property, or injured due to failure to follow required tree protection measures such that the tree(s) die
or may be reasonably expected to die, the city shall have authority to enact any or all of the following administrative and civil penalties on the developer and/or owner of
the property:
(1) A monetary penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per diameter inch of tree removed, payable to the city. Funds paid to the city as tree removal
penalties shall be deposited in the tree mitigation and replacement fund.
(2) Requirement to replace trees. Replacement trees shall have a minimum of at least a diameter width of three inches (3") and a minimum height of five
feet (5'). All other replacement requirements for medium and large trees shall apply.
(3) If the precise diameter of a tree cannot be determined, the cost of replacement shall be established by a certified arborist based on the arborist's
estimate of the caliper of the removed or damaged tree.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance 2017-62, sec. 3, adopted 9/19/17)
Sec. 13.02.079 Replanting of protected trees
(a) No person, directly or indirectly, shall replant, relocate, transfer or move from one location to another any tree on any real property within the city without first
obtaining a permit, except as otherwise provided herein.
(b) Only trees that meet and are replanted in compliance with appendix A of article 15.02, and the American National Standards Institute A300 guidelines, shall satisfy
the tree replanting requirements contained herein.
(c) Any person replanting, relocating, transferring or moving from one location to another any trees on any real property within the city, without first obtaining a permit,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in this article.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 13.02.080 Heritage tree removal prohibited; penalties
(a) Prohibition. No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or effectively destroy through damaging a heritage tree on any real property within the
city.
(b) Penalties. If any heritage trees are removed from any real property, or if a heritage tree is injured because of failure to follow required tree protection measures
such that the tree dies or may reasonably be expected to die, the city shall have the authority to enact the following administrative and civil penalties on the developer
and/or owner of the property:
(1) A monetary penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per caliper inch of heritage tree(s) removed, payable to the city. Funds paid to the city as tree
removal penalties shall be deposited in the tree mitigation and replacement fund; and/or
(2) Replacement with tree(s) having a total tree caliper equal to that of the removed tree(s). Such replacement trees shall have a minimum diameter of
three inches (3") and a minimum height of at least five feet (5'). All other replacement requirements for trees shall apply.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.081 Tree protection measures
The following tree protection measures shall be required:
(1) Prior to construction or land development, the developer shall establish and maintain a root protection zone and install four-foot-high (4') plastic (or
equivalent) safety fencing outside the dripline of existing and replacement trees for the duration of the construction and development. Warranty for the
survival of the trees may not be accepted in lieu of a root zone that is less than the area within the dripline. Trees may not be pruned to reduce the root zone.
(2) During construction, the developer shall prohibit the cleaning of equipment or materials and/or the disposal of any waste material, including, but not
limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc., under the canopy or dripline of any existing or replacement tree or group thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/349
(3) No attachments or wires of any kind, other than those of a protective nature, shall be attached to any tree.
(4) With major grade changes of six inches (6") or greater, a retaining wall or tree well of rock, brick, landscape timbers or other approved materials shall
be constructed around the tree no closer than the dripline of the tree. The top of the retaining wall or tree well shall be constructed at the new grade. The area
contained within the first one thousand five hundred feet (1500') of the root zone must be left in a pervious condition after construction and development is
completed.
(5) Unless otherwise approved by the city, no construction or construction-related activity shall occur under the dripline of any existing or replacement tree
or group thereof. Furthermore, if a foundation, street or alley pavement, utility line, on-site sewerage facility, pool, tennis court, patio, sidewalk, drive or
parking lot must be constructed within the dripline of said trees, it shall be constructed no closer than five feet (5') from the trunk of such trees; and, provided
further, the portion of any driveway or parking lot constructed within the dripline of any existing or replacement tree or group thereof shall be constructed of
pervious materials, such as pervious pavestone or ecocrete, approved by both the community development director and city engineer.
(6) Any trees removed during land development, construction, or construction-related activities are encouraged to be chipped or hauled off-site.
(7) No person shall remove, destroy, damage or cause the removal or destruction of a tree on city property or in any city park without first having obtained
written permission for such removal or destruction from the community development department. City work crews are excepted from the requirement of
obtaining written permission.
(Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14)
Sec. 13.02.082 Approved tree lists
Appendix A, of article 15.02 “Landscape Plantings,” will be periodically updated. The list shall be maintained and distributed to the public as guides for the identification
and selection of tree species that meet the various standards and requirements of this article. Trees included on these tree species lists are selected on the basis of one
or more of the following criteria or factors: hardiness, resistance to disease, suitability relative to local climate and soil conditions, adaptability for transplantation,
longevity, adaptability to various landscape conditions, resistance to drought, aesthetic qualities, shade provision, windbreak provision, screening qualities, improvement
of the city tree canopy, and/or contribution to the diversity of the city forest. (Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/14; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
CHAPTER 14
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 SOLID WASTE†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 14.02.001–14.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Collection
Sec. 14.02.031 Definitions
Brush. Includes leaves, lawn trimmings, grass cuttings, tree trimmings, hedge trimmings, weeds, flower stalks, and trees and tree limbs not to exceed three inches in
diameter or four feet in length (or so cut).
Garbage. Includes rubbish and refuse, and as so defined shall include kitchen and household waste of all kinds, food scraps, food containers, ashes, tin cans, glass,
paper, trash, and, in addition, all other substances capable of causing noxious odors.
(1972 Code, sec. 11.105; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.031)
Sec. 14.02.032 Declaration of necessity for collection system
The necessity for the establishment of a garbage and refuse collection system in the city is hereby declared. (1972 Code, sec. 11.101; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.032)
Sec. 14.02.033 Method of collection
The city may either establish its own garbage collection system, and hire employees and purchase equipment therefor as the council shall provide, or it may by
ordinance designate a garbage collection franchise holder as its exclusive agent therefor. (1972 Code, sec. 11.102; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.033)
Sec. 14.02.034 Collection by unauthorized persons prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation other than the city or the city's franchise holder and contractor to haul, collect, or otherwise transport garbage,
weeds, brush, or refuse of any kind within the city. In cases of oversize trees, large quantities of brush and large dead animals, citizens may, with the approval of the city
secretary, arrange for the collection and disposal of same with other agents, contractors, firms or individuals. Business concerns which produce too large a volume of
garbage or trash to be properly serviced under the quantity limitations hereinafter prescribed may, after first getting a written permit from the city, contract at their own
expense for the removal of same on conditions to be set out fully in said permit. No person, firm or corporation shall have the use of the official or contract dumping
grounds of the city without a written permit to do so issued by the city. (1972 Code, sec. 11.103; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.034)
Sec. 14.02.035 Use of collection service required
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the city or person dwelling therein, or proprietor or manager of commercial establishments, to refuse to avail themselves of the
garbage and refuse collection provided by the city itself or through its contractor and to refuse to pay the charges for said service established by the city council. (1972
Code, sec. 11.104; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.035)
Sec. 14.02.036 Containers
Curbside waste and recycling containers must meet the following requirements: Each container to be provided by the approved waste hauler shall be a watertight
receptacle officially approved by the city. (1972 Code, sec. 11.106; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.036; Ordinance 2018-7, sec. 1, adopted 1/23/18)
Sec. 14.02.037 Placement of waste for collection
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/349
Every owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any home, house, building, business or apartment in the city shall provide for such place one or more containers of the
type set out above as may be required to adequately handle all garbage originating at said dwelling or business, and to regularly set out such garbage therein for
collection. Such containers shall be set out or be placed so as to be easily visible by and accessible to the collector from the street or alley. Curbside waste and recycle
collection service shall be provided at least once a week at such times as may be set by the city. (1972 Code, sec. 11.107; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.037; Ordinance 2018-
7, sec. 2, adopted 1/23/18)
Sec. 14.02.038 Brush
No brush, as above defined, shall be mixed with any garbage or refuse, as above defined. If a garbage container is used for brush, it shall contain no garbage at the
time, and such brush shall be fully contained therein and not project out of same. All brush shall be placed in paper boxes (or in garbage containers as above provided),
except that trees and limbs not to exceed three inches in diameter and four feet in length may be tied together in bundles and stacked on the ground. (1972 Code, sec.
11.108; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.038)
Sec. 14.02.039 Waste from building operations
Rock, dirt, waste, scrap building materials, or other trash resulting from construction or remodeling of vacant or improved property, or general cleanup thereof prior to
occupancy, or substantial quantities of cut trees, brush, weeds and debris resulting from clearing operations for construction purposes, shall be removed by the owner
(or his agent) at his expense and shall not be collected by the city service. (1972 Code, sec. 11.109; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.039)
Sec. 14.02.040 Accumulation of waste
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place, deposit or throw, or permit or cause to be placed, deposited or thrown, any garbage, brush, loose waste
or refuse of any kind on public or private property (or permit the same to remain thereon) unless the same has been placed for collection in accordance with the
provisions of this article. (1972 Code, sec. 11.110; 2008 Code, sec. 13.02.040)
ARTICLE 14.03 PRIVATE WATER WELLS*
Sec. 14.03.001 New water wells prohibited; drilling permit required
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, association of persons, firm, or corporation to repair, correct, abandon and/or plug a well, or to engage upon such work,
within the limits of the city, or to employ anyone else to engage in such work, without first applying for and securing a permit from the city. Such permit may be granted to
any person, association of persons, firm or corporation who or which files with the city the application hereinafter provided for, and pays the fee hereinafter required, and
complies with all other requirements hereinafter set forth. All permits shall be executed in triplicate, one copy to be delivered to the applicant and two copies to be
retained by the city. It shall hereafter be unlawful for a new water well to be drilled within the city limits, with the exception of a local or state government, or for irrigation
purposes. The property owner, or his agents or assigns, shall abide by all applicable rules and regulations of the state commission on environmental quality and the
Edwards Aquifer Authority for the drilling of a new well. (1972 Code, sec. 29.101; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.001; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.002 Inspection of property prior to drilling
It shall be the duty of the city to cause to be inspected by the city engineer the property where any well is to be drilled, sunk, dug, or bored, and to refuse the issuance of
a permit to drill, sink, dig, or bore a well in a place which does not meet the required standards as to drainage and other sanitary conditions. (1972 Code, sec. 29.102;
2008 Code, sec. 13.03.002; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.003 Application for permit
Every application for a permit for the drilling, construction, repair and correction, abandonment and/or plugging of a well shall state the name of the well, and shall state
the name and address of the owner thereof; the purpose for which the permit is desired, which shall be one or more of the acts just mentioned; the definite location of
the well or proposed well; its approximate depth; and, if for a permit for the drilling or construction or repair and correction of a water well, the estimated amount of water
to be or which is pumped daily, monthly or annually, and the use or uses for which the water will be or is required; if for a permit for the drilling or construction or for the
repair and correction of a well, the proposed method of drilling or construction, or the proposed method of repair and correction, and the kind of equipment to be used;
and, in all cases, the name of the contractor, if done through a contractor, whom the owner desires to drill or construct, repair and correct, or do the work pursuant to an
abandonment of a well in compliance with this article. (1972 Code, sec. 29.103; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.003; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.004 Exceeding depth specified in permit
It shall be unlawful for any applicant who obtains a permit to construct a well of a certain depth to extend such well to a depth exceeding the depth provided for in such
permit without first obtaining an additional permit therefor. (1972 Code, sec. 29.105; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.004; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.005 Enforcement
(a) The city shall have the power:
(1) To have made examinations of all wells within the limits of the city, whether privately owned or otherwise;
(2) To have made at any time the necessary analyses and/or tests of water therefrom;
(3) To direct city employees go upon the land and property of the owner or owners of wells for that purpose;
(4) To require the owner or owners to furnish all information requested concerning the wells, including, in the case of new wells, complete logs of the well
showing depth to and depth through all geologic formations encountered;
(5) To supervise the construction, repair, abandonment and plugging of wells and the operation of the same.
(b) The city shall keep a register of all wells within the limits of the city, which shall show the owner, the location and the date of construction of each well, its depth and
diameter, the purpose for which the well was constructed and, if abandoned, the date of such abandonment.
(c) All acts authorized to be done by the city may be performed by such persons as may be authorized by the city manager to act for him.
(1972 Code, sec. 29.106; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.005; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.006 Plugging, sealing and casing
(a) Every well hereafter constructed, whether drilled, dug or excavated, shall be securely plugged and sealed or cased in such manner that the waters be confined to
the stratum so that no water from one stratum can by reason of the construction of the well come in contact with waters from another stratum. The casing shall be set in
the top of the Edwards Limestone formation from which water is to be taken and shall be cemented in place by a suitable method to be approved by the city, to the end
that cement be forced up around the outside of the casing from the bottom of the casing to the surface of the ground so that all waters found in the strata, except that
from which water is to be used, shall be sealed off one from the other by the cement, or, if a better method than cementing shall be scientifically developed to accomplish
the purpose mentioned, such better method may be prescribed by the city in lieu of cementing. The casing used shall be new or used grade A and of weight per foot not
less than the following, or the equivalent thereof:
Size of Casing Minimum Weight
per Foot
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/349
7 inch 20 pounds
8 inch 28 pounds
10-3/4 inch 32 pounds
12-1/2 inch 47 pounds
15-1/2 inch O.D. 60 pounds
18 inch O.D. 80 pounds
20 inch O.D. 89 pounds
(b) The casing shall be mechanically continuous from the point of setting in the bottom of the well to a point not less than 12 inches above ground level and shall be so
installed as to make impossible any leakage as against any pressure which may be encountered.
(c) If the casing is of two or more diameter sizes, the different sizes shall be connected with threaded nipples or be sealed with rubber, cement, or lead, or by some
other manner satisfactory to the city.
(1972 Code, sec. 29.107; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.006; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.007 Defective wells
Every well, whether dug or drilled, now constructed or which may hereafter be constructed, which for any reason does not completely prevent the mixing of water or
other liquid from above and below the source of the city's water supply with the water in the source of the city's water supply, or which for any reason would tend to
pollute or contaminate any other well or the water in the source of the city's water supply, shall be considered a defective well, and the city may have caused an
examination to be made of any well suspected of being defective, and if said examination indicates, in the opinion of the city engineer, that the well is a probable source
of contamination of the city water supply or any other well, or that the water from said well is unsafe for human consumption, shall issue written instructions to the owner
or his agent in charge of such well or the property upon which it is situated, for correcting the defects to comply with the provisions of this code, and prescribe a time
which, in his judgment, under all circumstances, is reasonable and within which such instructions shall be complied with. It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners or
operators of such defective well to fail to comply with such instructions within the time limit prescribed by the city. (1972 Code, sec. 29.108; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.007;
Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.008 Abandoned wells
(a) For the purpose of this article, an abandoned well is:
(1) A defective well which, in the judgment of the city engineer, cannot be corrected to comply with the requirements of this article; or
(2) A well which has been continuously out of use for a period of two years or longer.
(b) Whenever any well has not been in active use for more than two years, the owner or operator of the same shall report said fact to the city. Every abandoned well
shall be filled and plugged with such materials and in such manner as, in the judgment of the city engineer, will prevent the pollution and contamination of the city's water
supply or the contamination of any other well within the limits of the city. Such filling and plugging shall be done under the supervision of the city engineer, and at the
expense of the owner of such well. Whenever the city shall receive notice from any source of the existence of an abandoned well which has not been plugged and filled
in accordance with the provisions of this article, the city shall notify the owner or agent in charge of said well, or of the property upon which it is situated, that such well is
abandoned and shall instruct the owner or agent in charge to fill and plug such well in accordance with this article, and the owner or operator of such well shall comply
with such order within sixty days after the date of same. Should the owner or agent in charge fail to so comply within such period, or if, after using reasonable diligence,
should the city fail to locate the owner or agent in charge of such well, or of the property upon which the well is situated, the city representatives may go on the land or
property upon which the well is situated and fill and plug same in the manner required by this article. Whenever it becomes necessary for the city to have filled and
plugged any abandoned well, the owner or agent in charge thereof shall be liable to the city for the cost of doing such and shall pay the same upon demand.
(1972 Code, sec. 29.109; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.008; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.009 Nuisances
Any well or other opening now constructed, or which may hereafter be constructed, penetrating the underground water supply and which pollutes any other well, or the
city's water supply, is hereby declared a nuisance, and on notice to the owner of such well, or to the operator thereof, or to his agent in charge of the well, or of the
property on which it is situated, issued by the city, said nuisance shall be abated by the owner within ten (10) days from date of such notice by filling and plugging the
well or opening in the manner provided for in this article for abandoned wells, and if he shall fail to abate such nuisance within said time, or if, after exercising reasonable
diligence, the city is unable to locate the owner or his agent, the city shall have the right to authorize a representative to go on the land or property upon which the well is
situated and abate said nuisance in the manner provided, and the owner thereof shall be liable to the city for the cost of such work and shall pay the same upon
demand. (1972 Code, sec. 29.110; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.009; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.03.010 Minimum depth and size
It shall be unlawful for any person, association of persons, firm or corporation to drill or otherwise construct within the limits of the city any water well or any other well to
a depth of less than one hundred feet into the Edwards Limestone formation, and such well must be cased with a steel casing as heretofore provided of an inside
diameter of not less than eight inches so that such well may be properly cleaned for sanitary and health measures and be large enough for sanitary examination. (1972
Code, sec. 29.111; 2008 Code, sec. 13.03.010; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
ARTICLE 14.04 WATER SERVICE*
Sec. 14.04.001 Franchise required for supplying water
It shall be unlawful for any person, association of persons, firm or corporation, except as may now exist, to supply water to any other lot or lots for any purpose
whatsoever, regardless of ownership, whether or not they own the lot to be supplied, in the city, unless such person, association of persons, firm or corporation shall
have a written contract with the city to supply water to its inhabitants. Except as otherwise authorized by this chapter, all persons within the city limits of the City of Leon
Valley must be connected to either the City of Leon Valley water system or the San Antonio Water System. All new water service connections shall be made to the City
of Leon Valley water system, unless connection to the San Antonio Water System is deemed more suitable by the city engineer. This section does not apply to the retail
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/349
sale of water, or to property being serviced by operational private water well at the time of adoption of this chapter. (1972 Code, sec. 29.301; 2008 Code, sec. 13.04.001;
Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.002 Certificate of occupancy required prior to furnishing service
It shall be unlawful for any owner, officer, manager, agent, servant, or employee of any public utility or other supplier of water and water service to the public to hereafter
supply water to or provide water service for any person, firm or corporation within the city upon proof first furnished in writing by said person, firm or corporation of the
issuance to him, or it, in each case, of a certificate or permit of occupancy and compliance under the provisions of this code, respecting the premises for which water and
water service is sought. (1972 Code, sec. 29.302; 2008 Code, sec. 13.04.002; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.003 Monthly use charge
Monthly use charges for water, water service, water supply, Edwards Aquifer Conservation Plan, meter and other connection equipment and supplies, shall apply as
adopted in appendix A Fee Schedule of the city code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15; Ordinance adopting
2017 Code)
Sec. 14.04.004 Deposit required
A monetary deposit is required to establish water service. Fees for this deposit are as adopted in appendix A of the city code as amended or revised by ordinance from
time to time. The deposit is based upon the size of meter(s) being installed or used. Additional deposit charges may be incurred should water service be disconnected
for non-payment. Active military personnel and customers that provide a letter of credit from a previous water company confirming a payment history of no late payments
for the preceding twenty-four billing periods may be granted a deposit waiver. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 14.04.005 Responsibility for payment
The owner, renter, agent, firm, or corporation being supplied water service is responsible for payment of all water system charges as adopted in appendix A of the city
code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. Failure to pay these charges may result in disconnection of service and additional penalties. (Ordinance 15-
034 adopted 12/15/15; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 14.04.006 Water service disconnection
The water service customer is responsible for making all timely water service payments. Unpaid delinquent charges are subject to penalties as prescribed by the city.
Utility service may be discontinued due to nonpayment. When service to an existing connection has been suspended, the city will not re-establish service unless and
until a signed contract for water and sewer service has been received. The city may require an additional deposit of a sum, sufficient to the city, to ensure payment of
final charges. Water service may also be disconnected for failure to obtain annual inspection of, repairs to, or maintenance of any required air-gap or backflow
prevention device, or for failure to comply with the plumbing code as adopted by the city. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.007 Access to property
The owner, renter, agent, firm or corporation responsible for payment of the water service grants to the city access to the property on which the meter is placed, at all
reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, removing, or exchanging of city equipment, and for the purpose of detecting water leaks. The owner, renter,
agent, firm or corporation will promptly abate any violation of city regulations discovered by such inspections. The city may suspend utility service until repairs to water
leaks and/or sewer overflows are made. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.008 Restricted access to city equipment
The owner, renter, agent, firm or corporation responsible for water service to a property will not permit anyone except city employees to operate, tamper with, attempt to
repair, or in any way interfere with any city-owned equipment installed on the premises, and agrees to be legally responsible for damages to any city equipment.
(Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.009 Water line responsibilities
The city is responsible for repairs to meters and related city-owned water lines and mains. The owner, renter, agent, firm or corporation is responsible for repairs and
maintenance to privately owned water lines from the meter to the interior of the private property and any structures. The customer is responsible for the protection and
care of the water meter and water meter box which provides service to his property and further shall pay for any damages to these facilities. The customer is required to
supply a suitable main water supply shut-off valve to be placed in the line from the meter to the property. The shut-off valve shall be located on the private water supply
line. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.010 Interruption of service
The owner, renter, agent, firm or corporation responsible for water service will agree to hold the city harmless for any interrupted or diminished water service due to
water system repairs or due to the effects of drought management practices. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.011 Water supply safety
The city is responsible for assuring reasonable protection of the water supply from contamination or pollution from improper plumbing practices. All installation and
repairs to a water supply shall be performed by a state licensed plumber and all work performed shall be inspected by the city building official or plumbing inspector.
There shall be no direct connection between the public water supply and any potential source of water contamination. Potential sources of contamination shall be
isolated from the public water supply system by the installation of an air gap or reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device. Such devices are to be inspected by
a licensed plumber or licensed backflow prevention servicer annually. The customer is responsible for the installation, inspection, testing, repairs, and maintenance of
such devices. No cross connection between the public water supply and a private water system is permitted. Any potential threat by cross connection shall be eliminated
at the service connection by the installation of an air gap or reduced pressure zone backflow prevention device. No connection which allows water to be returned to the
public water supply is permitted. No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 0.2% lead may be used for the installation or repair of plumbing at any connection
which provides water for human use. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.012 Meter regulations
Except as herein provided, all water shall be furnished on a metered basis and a separate meter shall be installed for each family dwelling, business establishment, or
property served with water. There shall be no dual connections or more than one user on a single meter, with the exception of apartments. Apartment complexes will be
metered per building, with the exception of landscape watering meters. A separate meter may be requested and installed for landscape watering purposes. (Ordinance
15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.013 Rates equal and uniform
No free or reduced rate service shall be allowed and all water service connections shall be charged at rates as adopted by the city. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted
12/15/15)
Sec. 14.04.014 Bulk water
Temporary bulk water meters are allowed as a part of new construction or for short-term water service purposes. Bulk water meter permits are required and fees for bulk
meter deposits and bulk water are as adopted by city code. (Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
ARTICLE 14.05 SEWERS*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/349
Sec. 14.05.001 Connection
(a) Required. Every residence, place of business, or other building or place where persons reside, congregate, or are employed, which abuts a street in which there is
a public sanitary sewer, or the lot or tract of land which is at any point within three hundred feet (300') of a public sanitary sewer, within the city, shall be connected to the
sewer, by the owner or agent of the premises, in the most direct manner possible, and with a separate connection for each home, building or place. Neither the building
inspector nor any city official shall ever issue a building permit or a certificate of compliance and occupancy (whether on new construction or existing construction) as
required under this code unless there has been full compliance with this provision, which is hereby declared to be necessary for the public health.
(b) Permit. A permit fee shall be charged for connection of the plumbing fixtures of any house, residence, structure or building equipped with one or more plumbing
fixtures to any sewer line or pipe connected with or destined to be connected with the sanitary system of any franchisee of this city or to the sewer system of the City of
San Antonio, and connection of such fixtures, without first paying said fee and obtaining such permit is hereby declared to be an offense.
(c) Penalty. The connection of any plumbing fixture in any building to a sanitary sewer line in the city connected to any franchisee of this city or to the sewer system of
the City of San Antonio without first paying said fee and obtaining such permit is hereby declared to be an offense.
(1972 Code, sec. 21.100; 2008 Code, sec. 13.05.001; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.05.002 Monthly use charge
A monthly charge is hereby made against each and every user of sewer service in the city under the sewer service contract with the City of San Antonio. (1972 Code,
sec. 21.201; 2008 Code, sec. 13.05.002; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
Sec. 14.05.003 Permit for discharging waste through manhole or other opening
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to discharge, or to permit or bring about the discharge, of any liquid or substance whatever into any part of the sanitary
sewer system of the city through a manhole opening, storm drain, or otherwise, without having first secured a written permit from the city for the specific discharges
made. The city shall only issue such permits after the applicant has submitted a written application therefor describing in detail the discharges desired to be made: the
substances, quantities, dates, times, places, and means. In addition, the applicant must submit to the city proof in writing that the applicant has the permission of the
regional sewer authority, the City of San Antonio, to make the requested discharges. All permits otherwise issued are void and discharges made pursuant thereto shall
constitute violations hereof. (Ordinance 523 adopted 7/17/73; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 13.05.003; Ordinance 15-034 adopted 12/15/15)
ARTICLE 14.06 DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE AND TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF LIQUID WASTE*
Sec. 14.06.001 City of San Antonio regulations to apply within city; enforcement
(a) The city hereby authorizes the execution of an interlocal agreement with the San Antonio water system setting out the terms and conditions of the implementation
and enforcement of the City of San Antonio industrial waste and liquid waste transportation and disposal regulations ordinances within the city limits. The city manager is
hereby authorized to negotiate and execute an interlocal agreement substantially in the same form as the agreement attached to Ordinance 02-031 as attachment 1 and
incorporated herein.
(b) The terms, provisions and conditions of City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-471 through and including section 34-485 and section 34-511 through
and including section 34-524 will apply and be enforceable within the city limits. The city hereby delegates to the San Antonio water system the authority to enforce the
City of San Antonio's industrial waste and liquid waste transportation and disposal regulations ordinances within the city limits.
(c) Any person or entity within the city limits that is an authorized representative of an industrial user, an entity, an industrial user, a significant industrial user, a user, a
person, an existing source, a new source, a categorical user or a permittee, as those terms are used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-
471 through and including section 34-485, is required to perform all acts required of such a person or entity pursuant to the provisions of City of San Antonio Code of
Ordinances section 34-471 through and including section 34-485.
(d) Any person or entity within the city limits that is an authorized representative of an industrial user, an entity, an industrial user, a significant industrial user, a user, a
person, an existing source, a new source, a categorical user or a permittee, as those terms are used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-
471 through and including section 34-485, is required to pay all fees required of such a person or entity pursuant to the provisions of City of San Antonio Code of
Ordinances section 34-471 through and including section 34-485.
(e) Any person or entity within the city limits that is an authorized representative of an industrial user, an entity, an industrial user, a significant industrial user, a user, a
person, an existing source, a new source, a categorical user or a permittee, as those terms are used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-
471 through and including section 34-485, is subject to all prohibitions, limitations, restrictions and requirements applicable to such a person or entity that are contained
in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-471 through and including section 34-485.
(f) Any person or entity within the city limits that is an authorized representative of an industrial user, an entity, an industrial user, a significant industrial user, a user, a
person, an existing source, a new source, a categorical user or a permittee, as those terms are used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-
471 through and including section 34-485, is subject to all civil and criminal penalties applicable to such a person or entity that are contained in City of San Antonio Code
of Ordinances section 34-471 through and including section 34-485.
(g) The city authorizes the San Antonio water system to exercise all rights, to perform all functions, responsibilities and duties, and to do any act performable by the
control authority, SAWS, the city, the San Antonio water system, a publicly owned treatment works (POTW), the department, or the director, as those terms are used or
defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-471 through and including section 34-485, within the city limits.
(h) Any person or entity within the city limits that is a person, applicant, liquid waste transporter, permittee, liquid waste generator, disposal site operator, generator,
SAWS permit holder, commercial vehicle wash, liquid waste hauler, manager, mobile waste generator, vehicle wash grit drying facility, or transporter, as those terms are
used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-511 through and including section 34-524, is required to perform all acts required of such a person
or entity pursuant to the provisions of City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-511 through and including section 34-524.
(i) Any person or entity within the city limits that is a person, applicant, liquid waste transporter, permittee, liquid waste generator, disposal site operator, generator,
SAWS permit holder, commercial vehicle wash, liquid waste hauler, manager, mobile waste generator, vehicle wash grit drying facility, or transporter, as those terms are
used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-511 through and including section 34-524, is required to pay all fees required of such a person or
entity pursuant to the provisions of City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-511 through and including section 34-524.
(j) Any person or entity within the city limits that is a person, applicant, liquid waste transporter, permittee, liquid waste generator, disposal site operator, generator,
SAWS permit holder, commercial vehicle wash, liquid waste hauler, manager, mobile waste generator, vehicle wash grit drying facility, or transporter, as those terms are
used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-511 through and including section 34-524, is subject to all prohibitions, limitations, restrictions and
requirements applicable to such a person or entity that are contained in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-511 through and including section 34-524.
(k) Any person or entity within the city limits that is a person, applicant, liquid waste transporter, permittee, liquid waste generator, disposal site operator, generator,
SAWS permit holder, commercial vehicle wash, liquid waste hauler, manager, mobile waste generator, vehicle wash grit drying facility, or transporter, as those terms are
used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-511 through and including section 34-524, is subject to all civil and criminal penalties applicable to
such a person or entity that are contained in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances section 34-511 through and including section 34-524.
(l) The city authorizes the San Antonio water system to exercise all rights, to perform all functions, responsibilities and duties, and to do any act performable by
SAWS, the department, the city, the director, the CEO or the San Antonio water system, as those terms are used or defined in City of San Antonio Code of Ordinances
section 34-511 through and including section 34-524, within the city limits.
(Ordinance 02-031 adopted 11/5/02; 2008 Code, sec. 13.06.001)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/349
ARTICLE 14.07 UTILITY EASEMENTS
Sec. 14.07.001 Fencing
(a) The owner of property upon which a utility easement is located may use it for lawn purposes, and in such cases fencing across the easement shall be permitted.
However, gates along the side lot lines must be provided. The gates shall be fifteen feet (15') wide (two 7-1/2 foot gates) and shall be capable of being opened and
closed at all times. These gates shall be secured in the center by a drop rod or some similar device which does not obstruct free passage over the easement. The drop
rod may be lowered into a drop rod keeper, installed so as to be flush with the ground level. No permanent type center pole for the gates may be erected on the
easement.
(b) The gates provided for herein shall remain unlocked at all times. Post and chain gates as specified herein shall be installed at the ends of the utility easements and
shall be capable of being opened, closed and locked at all times.
(1972 Code, sec. 14.501; 2008 Code, sec. 13.07.001)
Sec. 14.07.002 Maintenance; obstructions
Maintenance of the easement shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which it is located. It shall be the duty of the property owner to keep the area
across, over or under this easement clear of any structure, debris, vegetation, trees, shrubs or landscaping whatsoever, except that lawn grass, which shall be regularly
mowed and controlled, may be grown thereon. No boats, automobiles, trailers, garbage cans, boxes or obstacles to the free movement of vehicular traffic whatsoever
shall be placed, parked, or permitted to remain in such easements. (1972 Code, sec. 14.502; 2008 Code, sec. 13.07.002)
ARTICLE 14.08 UTILITY CONSTRUCTION PERMIT*
Sec. 14.08.001 Required; issuance
(a) Applicability. Except as provided for herein, every individual, company, corporation, municipal corporation, utility district or other entity wishing to install, repair,
replace or maintain a utility line within the city where installation, repair, replacement or maintenance involves underground excavation must first secure a utility
construction permit from the city. Underground work permits are required within utility easements on private property. Except as may be required by other sections of the
city's ordinances, permits are not required for underground work on private property outside of utility easements.
(b) Franchise holders.
(1) Utility operators franchised by the city and their subcontractors must:
(A) Obtain a utility construction permit prior to beginning work. Permits shall not be issued until completion of the following:
(i) Permit application/construction plans. A permit request showing location, type of work to be performed, and other relevant information
requested by the city shall be submitted to the city development office along with three (3) copies of the utility construction plans;
(ii) Permit review. The director of public works or his designated representative shall review all documents submitted and make
recommendations;
(iii) Payment of all fees. Franchise holders are exempt from permit fees; and
(iv) Procedure. The city development office shall review the comments of the department of public works and thereafter approve or deny the
permit.
(B) Comply with the general conditions of the city for utility construction and special conditions indicated on the permit.
(C) If work is in a paved area, comply with section 14.08.003 and the general conditions of the city for utility construction.
(2) In emergency situations, franchise holders may begin work following the general conditions of the city for utility construction without first obtaining a
permit; however, a permit must be applied for the following business day. An emergency situation is considered a condition which is unsafe or where service
to customers will be interrupted unless immediate action is taken.
(3) Some franchise holders are contractually exempt from portions of this section.
(c) Non-franchise holders. Utility operators not holding a franchise with the city and their subcontractors shall comply with the provisions of subsection (b) of this
section and pay the following: Permit fees of ten percent (10%) of the city-approved estimate of project cost/valuation and not less than an amount as provided in
appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time must be paid to the city.
(Ordinance 97-037 adopted 11/4/97; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 13.08.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 14.08.002 Approval of plans
A permit will be issued by the city secretary for utility construction only after the plans have been approved by the city engineer. Scaled drawings showing the proposed
work and the relation to existing facilities are required. Additional information may be required by the city engineer. Such drawings shall bear the seal of an engineer
registered to practice engineering in the state and shall be submitted to the city engineer in the number of copies required by him. (Ordinance 443 adopted 4/18/72; 2008
Code, sec. 13.08.002)
Sec. 14.08.003 Work in paved areas
(a) Where work involves the underground crossing of paved areas, the city will require the applicant to install their line within a conduit by boring under the paved
areas.
(b) In the alternative and at the city's sole option, the city may, in some instances, allow the applicant to open-cut paved areas. If such permission is granted, the
following conditions must be met:
(1) Prepayment to the city of a predetermined amount per linear foot of the street cut. This cost shall reflect the actual cost to the city for materials and
contract labor used for street overlay;
(2) As necessary, the city may change, alter or impose other requirements to protect the interest of the city;
(3) Compliance with section 14.08.001.
(Ordinance 97-037 adopted 11/4/97; 2008 Code, sec. 13.08.003)
Sec. 14.08.004 Bond
(a) All contractors doing work requiring the cutting of an existing street or easement under this article shall post a maintenance bond in an amount sufficient to
guarantee repair of the right-of-way or easement should the contractor not do so properly. The engineer preparing the plans shall also prepare an estimate for such work
for approval by the city engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/349
(b) The maintenance bond so submitted for shall guarantee the work performed for a 6-month period, from the date of acceptance by the city, against failure due to
workmanship or materials.
(c) Such bond as required above is a prerequisite of the issuance of any permit under this article.
(d) The contractor shall notify the city secretary one day in advance of beginning any work and shall again notify the city secretary upon completion of the work for a
final inspection. The contractor shall allow 24 hours minimum time for a final inspection by the city.
(Ordinance 443 adopted 4/18/72; 2008 Code, sec. 13.08.004)
Sec. 14.08.005 Safety requirements
During construction, the contractor shall conform to all code provisions governing safety and shall provide adequate detours and flagmen if required to insure the safety
of the public. (Ordinance 443 adopted 4/18/72; 2008 Code, sec. 13.08.005)
ARTICLE 14.09 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.09.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
Assessment roll. The official listing of assessments of real property maintained by the Bexar County Appraisal District.
Base rate. The stormwater management fee charged on a square foot of benefited real property.
Benefited property. An improved lot or tract to which drainage service is made available under this article.
Board. The stormwater management board for the city. The city council is designated as the stormwater management board.
Certificate of occupancy. The final inspection by the city building inspector.
City manager. The city manager for the City of Leon Valley.
Commercial property. All developed property not meeting the definition of residential property, multifamily property or public property.
Cost of service. As applied to a drainage system service to any benefited property:
(1) The prorated cost of the acquisition, whether by eminent domain or otherwise, of land, rights-of-way, options to purchase land, easements, and
interests in land relating to structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefited property;
(2) The prorated cost of the acquisition, construction, repair, and maintenance of structures, equipment, and facilities used in draining the benefited
property;
(3) The prorated cost of architectural, engineering, legal, and related services, plans and specifications, studies, surveys, estimates of cost and of revenue,
and all other expenses necessary or incident to planning, providing, or determining the feasibility and practicability of structures, equipment, and facilities
used in draining the benefited property;
(4) The prorated cost of all machinery, equipment, furniture, and facilities necessary or incident to the provision and operation of draining the benefited
property;
(5) The prorated cost of funding and financing charges and interest arising from construction projects and the start-up cost of a drainage facility used in
draining the benefited property;
(6) The prorated cost of debt service and reserve requirements of structures, equipment, and facilities provided by revenue bonds or other drainage
revenue-pledged securities or obligations issued by the municipality.
Council. The city council of the City of Leon Valley.
Developed property. Real property which has been altered from its natural condition by the addition of any improvements such as buildings, structures, or other
impervious area.
Drainage. Bridges, catchbasins, channels, conduits, creeks, culverts, detention ponds, ditches, draws, flumes, pipes, pumps, sloughs, treatment works, and
appurtenances to those items, whether natural or artificial, or using force or gravity, that are used to draw off surface water from land, carry the water away, collect, store,
or treat the water, or divert the water into natural or artificial watercourses, and shall be used synonymously with “stormwater.”
Fee. The monthly service stormwater management charge established under this article and levied on owners of benefited real property to fund the costs of stormwater
management, including operating, maintaining, and improving the stormwater system in the city.
Fund. The stormwater management fund created by this article to operate, maintain, and improve the city's stormwater system.
Impervious surface. The number of square feet of surface area covered by buildings or other improvements which are compacted or covered with material that is
resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, and any other oiled,
graveled, graded, or any other surface which impedes the natural infiltration of surface water as determined by the city.
Multifamily property. A developed property which serves the primary purpose of providing three (3) or more permanent dwelling units.
Nonpoint source pollution. Pollutants which are not otherwise permitted for discharge, including but not limited to soil erosion, motor oils, antifreeze, gasoline, fertilizers,
pesticides, household chemicals, faulty septic systems, and animal wastes.
Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water of the state or water of the United States, that
renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or
the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Property owner. The property owner of record as listed in the assessment roll. A property owner includes any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, or group of
individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee, receiver, or personal representative.
Public property. A developed property which serves the primary purpose for use by the public such as, but not limited to, a church or a school.
Residential property. A developed property which serves the primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit and which is classified as residential in the
assessment roll. A single-family detached dwelling, townhouse or a second dwelling unit (duplex) is included in this definition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/349
Stormwater. Surface flow water from precipitation that accumulates in and flows through natural and/or man-made storage and conveyance systems during and
immediately following a storm event.
Stormwater management. The planning, design, construction, regulation, enforcement, improvement, repair, maintenance, and operation of facilities and programs
relating to water, pollutants, grading, erosion, tree conservation, and sediment control.
Stormwater system. The system or network of stormwater management facilities, including but not limited to inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage
easements, retention and detention basins and other components as well as all natural waterways within the city.
Undeveloped property. Any property that is in its natural condition.
User. The person or entity who owns or occupies a benefited property.
Water. Any stormwater, surface water, snowmelt or groundwater.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.001)
Sec. 14.09.002 Statutory powers
The statutory powers as to public utilities granted by Vernon's Annotated Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, title 28, Cities, Towns and Villages, chapter 10, Public Utilities,
articles 1106 through 1132, inclusive, and the Environmental Protection Agency and the state commission on environmental quality, and other powers as adopted by this
article, are hereby recognized and expressly declared to embody the policy and power of the city with respect to public utilities. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted
1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.002)
Sec. 14.09.003 Responsibility for stormwater management
The city is responsible for stormwater management in the city. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.003)
Sec. 14.09.004 Authority
The governing body of a municipality is authorized by the Texas Local Government Code, sec. 552.045 adoption of system; rules, to adopt a system of charges to fund
the implementation of stormwater and drainage management programs. This section declares the drainage system of the municipality to be a public utility. (Ordinance
09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.004; Ordinance 2018-71 adopted 9/4/18)
Sec. 14.09.005 Enactment
The city is enacting a stormwater management fee system based on factors that influence runoff, including the size of the parcel, the pollutants present, and the land
use of the property. The governing body must publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality stating the time and place of a public hearing to
consider the proposed ordinance. The proposed ordinance must be published in full in the notice. The governing body shall publish the notice three times before the
date of the hearing. The first publication must occur on or before the 30th day before the date of the hearing. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code,
sec. 13.09.005)
Sec. 14.09.006 Administration
The municipality must hold a public hearing on the charges before levying the charges. The municipality must give notice of the hearing in the manner provided by
section 14.09.005. The proposed schedule of drainage charges as originally adopted, or as revised, must be published in the notice. After completion of the public
hearing on the charges, the municipality may levy a schedule of drainage charges. The schedule of drainage charges must be based on an inventory of lots and land in
the service area. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.006)
Sec. 14.09.007 Scope of utility
All real property in the city, including property owned by public and tax-exempt entities, contributes to runoff and pollution of the receiving stream and either uses or
benefits from the stormwater system. State law requires a municipality to set customer fees on any basis other than the value of the property. Fees are to be directly
related to drainage, and drainage services must be afforded on a nondiscriminatory, equitable, and reasonable basis. Equity for all ratepayers is the primary objective in
establishing a drainage utility - each customer pays a fee relative to the amount of stormwater runoff service or damage generated from a property, negatively affecting
the public health and safety in loss of the life and property as a result of surface water overflows, surface water stagnation, and pollution arising from nonpoint source
runoff within the boundaries of the established service area. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.007)
Sec. 14.09.008 Causes
Stormwater runoff results in overflow damage, stagnation and associated health hazards, and contributes to nonpoint source pollution of the drainage systems of the
city, and a stormwater management program is required to reduce this type of damage, including pollution. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec.
13.09.008)
Sec. 14.09.009 Fee system
It is in the interests of the public to fund stormwater management with a user fee system that allocates the costs of stormwater management to benefited property
owners in the city. A stormwater management fee system offers additional financial management options that would assist the city to improve stormwater services. After
a determination of the utility revenue requirements and the selected billing rate structure, a schedule of charges will be developed for the new utility. The standard billing
rate will be calculated by dividing the necessary revenue requirement by the total number of billing units in the customer database. The initial rate will be designed with
adequate revenue generation to cover the annual revenue requirements for subsequent years. This allows for a constant utility rate for the first four years of utility
operation. The council may make changes to the rate system as allowed by law and may give additional notification to citizens of required hearings, whether one or
more, through the stormwater management fee billing at least 30 days prior to a public hearing. The date of the public hearing will be posted as provided by law and
provided on the billing notice. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.009)
Sec. 14.09.010 Stormwater drainage revenue bonds
As provided in Local Government Code, section 552.051, and Government Code, title 9, chapter 1201, by majority vote of the council, the city may issue stormwater
drainage revenue bonds. The city may use the Bond Procedures Act of 1981 (article 717k-6, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) [Public Security Procedures Act, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, chapter 1201]. In addition, the city may pledge income received by contracts for the provision of stormwater drainage services to other governments
or governmental subdivisions located inside or outside the service area. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.010; Ordinance 2018-71
adopted 9/4/18)
Sec. 14.09.011 Enforcement
Unless the property is exempted, a person must pay the established fee to the drainage system. Failure to pay such charges will subject such person to legal actions set
forth below. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.011)
Sec. 14.09.012 Segregation of income
The income of a drainage utility system must be segregated and completely identifiable in municipal accounts. If drainage charges are solely for the cost of service, the
municipality may transfer the charges in whole or in part to the municipal general fund, except for any part collected outside municipal boundaries and except for any
part pledged to retire any outstanding indebtedness or obligation incurred, or as a reserve for future construction, repair, or maintenance of the drainage system. If the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/349
governing body has levied, in the drainage charge, an amount in contribution to the funding of future system improvements, including replacement, new construction, or
extension, that amount is not transferable to the general fund. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.012)
Secs. 14.09.013–14.09.050 Reserved
Division 2. Funding
Sec. 14.09.051 Findings
(a) The city owns, operates and maintains a stormwater system.
(b) The stormwater system in the city needs regular maintenance and improvements.
(c) Water quality is degraded by erosion and the discharge of nutrients, metals, oil, grease, toxic materials, and other substances introduced into and through the
stormwater system.
(d) The public health, safety, and welfare are adversely affected by degraded water quality that results from stormwater.
(e) All real property in the city either uses or benefits from the maintenance and improvement of the stormwater system.
(f) The extent of use of the stormwater system by each property is dependent on factors that influence runoff, including land use and the amount of impervious surface
on the property.
(g) The costs of improving, maintaining, operating, and monitoring the stormwater system should be allocated, to the extent practicable, to all benefited property
based on the impact of stormwater runoff from the property into the stormwater management system.
(h) Management of the stormwater system to protect the public health, safety, and welfare requires adequate revenues and it is in the interest of the public to finance
stormwater management adequately with a user charge system that is “reasonable and equitable” so that each user of the system pays to the extent to which he
contributes to the need for it.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.051)
Sec. 14.09.052 Stormwater management fund established
(a) The stormwater management program is established and the stormwater system is provided to protect the waterways and land in the city by protecting the natural
environment. The costs of designing, developing, improving, operating, maintaining, and monitoring the stormwater system required in the city should, therefore, be
allocated, to the extent practicable, to all property owners based on their impact on the stormwater system. In order to provide revenue to fund those costs and to fairly
allocate those costs, a stormwater management fund is established.
(b) All revenues collected from the stormwater management fee, and from grants, permit fees, and other charges collected by stormwater management, shall be
deposited to the fund. The council may make additional appropriations to the fund. All disbursements from the fund shall be for the purposes of the fund as set forth in
section 14.09.053.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.052; Ordinance 2018-71 adopted 9/4/18)
Sec. 14.09.053 Purposes of fund
The fund shall be used for the following purposes:
(1) All costs of administration and implementation of the stormwater management program, including the establishment of reasonable operating and capital
reserves and contingencies;
(2) Operation and maintenance of the stormwater system;
(3) Monitoring, surveillance, and inspection of stormwater devices;
(4) Water quality programs;
(5) Inspection and enforcement activities;
(6) Legal expenses;
(7) Billing and administrative costs; and
(8) Other activities that are reasonably required for the operation of the stormwater program.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.053)
Sec. 14.09.054 Classification of property for purpose of determining fee
For purposes of determining the stormwater management fee, all properties in the city are classified into one of the following classes:
(1) Residential property;
(2) Commercial property;
(3) Multifamily property; or
(4) Public use property.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.054)
Sec. 14.09.055 Fee established
A monthly service charge is imposed upon all benefited real property beginning January 1, 2009 to fund stormwater management programs. This service charge shall be
known as the stormwater management fee (“fee”). Any real property completed or added to the county tax assessment roll after January 1, 2009, or annexed into the
city after January 1, 2009, will be subject to the monthly charge. The fee is based on:
(1) The property land area in square feet;
(2) The classification of the property; and
(3) The cost of implementing, operating and maintaining a stormwater management program.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/349
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.055)
Sec. 14.09.056 Base rate
The board shall, as set forth in section 14.09.091, establish the effective unit rate for the stormwater management fee. The base rate shall be calculated to insure
adequate revenues to fund the costs of stormwater management and to provide for the operation, maintenance, and capital improvements of the stormwater system in
the city. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.056)
Sec. 14.09.057 Exemptions from fee
(a) The council finds that all benefited real property in the city contributes to runoff and either uses or benefits from the maintenance of the stormwater system.
Therefore, all real property in the city, excluding properties that are under city, school district, state, and federal ownership, shall be charged with a fee.
(b) Reserved.
(c) New residence development is exempt, until the city has completed final occupancy inspections.
(d) Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system may reduce the fee to the extent that the private
drainage system is effective.
(e) Property held and maintained in its natural state is exempt, until such time that the property is developed.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.057; Ordinance 2018-71 adopted 9/4/18)
Sec. 14.09.058 Payment of fee; delinquency; lien for overdue fees
(a) The monthly fee must be paid within 30 days after the bill is mailed or issued to the property owner and is overdue after that date. An overdue fee penalty will be
assessed at the rate specified in the rate ordinance.
(b) The fee, including interest and penalties, when overdue, constitutes the basis for the city filing a lien on real property and may be collected in the same manner as
a delinquent electric bill or by a suit against the property owner or other methods as allowed by law. During the period when the fee is overdue and after written notice to
the owner, the property is no longer authorized to deliver stormwater to the city's stormwater system.
(c) The city manager may abate the fee, including interest and penalties, if it is determined by the city to be in error or otherwise not collectable.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.058)
Sec. 14.09.059 Request for correction of fee
(a) A property owner may request correction of the fee by submitting a written request to the city manager at 6400 El Verde Road, Leon Valley, Texas, 78238, within
30 days after the date the assessment notice or the bill is mailed or issued to the property owner. Grounds for correction of the fee include:
(1) Incorrect classification of the property for purposes of determining the fee;
(2) An error in the square footage of the property;
(3) Mathematical error in calculating the fee to be applied to the property; and
(4) Errors in the identification of the property owner of a property subject to the fee.
(b) Requests for correction of errors which are received after 30 days will be considered; however, no credit for any levy prior to receipt of the request shall be issued.
The city manager shall make a determination within 30 days after receipt of the property owner's completed written request for correction of the fee. The city manager's
decision on a request for correction of the fee shall end the administrative remedies available to the customer.
(c) A property owner must comply with all rules and procedures adopted by the city when submitting a request for correction of the fee and must provide all
information necessary for the city manager to make a determination on a request for correction of the fee. If a property owner alleges an error under section 14.09.091,
the request for correction must include a certification by a registered engineer or professional land surveyor of the size in square feet of the property if the property is
unplatted. Failure to comply with the provisions of this subsection shall be grounds for denial of the request.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.059)
Sec. 14.09.060 Discontinuation of drainage system
(a) If, after at least five years of substantially continuous operation of the drainage system, the council determines that the system should be discontinued, that the
powers under this article should be revoked, and that provision for city drainage should be made by other revenues, the council may adopt an ordinance to that effect
after providing notice and a public hearing as provided by section 14.09.005.
(b) If the municipality discontinues a system under subsection (a), it may not adopt a system under this article for at least five years after the discontinuation.
(c) A discontinuation does not affect a written obligation incurred by the city for funding or for the purchase of equipment, materials, or labor for the drainage system
that is not then fully paid or otherwise discharged.
(d) A claim for damages based on an alleged failure of the drainage system that is filed with the city before the adoption of the ordinance discontinuing the drainage
system is not abated by the discontinuation.
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.060)
Secs. 14.09.061–14.09.090 Reserved
Division 3. Rate Methodology
Sec. 14.09.091 Origin of base rate
Benefited properties will be assessed a fee based on square footage of real property as follows:
Area (square feet) Monthly Rate
Residential
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/349
Tier I 0 to 4,999 $2.78
Tier II 4,999 or more $3.68
Multifamily
Tier I 0 to 21,999 $6.19
Tier II 22,000 to 43,999 $19.37
Tier III 44,000 to 131,999 $58.73
Tier IV 132,000 or more $279.49
Commercial
Tier I 0 to 21,999 $15.85
Tier II 22,000 to 43,999 $43.35
Tier III 44,000 to 86,999 $77.70
Tier IV 87,000 to 131,999 $133.91
Tier V 132,000 or more $295.87
Public
Tier I 0 to 21,999 $15.70
Tier II 22,000 to 43,999 $42.94
Tier III 44,000 to 86,999 $77.56
Tier IV 87,000 or more $131.12
(Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.091)
Secs. 14.09.092–14.09.130 Reserved
Division 4. Enforcement
Sec. 14.09.131 Delinquent payments
Any charge due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered in an action at law by the city. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided at law or
in this article, failure of a user of the utility within the service area to pay the charges promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of any utility services
provided by the city. The city manager or designee is hereby empowered to enforce this provision against delinquent users. The employees of the utility established in
accordance with this article shall have access, at all reasonable times, to any benefited properties served by the drainage utility for inspection or repair of the stormwater
facilities or for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 1, adopted 1/20/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.09.131)
Sec. 14.09.132 Penalty
Each violation of this article shall be punished by a penalty of a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 09-003, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09; 2008
Code, sec. 13.09.132; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE 14.10 TELECOMMUNICATIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 14.10.001–14.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Use of Public Rights-of-Way†
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/349
Sec. 14.10.031 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to establish a competitively neutral policy for the use of the public rights-of-way for the provision of telecommunications services and
enable the city to:
(1) Establish a local policy with clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the exercise of local authority with respect to telecommunications
providers using the public rights-of-way;
(2) Manage access to the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects and the costs to
the citizens resulting from the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way;
(3) Obtain fair and reasonable compensation to the city for the private commercial use of the public right-of-way through the collection of nondiscriminatory
fees and charges;
(4) Promote competition among telecommunications service providers and encourage the universal availability of advanced telecommunications services
to all residents and businesses of the city;
(5) Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city;
(6) Assure that the city's current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public rights-of-way are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs;
(7) Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or services within the city comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations of the city;
(8) Assure that the city can continue to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare;
(9) Enable the city to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition and technological
development; and
(10) Assure that the rights of current franchise holders are not unduly affected.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 1; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.031)
Sec. 14.10.032 Definitions
Affiliate. A person who offers a telecommunications service and falls into one or more of the following categories:
(1) Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in a provider;
(2) Each person in which a provider has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest;
(3) Each officer, director, general partner, limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of fifteen percent (15%) or more, joint venturer or joint venture
partner, of a provider; and
(4) Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with the provider;
provided that “affiliate” shall in no event mean any limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of less than fifteen percent (15%) of such provider, or any creditor of
such provider solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being
under common ownership, common management, or common control with such provider.
Applicant. Any person who files an application with the city, under section 14.10.033, in order to obtain the necessary consent to place a telecommunications network
within the public rights-of-way of the city.
Cable Act. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. section 532 et seq., amended to January 1, 1997.
Cable operator. A person providing or offering to provide “cable service” within the city as that term is defined in the Cable Act.
Cable service. Shall have the same meaning provided by the Cable Act.
Certificated telecommunications utility. A telecommunications provider who is required to obtain or has a certificate of convenience and necessity or a certificate of
operating authority or a service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, as amended to January 1, 1996 (PURA), as
those terms are defined by PURA, as amended to January 1, 1996, to provide telecommunications services in the city.
City property. All real property owned by the city, other than public rights-of-way as that term is defined herein, and all other property held in a proprietary capacity by the
city, which are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this division.
City requirements. All laws, rules, regulations, policies and directives of general application of the city, in effect at present or to be adopted in the future by the city
council.
Director. The director of the public works of the city or his or her designee, charged with the administration and enforcement of this division.
Director of public works. The director of the department of the city, or his or her designee, charged with the administration of the public rights-of-way.
Excess capacity. The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct, conduit, manhole, handhold or other utility facility within the public way that is or will be available
for use for additional telecommunications facilities.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The federal agency or its successor agency that is the regulatory authority over the telecommunications providers.
Gross revenue. Includes all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a provider from telecommunications services offered through a telecommunications network within
the city. Gross revenue does not include revenue uncollectible from customers (bad debt). By way of example, but without limitation, gross revenue includes:
(1) Revenue derived from cash sales, customer credit account sales, and property of any kind or nature or from any service whatsoever received or
accruing to the provider directly or indirectly arising from or attributable to the sale or exchange of telecommunications and/or network services by the
provider within the city;
(2) All telecommunications services revenues charged on a flat rate basis;
(3) All telecommunications services revenues charged on a usage sensitive or mileage basis;
(4) All revenues from connection or disconnection fees;
(5) All revenues from penalties, fees or charges to customers for checks returned from banks, net of bank costs paid;
(6) All revenue from local service;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/349
(7) All revenue from authorized rental or lease of conduit space;
(8) All revenue from charges for access to or from local and long distance networks;
(9) All revenue from authorized rentals or leases of any portion of the provider's telecommunications network, including, but not limited to, plant, facilities,
antenna towers or capacity leased to others;
(10) All revenues from enhanced data service;
(11) All interconnect and access and/or landline charges or revenues from wireless telecommunications entities, interexchange carriers and other
providers;
(12) All revenues derived from co-location connection fees;
(13) All revenues from subsidiary or affiliate entities or entities renting or leasing conduit space or any other part of the provider's network;
(14) Any fees collected from the customer, other than state sales taxes, but including all fees and charges collected pursuant to this division;
(15) Revenues from the lease or resale of lines or circuit paths to any affiliate or third parties; and
(16) All revenue from the sale, lease or access for or to network elements in the public rights-of-way (as contemplated by 47 C.F.R. part 51 et seq.).
Network element. A facility or equipment used in the provision of telecommunications service, such as the local loop, that is on or in the public rights-of-way.
Person. An individual, corporation, association, partnership, joint venture or other entity.
Public rights-of-way. The surface, the air space above the surface, and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard,
drive, bridge, tunnel, easement or similar property in which the city holds any property interest (fee title, easement or otherwise) or exercises any rights of management
or control and which, consistent with the purposes for which it was acquired or dedicated, may be used for the installation and maintenance of a telecommunications
network. This term specifically includes public rights-of-way of the state.
Public rights-of-way use agreement or PRWUA. A PRWUA is the municipal consent granted by the city council to providers to use public rights-of-way to place a
telecommunications network within the city as specified by the terms of such agreement and consistent with this division.
Public street crossing fee. Any fee charged for use of public rights-of-way for providers not having authority to use all of the city's rights-of-way, but serving customers
within the city, including but not limited to actual crossing of streets.
Public utility commission of the state or PUC. The state agency having jurisdiction over telecommunications providers.
Telecommunications network or network. All facilities of any kind placed in, on or above the public rights-of-way and used to provide telecommunications services.
Telecommunications provider or provider. A person, and any affiliate, who is required by this division to obtain a PRWUA, or who have been granted the right by a
PRWUA to place a telecommunications network within the city in accordance with this division.
Telecommunications services. All transmissions between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing (whether voice, video or data),
without change in the content of the information as sent and received, where such transmissions are accomplished by means of a telecommunications network.
Telecommunications services also include any ancillary or adjunct services which may be rendered in conjunction with transmissions described in the preceding
sentence. Telecommunications services are classified in the categories set forth in section 14.10.045. For levels 1, 2, and 3, these categories are intended to utilize
existing state law classifications and shall be interpreted to reflect any nonsubstantive modification of service categories implemented by the PUC or judicial decision.
“Telecommunications services” does not include cable service.
Utility infrastructure. All city electric utility distribution poles, transmission structures, ducts and all other city owned or operated transmission structures, distribution
conduit, building entry conduit, utility tunnels, manholes, vaults, radio towers, other radio equipment, fiber optic cable capacity and active communications capacity,
together with all appurtenant facilities.
Wholesale telecommunications services revenues. The revenue received by the provider from selling its telecommunications services at a wholesale rate to other
telecommunications carriers, as those terms are defined in and as required by sections 251 and 252 of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, the
Federal Code of Regulations, 47 C.F.R. section 51.601 et seq., and the PUC substantive rules, all as amended to January 1, 1997.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 2; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.032)
Sec. 14.10.033 Application for use agreement
(a) Required. Any person proposing to place a telecommunications network within the public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services, who does not have
a franchise agreement with the city on the date of the passage of this division, shall submit an application to the public works department. The application shall be in a
form prescribed by the director as generally described below, and shall describe all services the applicant wishes to provide, and outline the applicant's proposed
network and its impact on the public rights-of-way. The director may require the following information in the application:
(1) The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant which may use in any manner the telecommunications network.
(2) A description of the telecommunications services that are or will be offered or provided by the applicant over its existing or proposed
telecommunications network.
(3) A description of the principal transmission medium that will be used by the applicant to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
(4) Preliminary engineering plans and specifications and a network map of the facilities to be located within the city, all in sufficient detail to identify:
(A) The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed telecommunications network.
(B) The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer, drainage, curbs, pavements, sidewalks, and
other facilities in the public rights-of-way along the proposed route.
(C) The locations(s), if any, for interconnections with other telecommunications facilities or networks of other telecommunications providers.
(D) The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, or cross under.
(5) If the applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications network on existing
utility poles along the proposed route, with evidence authorizing such use of the utility poles.
(6) If the applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing ducts or conduits within the public rights-of-way, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/349
(A) That excess capacity is currently available in such ducts or conduits before installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities and
evidence of authority for use of any such ducts or conduits;
(B) The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications facilities.
(7) If the applicant is proposing an underground installation within new ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public rights-of-way:
(A) The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
(B) The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of the applicant's telecommunications network.
(8) A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
(9) A preliminary traffic-control plan in accordance with the DOT Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(10) Audited financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability to
construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the telecommunications network, prepared by an independent certified public accountant.
(11) Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the telecommunications network
and services described in the application.
(12) Information to establish that the applicant will obtain all other governmental approvals and permits prior to construction and operation of the
telecommunications network and prior to offering or providing the telecommunications services.
(13) Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service or other video programming service, such as an open video system, as defined in the Cable
Act, together with sufficient information to determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising under the Cable Act.
(14) An accurate map showing the location of any existing telecommunications network in the city that the applicant intends to use or lease.
(15) A description of the services or facilities that the applicant will offer or make available to the city and other public, educational and governmental
institutions, if any, at rates differing from its customary charges and rates.
(16) A description of the applicant's access and line extension policies.
(17) The area or areas of the city the applicant desires to serve and a schedule for build-out to the entire city, if any.
(18) Information in sufficient detail that evidences that the applicant will provide or ensure a seamless interconnection with or through other
telecommunications service providers to the local emergency number district and evidence of compliance with chapters 771 and 772 of the Texas Health and
Safety Code on emergency communication, and the state public utility commission's Substantive Rules on Interconnection, particularly section 23.97(a), (d)
and (e), as amended.
(19) All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to this division, or found elsewhere in the regulations of the city.
(20) Such other and further information as may be reasonably requested by the director.
(b) Authority of director. The director shall administer and enforce compliance with respect to all PRWUAs granted under this division. The director shall have the duty
to review applications submitted under this division and formulate recommendations to the city council regarding a PRWUA for the applicant. A recommendation to the
city council or a written notice of denial to the applicant shall be given within one hundred twenty (120) days after a completed application has been submitted to the
director; such time frame may be extended for good cause, with consent of the applicant. The director shall negotiate the terms of PRWUAs (consistent with and to the
extent not prescribed in this division) for adoption by the city council. The director shall consider the following:
(1) The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the applicant's proposed facilities.
(2) The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate an additional telecommunications network if the PRWUA is granted.
(3) The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities, improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the PRWUA is granted.
(4) The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of construction within the public rights-of-way.
(5) The service that the applicant will provide to the community and region.
(6) The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the PRWUA is granted.
(7) The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the proposed facilities.
(8) Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations and policies.
(9) The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
(10) The legal authority of the applicant.
(11) Such other factors as may demonstrate that authorization to use the public rights-of-way will serve the community interest.
(c) City council action. All public rights-of-way use agreements approved by the city council under this division shall incorporate each applicable provision of this
division. All PRWUAs must be approved by the city council to be effective. The act of approval, consenting to, amending, denying or terminating PRWUAs is a legislative
function within the sound discretion of the city council. Any person who is denied a PRWUA or whose PRWUA is terminated must petition the city council for
reconsideration before seeking judicial remedies.
(d) Priority of usage. In case of conflict or interference between the facilities of different providers, the provider whose facilities were first permitted shall have priority
over a competing use of the public rights-of-way.
(e) No right to use city property or utility infrastructure granted by PRWUA. The grant of a PRWUA under this division shall not be construed to grant any attachment
rights or authorize the use of any city property or utility infrastructure in any manner without additional compliance by the provider with other applicable city requirements.
(f) Responsibility for adequacy of design. Review and approval by the city does not constitute a guarantee of sufficiency of the design of the telecommunications
network. The applicant retains full responsibility for the adequacy of the design of the telecommunications network.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 3; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.033)
Sec. 14.10.034 Fees and charges; records
(a) Filing fee and administrative fee. To reimburse the city for its initial administrative costs in processing the application, each applicant shall submit a nonrefundable
application fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. Upon acceptance of a PRWUA granted by the city, a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/349
provider shall pay an administrative fee as provided in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time, against which the application fee
will be credited. Such administrative fee is to defray the cost to the city in preparing and entering into the PRWUA.
(b) Public rights-of-way use fees and charges.
(1) Public rights-of-way use fee.
(A) Established; adjustment.
(i) The appropriate fair and reasonable compensation to the city for the use of its public rights-of-way on a city-wide basis is equal to 3% of the
gross revenues of the provider based on the “retail” sales revenue of its telecommunications services. Under FCC and PUC regulations adopted in
1996, pursuant to federal law, some providers are required to “unbundle” certain telecommunications services and to sell them at wholesale rates
to other telecommunications carriers for resale. In order for the city to recover appropriate compensation for the use of its public rights-of-way, a
fee equal to 4% of all wholesale telecommunications services revenues shall be paid to the city in accordance with this division and as part of the
public rights-of-way use fee, as stated below. (Such 4% fee on the wholesale telecommunications services revenue is based on an approximate
20% discount (discount rate) from the retail cost of the telecommunications services, such discount rate being set by the PUC from time to time.)
(ii) Such 4% fee on the wholesale telecommunications services revenue may be adjusted by the city from time to time, in the event the discount
rate of 20% is changed by the PUC or FCC, or other authorized entity, to ensure the city receives an amount substantially equal to, but not
exceeding, 3% of the retail value of gross revenue of the telecommunications services. Each PRWUA shall provide for such an adjustment.
(B) Rate. As provided in subsection (1)(A) of this section, because the use of the public rights-of-way on a city-wide basis is a valuable property right
for which reasonable compensation is due the city, each provider, except as provided in subsections (b)(2) and (3), shall pay the city an annual rental
fee (public rights-of-way use fee) equal to:
(i) 3% of the provider's or other affiliate's gross revenue obtained from the provision of telecommunications services using the
telecommunications network; and
(ii) 4% of the provider's wholesale telecommunications services revenue obtained from other telecommunications carriers, including but not
limited to certificated telecommunications utilities, using the telecommunications network, subject to adjustment in accordance with subsection (A)
above and credits in accordance with subsection (C) below.
(C) Credit. In no event shall the fee on wholesale telecommunications service revenue exceed 3% of the actual retail revenue of the
telecommunications services sold by the other telecommunications carriers(s). Upon sufficient documentation and information furnished to the city by
the provider, as may be reasonably required by the city, the provider will be entitled to a credit on the next public rights-of-way use fee payment to the
extent the fee payment on wholesale revenue exceeds 3% of the actual retail revenue. For the purposes of this section, wholesale rates and retail rates
for telecommunications services shall have the same meaning as in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of
1996, section 251(c)(4), or in section 252(d)(3), or as provided in the PUC Substantive Rules, as amended to January 1, 1997.
(D) Quarterly payment. Providers shall remit the public rights-of-way use fee to the city on a quarterly basis, prorated as applicable (quarterly
payment). Each quarterly payment shall be made by wire transfer to the account designated by the director, and this payment shall be due on the fortyfifth
(45th) day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated (due date).
(E) Quarterly report. In order for the city to determine that the gross revenue received by the provider is reported correctly, the provider shall agree
that, on the same date that each quarterly payment is made, as provided in this section, it will file with the city secretary a sworn copy of a report, in a
form to be prescribed and acceptable to the director, which is in sufficient detail to itemize revenues from each category of the telecommunications
services to determine the accuracy of the quarterly payment.
(F) Late fees. In the event a quarterly payment is made after noon on the due date, the provider shall pay a late payment fee of the greater of:
(i) $100.00; or
(ii) Simple interest at a ten percent (10%) annual percentage rate of the total amount past due.
(2) Public street crossing fee.
(A) Any provider which has a specific route for its telecommunications network and which does not have authority to use all of the city's public rightsof-
way in its PRWUA, but does serve customers or other providers within the city, shall pay the city an annual public street crossing fee of:
(i) $1.35 per linear foot for each diameter inch or fraction thereof of underground conduit or wire and for each 0.250 diameter inch or less of
aerial wire that is in the public rights-of-way per annum; and
(ii) $2,000.00 for one street crossing and $6.00 for every street crossing thereafter.
(B) This fee shall be due on July 15 of every year of the PRWUA, prorated as applicable. A report as required by the director shall be provided with
each annual payment showing the calculation of the payment, including the length of the network, outside diameter of the wire, outside diameter of the
conduit, and whether it is overhead or underground, as applicable, and number and name of each street crossing.
(C) This fee is to compensate the city for the reasonable rental value of the public rights-of-way used by the provider, and to recover the
administrative cost in monitoring and enforcing the provisions of this division and of the PRWUA. Each PRWUA shall provide that such fee may be
adjusted once every three (3) years to properly reflect the reasonable rental value of the public rights-of-way and administrative cost to the city.
(3) Administrative public right-of-way use charge.
(A) Any provider which uses a telecommunications network within the city but which serves no customers within the city other than itself shall pay an
annual administrative public right-of-way use charge of:
(i) $1.50 per linear foot for each diameter inch or fraction thereof of underground conduit or wire and for each 0.250 diameter inch or less of
aerial wire that is in the public rights-of-way per annum; and
(ii) $2,000.00 for one street crossing and $6.00 for every street crossing thereafter.
(B) This charge shall be due on July 15 of every year of the PRWUA, after the first 12 months of the PRWUA, prorated as applicable. A report as
required by the director shall be provided with each annual payment showing the calculation of the payment, including the length of the network, outside
diameter of the wire, outside diameter of the conduit and whether it is overhead or underground, as applicable, and number and name of each street
crossing.
(C) This charge is to recover the city's administrative and regulatory cost for the monitoring and enforcing of the provisions of this division and the
PRWUA. Each PRWUA shall provide that such administrative charge may be adjusted once every three (3) years to fully reimburse the city for its
administrative cost.
(c) Default. Notwithstanding any other provision in this division, in the event that full and proper payments due the city under this division or the PRWUA have not
been made by a provider within twenty (20) days after the due date, an event of default shall have occurred, in which case the city may terminate the PRWUA as set
forth in this division or in the PRWUA.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/349
(d) No release of other claims. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of, or an accord or satisfaction of, any claim that the city might have for
further or additional sums payable under the terms of this division or a PRWUA, or for any other performance or obligations of a provider.
(e) Permit and inspection charges. All permit and inspection charges related to a provider's construction and maintenance in the public rights-of-way shall be paid by
the provider as established by the director.
(f) Adjustments. Every PRWUA granted under this division shall include a clause specifying that the level of compensation received by the city for public rights-of-way
usage shall be adjusted upward to be equal to that of any other Texas city in which such provider offers telecommunications services.
(g) Other city fees, taxes and charges. Payments of compensation made by a provider to the city pursuant to this division or a PRWUA shall be considered in addition
to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, or other levies or assessments presently in effect, or subsequently adopted, to the
extent provided under applicable law.
(h) Nonmonetary consideration. To the fullest extent allowed by law, the city may require nonmonetary consideration from each provider. To the extent not expressly
provided by applicable law, the provider may agree to furnish to the city nonmonetary consideration in the form of network capacity, conduit or other infrastructure. This
nonmonetary consideration will be negotiated with each provider, taking into account the unique characteristics of each, shall be competitively neutral, and shall not
discriminate in favor of or against any provider with respect to total compensation. Such nonmonetary compensation may be used as a credit or an offset against the
monetary consideration, as may be mutually agreed to by the city and the provider in the PRWUA.
(i) Books and records.
(1) Providers shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of their business and operations pursuant to any PRWUA granted
hereunder in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles; however, providers shall keep their books of account and records in such a way that
identification of all revenues by type of telecommunications service within the city is available. If required by the FCC, the PUC or the state comptroller for
sales tax purposes, providers may use the systems of accounts and the forms of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed by those entities;
provided, however, that the director may require the keeping of additional records or accounts which are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying,
accounting for, and reporting gross revenue and uncollectibles for purposes of this division.
(2) Upon written request from the director, providers shall report to the city such other information as the director may reasonably require to ensure correct
payments to the city are made and shall comply with the city's reasonable determination of forms for reports, the time for reports, the frequency with which
any reports are to be made, and if reports are to be made under oath. Such reports may include a report prepared by an independent certified public
accountant.
(3) Providers shall promptly make available to the city or a city designated representative, upon the director's reasonable written request, their books and
records to examine, audit, review and/or obtain copies of the papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other records of providers pertaining to
PRWUAs granted under this division to ensure proper payments are made to the city. Providers shall fully cooperate in making available their records and
otherwise assisting in these activities.
(4) The director may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to a provider's performance of the terms and conditions of a PRWUA. Providers shall respond
to such inquiries on a timely basis.
(5) The city will maintain confidentiality of information provided by providers to the extent permitted by law when providers have notified the city in writing of
the confidential nature of the information. The city will furnish providers with copies of any attorney general opinion request under the Open Records Act
which pertains to such information.
(6) (A) Without any prior request, providers shall promptly and timely furnish the city with written notice of all petitions, applications,
communications and reports submitted by providers to the FCC, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PUC, or their successor agencies,
relating to any matters affecting the use of city public rights-of-way and/or the telecommunications services authorized pursuant to a PRWUA granted
under this division. Upon written request from the director, providers shall promptly and timely furnish the city with copies of all such documents, which
shall be no later than 10 business days from the date of the written request.
(B) Without limiting the above subsection, the provider shall promptly furnish to the city a copy of the initial registration, and any updated registrations,
required by PUC Substantive Rules section 23.61(i), as amended, and a copy of the initial, [and] any update of the annual informational filing required
by PUC Substantive Rules section 23.61(j), as amended.
(j) City's right to audit.
(1) The city reserves the right to review and audit the provider's books and records, if the city deems it necessary in order to determine if the appropriate
amount has been paid to the city. If such audit discovers an underpayment due the city that exceeds five percent (5%) of the total amount paid for any
quarterly or annual reporting period, as applicable, then the provider shall promptly reimburse the city for the actual and reasonable cost of such an audit. The
provider shall also pay the city all actual amounts of the underpayments as determined by the audit.
(2) If an audit or other research discovers that fees or charges have been either underpaid or not paid for any period, in addition to all other remedies under
this division under the PRWUA and at law, the city also may seek full recovery of the underpaid or nonpaid fees or charges, plus interest at a 10% annual
percentage rate, from the original due date.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 4; Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.034; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 14.10.035 Transfer of use agreement
(a) No PRWUA granted under this division, the assets held by providers for use under such PRWUA which are in the public rights-of-way, or any rights or privileges of
providers under a PRWUA, either separately or collectively, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by providers under a PRWUA, either separately or
collectively, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or conveyed by providers [sic] to any other person without the prior written consent of the city by ordinance or
resolution. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Should the provider sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of any of its rights or interests under
the PRWUA, including such provider's telecommunications network, or attempt to do so, without the city's prior consent, the city may revoke the PRWUA for default, in
which event all rights and interest of the provider shall cease.
(b) Any transfer in violation of this section shall be null and void and unenforceable. Any change of control of a provider shall constitute a transfer under this section.
(c) There shall be a rebuttable presumption of a change of control of a provider upon a change of 15% or greater in the ownership of such provider. Such a change in
control shall be deemed a transfer which requires consent of the city.
(d) A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending institution in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment or transfer.
(e) Every PRWUA granted under this division shall specify that any transfer or other disposition of rights which has the effect of circumventing payment of required
PRWUA fees and/or evasion of payment of such fees by noncollection or nonreporting of revenues derived from telecommunications services, bartering or any other
means which evade the actual collection of revenues for business pursued by a provider is prohibited.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 5; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.035)
Sec. 14.10.036 Obligations of providers regarding public rights-of-way
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/349
(a) Compliance with law. Providers are explicitly subject to the police powers of the city, and other governmental powers, and the city's rights as a property owner
under state and federal laws. All work done by providers in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of their facilities in the
public rights-of-way shall be subject to and governed by all city requirements, and applicable federal and state rules and regulations. Providers shall place or relocate
certain facilities underground when required by applicable city requirements. For this section, the term “provider” shall also mean a person who controls or manages
physical transmission facilities, and all appurtenant equipment, installed in the public rights-of-way.
(b) Duty to furnish information to city. Upon request, providers shall provide the city timely information as to all matters in connection with or affecting the construction,
reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by providers in the public rights-of-way.
(c) Construction work regulation, maintenance and underground conduit use.
(1) All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be performed in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the
obligation to use trenchless technology whenever possible. Furthermore, all such construction shall be undertaken so as to minimize interference with the use
of public and private property and in accordance with any direction given by the city under the police and regulatory powers of the city.
(2) Providers may be required by the city to attach portions of their facilities to poles or duct trench space maintained by any other person or entity
authorized by the city to the extent reasonable. A provider shall not be required to attach its facilities to the poles or duct trench space of any other person or
entity authorized by the city if it can be shown to the city's satisfaction that such provider shall be subjected thereby to increased risks of interruption to its
service or to increased liability for accidents, or unreasonable delay in construction or availability of service, or if the facilities of such other person or entity
are not of the character, design and construction required by or are not being maintained in accordance with current practice, or are not available to the
provider on reasonable terms, including, without limitation, a reasonable fee.
(3) In furtherance of the public interest in safety, health and public welfare and to facilitate the safe management of public rights-of-way, the construction,
expansion, reconstruction, excavation, use, maintenance and operation of the provider's telecommunications network and property shall be subject to all
generally applicable city requirements as determined by the director or designee.
(4) In addition to any other city requirements, thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of construction which involves any alteration to the surface or the
subsurface of the public rights-of-way, to the extent generally required, providers shall furnish the director (or such other officials as the city may designate
from time to time) with construction plans and maps showing the routing of any new construction and construction plans. Providers shall not commence
construction until the plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the director. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.
(5) Upon request by written notice of the city, providers shall promptly remove and abate any facility that is declared an emergency by the city. Providers
and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service during the removal. If any provider, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the
city may remove or abate the same, at the sole cost and expense of such provider, which shall be promptly paid to the city, all without compensation or
liability for damages to the provider.
(6) Upon completion of initial or any subsequent construction work, providers shall promptly restore the public rights-of-way in accordance with applicable
city requirements. Providers given notice under this section may excavate only for the construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, and maintenance
of all or a portion of its telecommunications network.
(7) Except in an emergency, a provider shall not excavate any pavement in any public alley or street or significant amounts of any unpaved public right-ofway
without first complying with all applicable city requirements.
(8) Within one hundred twenty (120) days of completion of each segment of the provider's telecommunications network, each provider shall supply the city
with a complete set of “as built” drawings for that segment in a format to be prescribed by director. Providers shall provide the city a compete set of “as built”
drawings annually, and at no cost to the city, incorporating any changes to the provider's telecommunications network in the public rights-of-way, in a format
to be prescribed by the director. Providers shall also obtain the city's approval before any relocation of the provider's telecommunications network in the public
rights-of-way. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. In addition, a provider shall provide annually to the city a map of its telecommunications
network.
(9) Providers shall participate in any local utility coordination council, currently existing or as may be established, meetings and coordinate all new
construction with same. The provider's telecommunications network shall bear identification marks, as may be established by such council, to the extent such
telecommunications networks are installed after the council establishes such identification marks.
(d) Work by others, construction by abutting owners and alterations to conform with public improvements.
(1) The city reserves the right to lay and permit to be laid sewer, gas, water, and other pipelines or cables and conduits, and to do and permit to be done
any underground and overhead work, and any attachment, restructuring or changes in aerial facilities, that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city,
in, across, along, over or under any public street, alley or right-of-way occupied by providers, and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street.
In permitting such work to be done, the city shall not be liable to providers for any damages not directly caused by the willful misconduct or gross negligence
of the city; provided, however, that nothing herein shall relieve any other person or entity, including any contractor, subcontractor, or agent, from liability for
damage to providers' facilities.
(2) In the event that, during the term of the PRWUA, the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley,
or right-of-way, such grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights herein granted to providers. In the event that the city shall close or abandon
any public right-of-way which contains any portion of providers' facilities, any conveyance of land contained in such closed or abandoned public right-of-way
shall be subject to the rights herein granted.
(3) During the term of all PRWUAs, providers shall be liable for the acts or omissions of any entity used by providers (including an affiliate) when such
entity is involved directly or indirectly in the construction and installation of providers' facilities, to the same extent as if the acts or omissions of such entity
were the acts or omissions of a provider.
(4) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within thirty (30) days following written notice from the city, the providers shall, at their expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any of their facilities or telecommunications network that are in the public rights-of-way
whenever the city shall have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
(A) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any city or other public improvement in or upon the public rights-of-way; or
(B) The operations of the city or other governmental entity in or upon the public rights-of-way.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 6; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.036)
Sec. 14.10.037 Insurance requirements
(a) Providers shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect, throughout the term of a PRWUA granted under this division, insurance with an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state and acceptable to the city as determined by its representative. All companies will be required to be rated A-VI or better by A.M. Best
or A or better by Standard and Poors. Providers shall furnish the city with proof of such insurance so required at the time of filing the acceptance of a PRWUA, and to
reasonably adjust insurance coverage and their limits when deemed necessary and prudent by the city's risk manager, based upon changes in statutory law, court
decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the provider.
(b) Subject to the provider's right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such amounts as are approved by the city's risk manager, providers shall obtain and maintain
in full force and effect for the duration of any PRWUA, at the provider's sole expense, insurance coverage in the following type and minimum amounts:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/349
Type Amount
(1) Workers' compensation
(Minimum statutory limits, and statutory
employers $100,000.00/$500,000.00/
$100,000.00 as amended.)
(2) Commercial general (public)
liability, to include coverage for
the following where the exposure
exists:
Combined single limit for bodily injury
and property damage $10,000.00 per
occurrence or its equivalent.
(A) Premises operations;
(B) Independent contractors;
(C) Products/completed
operations;
(D) Personal injury;
(E) Contractual liability;
(F) Explosion, collapse and
underground property damage.
(3) Comprehensive automobile
insurance coverage for loading
and unloading hazards, for:
Combined single limit bodily injury and
damage $2,000,000.00 per occurrence
or its equivalent.
(A) Owned/leased automobiles;
(B) Non-owned automobiles;
(C) Hire automobiles.
(4) Pollution liability insurance
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence.
(A) Bodily insurance.
(B) Property damage.
(C) Cleanup cost.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/349
(c) The director shall be entitled, upon request and without expense, to receive copies of certificates of insurance evidencing coverage stated above. The director also
may make any reasonable request for deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, except where policy provisions are
established by law or regulation binding upon either the city or a provider or upon the underwriter for any of such policies. Upon request for deletion, revision or
modification by the director, providers shall exercise reasonable efforts to accomplish the changes and shall pay the cost thereof.
(d) Providers shall agree that, with respect to the above-required insurance, all insurance certificates will contain the following required provisions:
(1) Name the city and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as additional insureds (as the interests of each insured may
appear) as to all applicable coverage;
(2) Provide for thirty (30) days' notice to the city for cancellation, nonrenewal, or material change;
(3) Provide for notice to both the director and the city secretary by certified mail; and
(4) Provide that all provisions of the PRWUA, as amended, concerning liability, duty, and standard of care, including the indemnity section, shall be
underwritten by contractual coverage sufficient to include such obligations within applicable policies, subject to policy terms and conditions.
(e) The insurance certificates obtained by providers in compliance with this section shall be subject to approval by the city's designated representative, and such proof
of insurance shall be filed and maintained with the director and the city secretary during the term of the PRWUA, or any extension or renewal thereof, and may be filed
and maintained with the director and the city secretary during the term of the PRWUA, or any extension or renewal thereof [sic], and may be changed from time to time
to reflect changing liability limits, as required by the city. Providers shall immediately advise the city attorney of any actual or potential litigation that may develop that
would affect insurance coverage related to any PRWUA.
(f) Insurers shall have no right of recovery against the city, it being the intention that the insurance policies shall protect providers and the city and shall be primary
coverage for all losses covered by the policies.
(g) The policy clause “other insurance” shall not apply to the city where the city is an insured on the policy.
(h) Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse against the city for payment of any premiums or assessments, which all are set at the sole risk of
the providers. Insurance policies obtained by a provider shall provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation or assignment against
the city in connection with any damage covered by these policies.
(i) Self-insurance. At the director's reasonable discretion, and with adequate financial documentation from the provider and in compliance with applicable state laws,
the director may accept, in lieu of the insurance requirements described above, a self-insurance provision in the PRWUA which provides substantially similar protection
to the above requirements.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 7; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.037)
Sec. 14.10.038 Term of use agreements
The term of each PRWUA granted under this division shall be subject to specific negotiation with applicants consistent with this division, but in no event shall it exceed
ten (10) years. (1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 8; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.038)
Sec. 14.10.039 Indemnity
Each PRWUA granted under this division shall contain provisions whereby the provider agrees to defend, indemnify and hold city harmless from and against all
damages, costs, losses or expenses:
(1) For the repair, replacement, or restoration of the city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or found
to be defective as a result of such provider's acts or omissions;
(2) From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action, and judgments for:
(A) Damage to or loss of the property of any person (including, but not limited to such provider, its agents, officers, employees and subcontractors,
the city's agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/or
(B) Death, bodily injury, illness, disease, worker's compensation, loss of services, or loss of income or wages to any person (including but not limited
to the agents, officers and employees of such provider, the provider's subcontractors and the city, and third parties);
arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the act or omissions of such provider, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of
activities pursuant to such PRWUA, no matter how, or to whom, such loss may occur.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 9; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.039)
Sec. 14.10.040 Bond and letter of credit; liquidated damages
(a) Each PRWUA shall contain the requirements for a bond and a letter of credit to ensure compliance with this division and the PRWUA, in an amount as reasonably
determined by the director in a nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral manner.
(b) Each PRWUA shall contain a provision of liquidated damages, as appropriate for the provider, in an amount as determined by the director in a nondiscriminatory,
competitively neutral manner.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 10; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.040)
Sec. 14.10.041 Termination of use agreement
(a) The city shall reserve the right to terminate any PRWUAs and any rights or privileges granted under this division in the event of a material breach of the terms and
conditions of the PRWUA or of this division, subject to a thirty-day written notice and the opportunity to cure the breach during that thirty-day period.
(b) Material breaches of a PRWUA specifically include, but are not limited to, continuing violations of sections 14.10.034 and 14.10.036, and the furnishing of services
of any kind not authorized by the PRWUA.
(c) A material breach shall not be deemed to have occurred if the violation occurs without the fault of a provider or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its
control. Providers shall not be excused from performance of any of their obligations under this division by economic hardship, nor misfeasance or malfeasance of their
directors, officers or employees.
(d) A termination shall be declared only by a written decision of the city council after an appropriate public proceeding before the city council, which shall accord the
provider due process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be met by giving the provider at
least fifteen (15) days' prior written notice of any public hearing concerning the proposed termination of its PRWUA. Such notice shall state the grounds for termination
alleged by the city.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 11; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.041)
Sec. 14.10.042 Unauthorized use of right-of-way
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/349
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly use the public rights-of-way to provide telecommunications services that have not been authorized by the city in
accordance with the terms of this division and its PRWUA.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to place a telecommunications network or any facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way, city property, city structures or
utility infrastructure unless expressly allowed under this division or the terms of a PRWUA.
(c) Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a distinct and separate offense. Each day a violation of this division continues shall constitute a distinct and
separate offense.
(d) The violation of any provision of this division shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of this division shall be in accordance with
section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 12; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.042; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 14.10.043 Preemption
No provision of this division or a PRWUA shall be deemed void or unenforceable as a result of state or federal preemption unless and until so determined by a final,
unappealable order of a state or federal agency or court. (1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 13; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.043)
Sec. 14.10.044 Emergency number (9-1-1) compliance
The provider shall provide or ensure a seamless and technically efficient interconnection that is transparent to the customer, with or through another telecommunications
service provider, to the area's emergency number district's 9-1-1 system, to include compatibility for automatic number identification (AND) and automatic location
identification (ALI), in compliance with all applicable requirements of chapters 771 and 772 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, concerning emergency
communications, and the public utility commission Substantive Rules, section 23.97 et seq., and in particular section 23.97(a), (d) and (e), all as amended to January 1,
1997. (1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 14; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.044)
Sec. 14.10.045 Classification of services
(a) Level 1: Basic telecommunications services.
(1) Residential and business local exchange telephone service, including primary directory listings and the receipt of a directory and any applicable mileage
or zone charges;
(2) Tone dialing service;
(3) Lifeline and tel-assistance services;
(4) Service connection charges for basic services;
(5) Direct inward dialing service for basic services;
(6) Private pay telephone access service;
(7) Call trap and trace service;
(8) Access to 9-1-1 service where provided by a local authority and access to dual party relay service;
(9) Switched access service;
(10) Interconnection to competitive providers;
(11) Mandatory extended area service arrangements;
(12) Mandatory extended metropolitan service or other mandatory toll-free calling arrangements;
(13) Interconnection for commercial mobile service provider;
(14) Directory assistance; and
(15) 1 + intraLATA message toll service.
(b) Level 2: Adjunct or discretionary telecommunications services.
(1) 1 + intraLATA message toll services, where intraLATA equal access is available;
(2) 0+, 0- operator services;
(3) Call waiting, call forwarding, and custom calling features not listed in Level 3;
(4) Call return, caller ID, and call control options not listed in Level 3:
(5) Central office based PBX-type services;
(6) Integrated services digital network (ISDN) services; and
(7) New services.
(c) Level 3: Competitive telecommunications services.
(1) Services described in the WATS tariff as of January 1, 1995;
(2) 800 and foreign exchange services;
(3) Private line service and dedicated circuits;
(4) Special access service;
(5) Services from public pay telephones;
(6) Paging services and mobile services (IMTS);
(7) Speed dialing; and
(8) Three-way calling.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/349
(d) Level 4: Capacity leases and/or network use arrangements. Offering of transmission capacity through leases, licenses or other network use arrangements among
telecommunications service providers governing use of network capacity, whether switched or nonswitched, including any arrangements mandated by regulatory
agencies.
(e) Level 5: Content offerings. All information (whether voice, data or video) offered in conjunction with Levels 1–4 transmissions and formatting of content from analog
to digital and vice versa when such formatting is offered in conjunction with Levels 3–4 transmissions.
(f) Level 6: Telecommunications broadband common carriage. Offering of high capacity transmissions, whether switched or nonswitched, on a common carrier basis,
offered to the public or to such classes of users as to be available to a substantial portion of the public.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, app. A; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.045)
Secs. 14.10.046–14.10.100 Reserved
Division 3. Wired Unmanned Telecommunication Boxes on Private Easements
Sec. 14.10.101 Definitions
Wired unmanned telecommunication utility box. A structure which houses wired or electronic equipment for the purpose of providing telecommunication service to
surrounding areas, and is neither operated nor occupied by people, is situated on a substantial foundation, and is equal to or larger than four (4) feet long, two (2) feet
wide, and three (3) feet tall. (Ordinance 01-18 adopted 6/5/01; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.101)
Sec. 14.10.102 Permit required
Every individual, corporation or association wishing to install in or upon private easements one or more wired unmanned telecommunication utility box(es), equal to or
larger than four (4) feet long, two (2) feet wide, and three (3) feet tall, shall first secure a permit from the city secretary. A fee for such permits will be charged as noted in
the fee schedule in appendix A of this code as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. (Ordinance 01-18 adopted 6/5/01; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.102;
Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 14.10.103 Approval of plans
A permit will be issued by the city secretary for a wired unmanned telecommunication box installation only after detailed plans indicating the size and location of the
boxes have been approved by the city engineer and building official. Scaled drawings showing the proposed work and the relation to existing facilities or other structures
are also required. Additional information may be required from the city engineer and building official; all information is to be submitted to these persons in the number of
copies required by them. (Ordinance 01-18 adopted 6/5/01; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.103)
Sec. 14.10.104 Location and size
(a) Those wired unmanned telecommunications box(es) that will be located within private property easements must conform as follows:
(1) They shall not be located in front of residential lots. Such placement is deemed an unreasonable visual and/or aesthetic impairment for the property
owner or surrounding property owners.
(2) The box(es) located within private property easements shall be required to abide by the building regulations of the zoning district in which the box or
structure is to be located.
(3) If the wired unmanned telecommunication box is equal to or larger than ten (10) feet wide, fifteen (15) feet long, and seven (7) feet tall, such structures
shall be considered buildings and must be placed on private property and comply with all requirements of the city's building code, including receipt of a
building permit prior to installation.
(b) The city engineer is authorized to approve or disapprove written requests for exceptions to these requirements.
(Ordinance 01-18 adopted 6/5/01; 2008 Code, sec. 13.10.104)
Secs. 14.10.105–14.10.120 Reserved
Division 4. Small Cell Wireless Facilities
Sec. 14.10.121 Purpose and scope
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this division is to establish rules and regulations for the placement of node support poles in the right-of-way and network nodes in the
public right-of-way and on service poles within the city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefits and will be consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe
usage, and visual qualities of the city public right-of-way and the city as a whole.
(b) Intent. In enacting this division, the city is establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by network nodes, including without limitation, ensuring that
network nodes or node support poles do not adversely affect:
(1) Use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places;
(2) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(3) The operation of facilities lawfully located in public rights-of-way or public property;
(4) The ability of the city to protect the environment, including the prevention of damage to trees;
(5) The character of residential and historic areas, and city parks, in which network nodes may be installed;
(6) The rapid deployment of network nodes to provide the benefits of wireless services; and
(7) The use of radio waves used by licensed Hertz-Armstrong-Marconi (HAM) radio operators.
(c) Conflicts with other chapters. This division supersedes all chapters, parts of chapters or rules adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of
such conflict.
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.122 Definitions
All terms used in this division, not specifically defined herein, have the meaning provided in chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Applicable law. Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Applicant. Any person who submits an application and is a network provider.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/349
Application. A request submitted by an applicant:
(1) For a permit to collocate network nodes;
(2) To install a transport facility; or
(3) Approve the installation, replacement or modification of a pole.
City code. Those ordinance provisions relevant to use of the public right-of-way where compliant with applicable law.
Day. Calendar day.
Person. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the city.
Routine maintenance.
(1) Work in the public right-of-way that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way;
(2) Replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or
closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or
(3) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node
support poles, in the public right-of-way.
Technical grounds. In light of prevailing industry and engineering standards, reasons of insufficiency of capacity, safety, reliability and/or generally applicable engineering
purposes consistent with applicable law and city code.
Zoning code. The Leon Valley Code of Ordinances chapter 15 zoning.
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.123 Permitted use; application and fees
(a) Permitted use. Collocation of network nodes and the placement of node support poles, meeting the parameters set forth in section 14.10.125 below and in
applicable law shall be a permitted use. No zoning or land use review shall apply, subject to the requirements in section 14.10.125.
(b) Permit required. No person shall place a network node, transport facility or node support pole in the public rights-of-way, without first filing a permit application and
obtaining a permit therefor, except as otherwise provided in this division.
(c) Permit application. All permit applications filed pursuant to this division shall be on a form, paper or electronic, provided by the city. The applicant may designate
portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or “confidential” by clearly marking each
page of such materials accordingly.
(d) Application requirements. The permit application shall be made by the network provider or it's duly authorized representative and shall contain the following:
(1) The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address.
(2) The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the filing of
the application.
(3) Construction and engineering drawings and information confirming that the construction will be consistent with city code.
(e) Routine maintenance and replacement. A permit application shall not be required for:
(1) Routine maintenance; or
(2) The replacement of a node with another node that is substantially similar.
(f) Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city within 30 days after the change
necessitating the amendment.
(g) Application fees. All applications for permits pursuant to this division shall be accompanied by fees as prescribed in appendix A schedule of fees.
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.124 Action on permit applications
(a) Review of applications. The city shall review applications for network nodes, node support poles and transport facilities in light of their conformity with applicable
law and city code and shall issue such permits on nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the following requirements:
(1) Within 30 days of receiving an application for a network node or node support pole, or 10 days for a transport facility, the city shall determine and notify
the applicant whether the application is complete; or if incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing information in such notification. There shall be
no fee charged for completion and resubmittal of an application.
(2) The city shall make its final decision to approve or deny a complete application no later than:
(A) 21 days after receipt of a complete application for a transport facility;
(B) 60 days after receipt of a complete application for a network node; and
(C) 150 days after receipt of a completed application for a new node support pole.
(3) The city shall advise the applicant in writing of its final decision, and, if denied, the basis for that denial, including specific provisions of city code or
applicable law on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies the application. The applicant
may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within 30 days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. The city
shall approve or deny the revised application within 90 days of receipt of the amended application. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the original denial.
(4) If the city fails to act on an application within the review period specified in this section, the application shall be deemed approved.
(5) An applicant seeking to collocate network nodes may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application and receive permits for up to 30
network nodes. Provided however, the city's denial of any node within a single application shall not affect other nodes submitted in the same application. The
city shall grant permits for any and all nodes in a single application that it does not deny, subject to the requirements of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/349
(b) Review of eligible facilities requests. Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, the city shall approve and may not deny applications for eligible facilities
requests within sixty (60) days according to the procedures established under 47 CFR 1.40001(c).
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.125 Network nodes in the public right-of-way; maximum height; other requirements
(a) Maximum size of permitted use. Collocation of permitted use network nodes in the public right-of-way shall be subject to the size limitations specified in chapter
284.003 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(b) Undergrounding provisions. A network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including the city code, subdivision regulations,
zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way
without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. This requirement or restriction shall not be interpreted to prohibit a network provider from replacing an existing
structure.
(c) Historic areas and design districts. Subject to the permit application approval time frames in section 14.10.124, a network provider must obtain advance approval
from the city before collocating new network nodes or installing new node support poles in any areas zoned or designated as a historic district or as a gateway or
sustainability overlay zoning district, as designated by the official zoning map of the city, if such district has or requires decorative poles. Such installations shall be
subject to the design and aesthetic standards of such areas.
(d) Installation in municipal parks and residential areas. A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city's
discretionary, nondiscriminatory, written consent of the community development and public works department if the public right-of-way is located in a municipal park or is
adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is (1) not more than 50 feet wide; and (2) adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped
land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. A network provider shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions
when installing network nodes in parks and residential areas.
(e) Zoning. A network provider seeking to construct, replace or modify a pole or node in the public right-of-way that exceeds the height or size limits contained in this
section, shall be subject to applicable zoning requirements.
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.126 Effect of permit
(a) Authority granted. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this division, and does not create a property
right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the public right-of-way.
(b) Time of installation. A network provider shall begin the installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final approval and shall diligently
pursue the installation to completion. Provided, however, the city may place a longer time limit on completion or grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the
network provider.
(c) Right to occupy. Once a network provider has collocated a network node or placed a node support pole pursuant to a permit, the provider shall be permitted to
continue to maintain such collocation or such pole unless required to remove or relocate under the terms of this division.
(d) Interference with network nodes. City will not grant a permit to any person to install any network node or other wireless facility if the city knows or has reason to
know that such person's use of such network node of other wireless facility may in any way adversely affect or interfere with the use and operation of an existing and
operational network node for which the city has previously issued a permit.
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.127 Removal, relocation or modification of network nodes in the ROW
(a) Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a network provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect,
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any network node or node support pole within the public right-of-way whenever the city has determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the city in or upon, the public right-of-way.
(b) Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to disconnect or move any network node located within the public right-of-way
of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city shall
notify the network provider and allow the network provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to the city disconnecting or removing a facility and shall notify the
network provider after disconnecting or removing a network node or node support pole.
(c) Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a network node or node support pole within the public right-of-way, the network provider shall notify the city within
90 days. Following receipt of such notice, the city may direct the network provider to remove all or any portion of a network node or node support pole if the city, or any
of its departments, determines, subject to city code, that such removal is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare.
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.128 Public right-of-way rate
(a) Annual rate. Once a network provider has installed and made operational a network node in the public right-of-way, network provider shall pay to the city
compensation for use of the public right-of-way as prescribed in appendix A fee schedule.
(b) Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from the public right-of-way and cease paying the city compensation for use of
the public right-of-way following removal and notification to the city of such removal.
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.129 Attachment to service poles in the public right-of-way
A network provider shall be permitted to attach network nodes to city-owned service poles, consistent with applicable law and city code and subject to the requirements
specified herein.
(1) Permits. A network provider shall obtain a permit, pursuant to the terms of this division, prior to collocating network nodes on service poles.
(2) Make ready. Network provider shall be responsible for costs for make ready work on city service poles to which provider seeks to place a network node.
(3) Technical limitations. In the event the city determines, based upon technical grounds, that inadequate space exists on a service pole to accommodate
the proposed network node, such pole may be replaced by network provider, at the network provider's expense, with a service pole with adequate space to
accommodate the proposed network node.
(4) Facilities rearrangements. If another provider would have to rearrange or adjust any of its facilities to accommodate a new network node, the city shall
use reasonable efforts to work with the affected providers to coordinate such activity. All make ready work shall comply with NESC, and other applicable
codes. The applicant shall not be responsible for any third-party costs, including those of other network providers, to adjust existing attachments that are
noncompliant with the NESC and other applicable codes at the time of the application.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/349
(5) Service pole attachment fee. The rate to collocate a network node on a service pole in the public right-of-way shall be as prescribed in appendix A fee
schedule. Subject to the provisions of section 14.10.130, such compensation together with the application fee and the public right-of-way rate specified in the
appendix A fee schedule shall be the sole compensation that the network provider shall be required to pay to the city.
(6) Cease payment. A network provider is authorized to remove its facilities at any time from a service pole in the public right-of-way and cease paying the
attachment fee to the city upon notification to the city that the facilities have been removed.
(Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.130 Transport facilities
Installation of transport facilities, including applicable compensation to the city for such facilities, shall be governed by chapter 284.055 of the Texas Local Government
Code. (Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. 14.10.131 Design manual
A network provider shall comply with the city's design manual, if any, in place on the date a permit application is filed in relation to work for which the city has approved a
permit application. The city's design manual may not conflict with applicable law and must be competitively neutral. (Ordinance 2017-64 adopted 10/2/17)
ARTICLE 14.11 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT MANAGEMENT
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 14.11.001–14.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Landscape Watering
Sec. 14.11.031 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished by a fine in accordance
with section 1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 94-30, sec. 7, adopted 7/19/94; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.031; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 14.11.032 Use of sprinklers prohibited during certain hours
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant or for any person, individual, corporation, or partnership in apparent control of any property in the city to intentionally,
knowingly, recklessly, or criminally negligently perform landscape watering or to allow or cause landscape watering on said property from the hours of 11:00 a.m. through
7:00 p.m. per calendar day by using individual sprinklers or sprinkler systems.
(b) For purposes of this section, “individual sprinklers” or “sprinkler systems” shall mean any method or device used for the application of water on said property other
than the method and/or devices set out in section 14.11.034. “Landscape watering” shall herein be defined as the application of water to any member of the plant
kingdom, including any tree, shrub, vine, herb, flower, succulent, ground cover or grass species, that grows or has been planted out-of-doors.
(Ordinance 94-30, sec. 1, adopted 7/19/94; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.032; Ordinance 15-023, sec. I(a), adopted 10/5/15)
Sec. 14.11.033 Presumption regarding responsibility for violation
For purposes of this division, it shall be presumed that any person, individual, corporation, or partnership in whose name a water meter connection is registered with the
water purveyor servicing the property has knowingly made, caused, used or permitted to be used water in a manner contrary to any provision of this division. Proof that
the particular premises have a water meter connection registered in the name of the defendant named in the criminal complaint filed pursuant to this division shall
constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the person in whom such water connection is registered is a person who permitted or caused illegal landscape
watering to occur on the premises. (Ordinance 94-30, sec. 2, adopted 7/19/94; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.033)
Sec. 14.11.034 Permitted watering methods
The following methods of landscape watering are permitted at any time:
(1) Landscape watering with a hand-held hose with a manual or automatic shutoff nozzle operated by one person;
(2) Landscape watering with a bucket having a holding capacity of five gallons or less;
(3) Landscape watering with a drip irrigation system. For purposes of this section, “drip irrigation” shall mean an automatic water-saving irrigation system
(drip, porous pipe, etc.).
(Ordinance 94-30, sec. 3, adopted 7/19/94; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.034)
Sec. 14.11.035 New plantings or transplants
It shall be a defense to prosecution that landscape watering was performed on any plant or seed planted in or transplanted to an area within such period of time as to
accomplish a reasonable establishment and maintenance of growth. (Ordinance 94-30, sec. 4, adopted 7/19/94; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.035)
Sec. 14.11.036 Plant nurseries and similar businesses
It shall be a defense to prosecution that landscape watering was performed by those commercial enterprises in the business of growing or maintaining plants for sale,
such as plant nurseries; provided, however, that such landscape watering shall be performed solely for the establishment, growth and maintenance of such plants.
(Ordinance 94-30, sec. 5, adopted 7/19/94; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.036)
Sec. 14.11.037 Golf courses
It shall be a defense to prosecution that landscape watering was performed on a golf course for the purpose of its maintenance or operation. For purposes of this
section, “golf course” shall mean an area of land laid out for the game of golf with a series of 9 or 18 holes each, including tee, fairway and green and one or more
natural or artificial hazards. (Ordinance 94-30, sec. 6, adopted 7/19/94; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.037)
Secs. 14.11.038–14.11.070 Reserved
Division 3. Drought Management*
Sec. 14.11.071 Waste of water prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the corporate limits of the city to waste water.
(b) For the purposes of this section, “waste” shall be defined as causing, suffering or permitting a flow of water, from any source whatsoever, to run into any river,
creek or other natural watercourse or drain, superficial or underground channel, or bayou, or into any sanitary or storm sewer or any street, road or highway, or upon the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/349
lands of another person, firm or corporation, or upon public lands, without first having obtained the maximum degree of beneficial use.
(c) For the purposes of this section, the term “maximum degree of beneficial use” shall be defined and shall be construed to mean the use of water under means and
by methods of conservation as hereinafter in this division set out so that only that amount of water actually and necessarily required for a specific purpose is to be used
by the consumer or inhabitant.
(Ordinance 98-015 adopted 5/5/98; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.071)
Sec. 14.11.072 General information
(a) The city is a general-law city located in northwest Bexar County. It measures approximately three and one-half square miles and is surrounded on all sides by the
city of San Antonio. The 1998 estimated population is 10,000 persons with a maximum expected growth to 20,000 persons if zoning regulations remain essentially
unchanged. Currently, there are approximately 2,600 single-family dwellings and eight apartment complexes in the city.
(b) The city is serviced by two water purveyors. The San Antonio water system (SAWS) provides water to approximately one-third of the city. The remaining two-thirds
of the city is serviced by the Leon Valley water and sewer system. The municipal water system currently has two wells in service and has an emergency interconnect
meter from SAWS.
(c) Continued growth is expected for the city, which will add to the requirement for increased water supplies.
(Ordinance 98-015 adopted 5/5/98; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.072)
Sec. 14.11.073 Definitions
The following words and terms, when used in this document, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. These definitions have
been taken directly from the interim critical period management rules approved by the Edwards Aquifer Authority.
Act. The act creating the Edwards Aquifer Authority (Senate Bill 1477, chapter 626, 73rd Legislature, Regular Session, 1993, as amended.)
Aesthetic use. The use of water for fountains, waterfalls, landscape, lakes and ponds where such use is entirely ornamental and serves no other functional purpose.
Agricultural irrigation. Irrigation for the purpose of growing crops commercially for human consumption or to use as feed for livestock or poultry.
Aquifer. The Edwards Aquifer, as defined in the Act.
Athletic field. A sports playfield used primarily for organized sports for schools, professional sports or sanctioned league play whose essential feature is a grass turf.
Authority. The Edwards Aquifer Authority.
Base usage. The average monthly total underground water usage for the three lowest months of November and December of 1995 and January and February of 1996.
Beneficial use. The use of the amount of water that is economically necessary for a purpose authorized by law, when reasonable intelligence and reasonable diligence
are used in applying the water to that purpose.
Bucket. A bucket or other container holding five gallons or less, used singly by one person.
cfs. Cubic feet per second.
Computer controlled irrigation system (CCIS). A system comprised of a computer controller (digital operating system), software, interface modules, satellite field
controllers, soil sensors, weather station, or similar devices, which is capable of achieving maximum efficiency and conservation in the application of water for irrigation.
A CCIS, at a minimum, should be designed to:
(1) Prevent overwatering, flooding, pooling, evaporation and runoff; and
(2) Prohibit sprinkler heads from applying water at an intake rate exceeding the capability of the soil.
Connection. A metered or unmetered delivery point to a customer or other receiver of water from an organized water distribution system.
Conservation. Those practices, techniques and technologies that will reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve efficiency in the use of
water, or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a water supply is made available for future or alternative uses.
Day. A 24-hour period beginning at midnight.
Demand management rules. The rules implementing the demand management plan for the Edwards-Balcones Fault Zone Aquifer adopted by the Edwards Underground
Water District on November 10, 1992, as revised.
Discretionary use. Any use listed as follows or any other use of underground water that is not an essential use (compare with “essential use”), provided that use of
underground water is essential and not discretionary to the extent the use is necessary to prevent danger to public health, safety, or welfare, or to comply with state or
federal law:
(1) Recreational use to the extent the underground water is not recycled, including the watering of turf areas.
(2) Landscape watering, including residential, commercial and public landscapes, golf courses, athletic fields and cemeteries.
(3) Filling or maintaining swimming pools.
(4) Ornamental outdoor fountains and similar features.
(5) Washing of an impervious outdoor ground covering such as a parking lot, driveway, street, or sidewalk.
(6) Use in connection with an aquaculture operation to the extent the underground water is not recycled.
Domestic or livestock. The use of underground water for:
(1) Drinking, washing, or culinary purposes;
(2) Irrigation of a family garden or orchard, the produce of which is for household consumption only; or
(3) Watering of animals.
Drip irrigation. An automatic water-saving irrigation system (drip, porous pipe, etc.).
Drought. A period of shortage of precipitation of seasonal or longer duration.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/349
Edwards Aquifer. That portion of an arcuate belt of porous water-bearing limestones composed of the Edwards Group limestone and associated formations trending
from west to east to northeast through Kinney, Uvalde, Medina, Bexar, Comas and Hays counties.
Essential use. A use of water which is:
(1) Essential to the protection of public health, safety, or welfare, including but not limited to use for drinking, food preparation, personal hygiene, public
sanitation, control or prevention of disease, and firefighting;
(2) Essential to an industrial use or agricultural or military activity which directly supports gainful employment, unless the use is specifically defined in these
rules as a discretionary use; or
(3) Essential to irrigation use.
Evapotranspiration rate (ET rate). The rate in which both the combination of evaporation from the soil surface and transpiration from vegetation will occur for specific
climatic conditions.
Existing facility. A swimming pool, hot tub or any similar facility, including residential, public and private facilities, installed during any period for which a drought has not
been declared or during a drought stage which has been rescinded. This term does not include pools specifically maintained to provide habitat for aquatic life.
Existing landscaping plant. A landscaping plant existing in an area after such period of time as to accomplish an establishment and maintenance of growth.
Hand-held hose. A hose attended by one person, fitted with a manual or automatic shutoff nozzle.
Historical annual average rainfall. The average of annual rainfall amounts for the period of record, as established by the United States National Weather Service.
Household use. The use of water, other than uses in the “outdoor” category, for personal needs or for household purposes, such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking,
sanitation or cleaning, whether the use occurs in a residence or in a commercial or industrial facility.
Impervious surface area. Any horizontal structure such as any street, driveway, sidewalk, patio or other surface area covered with brick, paving, tile or other impervious
material.
Industrial use. The use of water for or in connection with commercial or industrial activities, including manufacturing, bottling, brewing, food processing, scientific
research and technology, recycling, production of concrete, asphalt, and cement, commercial uses of water for tourism, entertainment, and hotel or motel lodging,
generation of power other than hydroelectric, and other business activities.
Irrigation suspension program (ISP). A program administered by the authority pursuant to which agricultural irrigators within the authority's boundaries voluntarily agree
to suspend some irrigation use of the underground water from the Edwards Aquifer in consideration of payments voluntarily funded by ISP participants.
Irrigation use. The use of water for the irrigation of pastures and commercial crops, including orchards.
ISP participant. Any beneficiary of the underground water who participates in an irrigation suspension program by paying amounts to the authority for the purpose of
funding payments to irrigators to suspend some irrigation use of underground water.
J-17 level. The level of the aquifer as measured by the authority in Well J-17 (well number AY-68-37-203) in the City of San Antonio.
Landscape plant. Any member of the kingdom Plantae, including any tree, shrub, vine, herb, flower, succulent, ground cover or grass species, that grows or has been
planted out-of-doors and is used for landscaping purposes or for the support of intensive recreational areas such as playgrounds and playing fields.
Landscape watering. The application of underground water to grow or maintain plants such as flowers, ground covers, turf or grasses, shrubs, and trees, but for
purposes of these rules does not include:
(1) Essential use without waste of underground water by a commercial nursery to the extent the water is used for production rather than decorative
landscaping;
(2) Application of underground water without waste to a noncommercial family garden or orchard, the produce of which is for household consumption only;
(3) Application of underground water in the morning before 10:00 a.m. and in the evening after 8:00 p.m. by means of a bucket, hand-held hose, or properly
installed drip irrigation system; and
(4) Application of groundwater by means of a soaker hose, immediately next to a concrete foundation, solely for the purpose of preventing, to the extent the
watering is necessary, substantial damage to the foundation or the structure caused by movement of the foundation.
Livestock. Animals, beasts, or poultry collected or raised for pleasure, recreational use, or commercial use. The term includes but is not limited to cattle, sheep, goats,
swine, horses, chickens, turkeys, and zoo animals, but does not include fish or other aquatic animals raised in a tank, raceway, reservoir, or watercourse.
msl. Elevation above mean sea level.
New facility. A swimming pool, hot tub or any similar facility, including residential, public and private facilities, installed during any current critical period stage. When the
stage is rescinded, such new facility will be treated thereafter as an existing facility. This term does not include pools specifically maintained to provide habitat for aquatic
life.
New landscaping plant. Any plant or seed planted in or transplanted to an area within such period of time as to accomplish a reasonable establishment and maintenance
of growth.
Other outside use. The use of water outdoors for the maintenance, cleaning and washing of structures and mobile equipment, including automobiles and boats, and the
washing of streets, driveways, sidewalks, patios and other similar areas.
Park. A tract of land, other than a golf course, maintained by a city, private organization, or individual as a place of beauty or of public recreation.
Person. An individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, partnership, association, and any other legal entity.
Pervious surface. Any ground surface which can absorb water or other liquids.
Power production use. The use of water for steam generation and the use of water for cooling and for replenishment of cooling reservoirs.
Public. Municipally owned or operated facilities.
Reclaimed water. Domestic wastewater that is under the direct control of the treatment plant owner/operator which has been treated to a quality suitable for a beneficial
use.
Recycled water. Water that is used by the same person two or more times, sometimes with partial treatment in between uses.
Reused water. Water that remains unconsumed after the water is used for the original purpose of use and that is used again before the water is discharged or otherwise
allowed to flow into a watercourse, lake, or other body of state-owned water.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/349
Stage. One of four designated drought stages which may be declared by the city.
Supplier. Any person who supplies underground water, including, but not limited to, a public or private water company, a water supply corporation, a municipality or a
water district.
Swimming pool. Any structure, basin, chamber, or tank, including hot tubs, containing an artificial body of water for swimming, diving, or recreational bathing, and having
a depth of two feet or more at any point.
(1) Private residential swimming pool. Any swimming pool located on private property under the control of the homeowner, the use of which is limited to
swimming or bathing by the homeowner's family or invited guests.
(2) Public swimming pool. Any swimming pool, other than a private residential swimming pool, intended to be used collectively by persons for swimming or
bathing, operated by any person as defined herein, whether owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged for
such use. The term includes, but is not limited to, apartment community pools, condominium association pools and community association pools.
Trigger conditions. Those specific conditions of rainfall amounts, Edward Aquifer water level elevations, spring discharges and water quality which the authority will
monitor and use as indicators of the occurrence of critical period conditions for purposes of declaring the various stages.
Underground water. Water within or produced, obtained, or originating from the Edwards Aquifer. Recycled, reclaimed and reused water are specifically excluded from
this definition.
Use for a beneficial purpose. Water which is used, without regard to priority, for:
(1) Agricultural, commercial, domestic, gardening, industrial, manufacturing, mining, municipal, pleasure, recreational or stock raising purposes;
(2) Exploring for, producing, handling or treating oil, gas, sulphur or other minerals; or
(3) Any other purpose that is useful and beneficial to the user.
User. A person, public or private, who produces, distributes or uses water from an Edwards Aquifer well located within the boundaries of the Edwards Aquifer Authority.
Variance. An authorized exception from compliance by the user with any provision of the rules granted by the district.
Vegetable garden. Any noncommercial garden planted primarily for household use. For this use, “noncommercial” includes incidental direct selling of produce from such
a vegetable garden to the public.
Waste.
(1) The flowing or producing of groundwater from wells in the Edwards Aquifer if the water flowing or produced is not used for a beneficial purpose by any
user;
(2) The unreasonable loss of groundwater through faulty design or negligent operation of a well or water delivery or application system; or
(3) Using quantities of groundwater for a purpose that otherwise would be considered beneficial in excess of quantities reasonably necessary for that
purpose.
Watering day. A day designated for landscape watering limited to the standard 24-hour period of 12:00 a.m. to midnight. Thus, if it is stage I and Wednesday is a
designated watering day, the period of time referenced is Wednesday morning between 12:01 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., and Wednesday evening between 7:00 p.m. and
midnight.
Water utility use. Water used for withdrawal, treatment, transmission, and distribution by potable water systems.
Zonal irrigation system. An irrigation system which segregates by station areas of shrubs, ground cover, bedding plants, or turf to accommodate a diversity of watering
requirements.
(Ordinance 98-015 adopted 5/5/98; Ordinance 00-034 adopted 9/19/00; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.073; Ordinance 15-023, sec. I(b), adopted 10/5/15)
Sec. 14.11.074 Demand reduction measures
The demand reduction measures for all water uses in stages I, II, III, and IV are set out in this section.
(1) Declaration of emergency stages. The city council or the city manager shall determine when conditions warrant implementation of the emergency
drought management plan. The plan is declared when the aquifer is at or below 660 feet msl as measured at the test well (J-17). Regardless of aquifer level,
the city may advance stages as needed to effect compliance with pumping limitation goals. The various stages shall be declared as follows:
(A) Stage I. Stage I water use reduction measures shall be declared to be in effect when the aquifer level at the J-17 well drops to six hundred sixty
(660) feet above msl (mean sea level), based on a 10-day rolling average calculated and determined by the Edwards Aquifer Authority.
(B) Stage II. Stage II water use reduction measures shall be declared to be in effect when the aquifer level at the J-17 well drops to six hundred fifty
(650) feet above msl based on a 10-day rolling average calculated and determined by the Edwards Aquifer Authority.
(C) Stage III. Stage III water use reduction measures may be implemented when the J-17 well falls to six hundred forty (640) feet above msl based on
a 10-day rolling average calculated and determined by the Edwards Aquifer Authority.
(D) Stage IV. Stage IV water use reduction measures may be declared if the total supply of water from the Edwards Aquifer is insufficient to meet
customer demand, even while complying with lesser restriction stages.
(2) Beginning and end of emergency drought management stages.
(A) The city manager will declare the drought stage based on levels in the county J-17 well, or as a result of consultation with the Edwards Aquifer
Authority.
(B) An emergency drought management stage will remain in effect for at least thirty days unless a more restrictive stage is implemented. A stage may
be rescinded before the 30 days expire if the city manager determines aquifer groundwater levels are sufficient to end the stage.
(3) Watering restrictions.
(A) Stage I restrictions. When stage I is in effect, the following restrictions apply:
(i) Landscape watering with an irrigation system or sprinkler is allowed only once a week before 11:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on your
designated watering day, in accordance with the last digit of the property address as follows:
Last Digit of Address Day of Week
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/349
0-1 Monday
2-3 Tuesday
4-5 Wednesday
6-7 Thursday
8-9 Friday
All businesses and apartment complexes will use Wednesday as their watering day.
(ii) No person may use groundwater for an ornamental outdoor fountain or similar feature unless a variance has been obtained for 100 percent
(100%) nonpotable water use.
(iii) Owners of exempt Edwards formation wells must comply with these restrictions.
(iv) Operators of athletic fields must submit a conservation plan to the city. Athletic fields may not irrigate between 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(v) Residential washing of vehicles or other equipment is allowed only on assigned watering days and times. A hose with an automatic shutoff
nozzle or bucket of five gallons or less may be used. Water should not be allowed to run into the street.
(vi) Washing of impervious cover such as parking lots, driveways, streets or sidewalks is prohibited.
(vii) Hand watering with a hand-held hose, soaker hose, drip irrigation, bucket or watering can is permitted any time and any day.
(viii) All nonpublic swimming pools must have a minimum of 25 percent of the surface area covered with evaporation screens when not in use.
Inflatable pool toys or floating decorations may be used for this purpose.
(ix) The use of commercial carwash facilities is allowed any day.
(B) Stage II restrictions.
(i) Landscape watering is permitted once a week from 7:00 - 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 - 11:00 p.m. Landscape watering by means of a properly
installed irrigation system, sprinkler or soaker hose is permitted on the authorized watering day during the designated hours listed in this
subsection. Watering with drip irrigation or 5-gallon bucket is permitted any day, but only between 7:00 - 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 - 11:00 p.m. Watering
with a handheld hose is allowed any time on any day.
(ii) Filling of all new and existing swimming pools is prohibited, unless at least 30% of the water is obtained from a source other than the aquifer.
Groundwater may be used to replenish swimming pools to maintenance level.
(iii) Draining of swimming pools is permitted only onto a pervious surface or onto a pool deck where the water is transmitted directly to a
pervious surface, only if necessary to:
a. Remove excess water from the pool due to rain to lower the water to the maintenance level;
b. Repair, maintain, or replace a pool component that has become hazardous;
c. Repair a pool leak; and
d. All nonpublic swimming pools must have a minimum of 25 percent (25%) of the surface area covered with evaporative screens when
not in use; inflatable pool toys or floating decorations may be used for this purpose.
(iv) Restrictions stated in stage I remain in effect, unless added to or replaced by stage II rules.
(v) Owners of exempt wells must comply with these restrictions.
(vi) Washing impervious cover such as parking lots, driveways, streets, or sidewalks is prohibited. Health and safety exceptions to this rule may
be requested from the city in writing.
(vii) Hotels, motels and other lodging must offer and clearly notify guests of a “linen/towel change on request only” program.
(viii) Restaurants may serve water only on request (to reduce dishwashing).
(ix) Charity carwashes are allowed only at commercial carwash locations.
(C) Stage III restrictions.
(i) All restrictions stated in stage I and stage II remain in effect unless replaced by stage III rules as follows.
(ii) Landscape watering allowed only every other week with an irrigation system, sprinkler or soaker hose from 7:00 to 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 to
11:00 p.m. on your designated watering day, as determined by your address. Watering with drip irrigation is allowed every Monday, Wednesday
and Friday, but only from 7:00 - 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 - 11:00 p.m.
(iii) Hotels, motels and other lodging must limit linen/towel changes to once every three nights, except for health and safety.
(iv) Groundwater from the aquifer may be used when and to the extent necessary to prevent danger to public health, safety, or welfare.
(D) Stage IV restrictions.
(i) Stage III landscape irrigation restrictions remain in effect.
(ii) A drought surcharge is assessed on all accounts for water used or assumed to be used for landscape irrigation. The surcharge is to remain
in effect for a minimum of one complete billing month and will remain in effect if stage IV is still in effect at the beginning of the next billing month.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/349
(4) End of emergency drought management plan. The emergency drought management plan and [restrictions] for each stage may be terminated or
changed at the discretion of the city manager after the trigger condition of a stage has been exceeded and after considering the J-17 water well level,
pumping trends, current precipitation and the outlook for additional precipitation.
(5) Use necessary for public health or safety. Notwithstanding any provision of these rules, underground water may be used when and to the extent it is
necessary to prevent danger to public health, safety, or welfare, or to the extent required by state or federal law.
(6) Athletic fields.
(A) An owner or operator of an athletic field who files with the city a conservation and reuse plan which plan has been approved by the city may apply
underground water to the field in accordance with this section. Athletic fields that are not covered by an approved conservation and reuse plan must
comply with all maximum allowable and specific restrictions provided in these rules.
(B) A conservation and reuse plan for athletic fields must contain the following information:
(i) The name, title, address, and telephone number of the owner or operator of the athletic field;
(ii) The name, title, address, and telephone number of the persons responsible for the watering of the field;
(iii) Whether the field is public or private, and the population served by the field;
(iv) The location, dimensions, type of athletic field, and type of turf;
(v) A description of the water delivery system used and how and when it is used;
(vi) A description of management practices relating to watering the field that are employed to control the amount of water applied to the field;
(vii) A description of any turf areas that are not essential to the functioning of the field that are or could be watered in accordance with the
specific restrictions on landscape watering contained in these rules;
(viii) A statement of what the owner or operator believes is a minimum amount of water and a minimum watering regimen during critical periods
that applies only to the amount of water necessary to maintain the viability of the turf without creating a safety hazard to users of the field;
(ix) A statement of any action or plans to obtain alternative water supplies such as reuse water, and if applicable a copy of any letter of
commitment from a water purveyor regarding supplying such water to the field;
(x) Any other information required by the city; and
(xi) Any such plan filed with the city shall be a variance (see section 14.11.075) and shall follow the procedure for a variance request and be
subject to the terms and conditions thereof.
(7) Use of recycled water. The use of recycled water may be used to irrigate any day between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. without waste. Signs
identifying property as using a recycled water source must be posted on site at a location where the general public can view it.
(Ordinance 09-033 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.074; Ordinance 15-023, sec. I(c)–(l), adopted 10/5/15)
Sec. 14.11.075 Variances
(a) Request for variance.
(1) A person may file a written request for a variance from these rules with the city. The request must contain the following information:
(A) The specific nature of the variance requested;
(B) A detailed explanation of why the person believes he should be granted the variance, including any supporting documentation; and
(C) A signed statement that the facts contained in the request are true and within the person's personal knowledge.
(2) The city manager may request the person to provide additional information, which must be filed within ten days of the request or as otherwise directed
in the request.
(b) When variances may be granted.
(1) The variance is necessary to avoid an unusual, direct, and substantial hardship;
(2) There are [no] other reasonably available means for avoiding the hardship without a variance;
(3) Granting the variance is consistent with the goals of this division; and
(4) Granting the variance will not cause significant harm to any other person or group of persons or result in the city being in violation of regulatory
requirements.
(c) Terms and conditions of variance.
(1) The city manager may grant a variance for such a term and in accordance with any conditions the city deems appropriate.
(2) It is a term of every variance granted by the city that the variance may be rescinded based on changed circumstances, new information, or failure of the
holder of the variance to abide by the terms and conditions of the variance or to comply with these rules or any other order or rule of the city.
(3) The city may require a person granted a variance to file reports with the city containing such information as the city believes relevant to monitoring the
continuing appropriateness of the variance.
(Ordinance 09-033 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.075)
Sec. 14.11.076 Penalty
(a) A person who knowingly or intentionally violates the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense and upon conviction be punished
by a fine in accordance with section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day's violation constitutes a separate offense. Compliance may also be sought through injunctive relief
in the district court.
(b) No violation, definition or penalty under this division shall have bearing on any violation, definition or penalty under any other section of this article.
(Ordinance 09-033 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. 13.11.076; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/349
CHAPTER 15
ZONING
ARTICLE 15.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 15.02 ZONING ORDINANCE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 15.02.001 Title
These regulations shall be known as article 15.02 of the city code of Leon Valley, Texas and will be referred to herein as “this article.” (1972 Code, sec. 30.101; 2008
Code, sec. 14.02.001)
Sec. 15.02.002 Purpose and effect
(a) The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive master plan for the purpose of promoting health,
safety, morals and the general welfare of the community by controlling the design, location, use or occupancy of all buildings through regulated and orderly development
of land and land uses within this jurisdiction.
(b) The zoning regulations are intended to be in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Fair Housing Act. Any portion of this article in conflict with
either of the referenced acts is unintentional and shall be overridden by that act or acts, to the extent of such conflict.
(c) In fulfilling these purposes, this article is intended to benefit the public as a whole and not any specific person or class of persons.
(d) This article shall be reviewed and amended periodically, as directed by the city council.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.102; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.002)
Sec. 15.02.003 Scope
(a) The provisions of this article shall apply to the construction, alteration, moving, repair and use of any building or parcel of land within this jurisdiction.
(b) Where, in any specific case, different sections of this article specify different requirements, the more restrictive shall govern. Where there is conflict between a
general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not apply to property belonging to the city; or to property used to provide public utilities; or work located primarily in or on a public
way, public utility towers and poles, or public utility easements, unless specifically mentioned in this article; provided that in the erection of buildings or other structures,
the city and utility companies shall attempt to conform in architectural design or otherwise as nearly as possible to the buildings permitted in the district in which they are
being erected.
(d) If any portion of this article is held invalid for any reason, the remaining portions herein shall not be thereby affected.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.103; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.003)
Sec. 15.02.004 Compliance
Except as provided in this article, no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than is
permitted in the district in which such building or land is located; no building shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height or bulk limit herein
established for the district in which such building is located; no lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than
prescribed by this article, nor shall the yard or open spaces provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this article be considered as
providing a yard or open spaces for any other building. (1972 Code, sec. 30.104; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.004)
Sec. 15.02.005 Penalties for violations
Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00), nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), unless some other fine is
specifically prescribed for a particular violation. Each day any violation occurs or continues to occur shall be considered a separate offense. (1972 Code, sec. 30.105;
2008 Code, sec. 14.02.005)
Sec. 15.02.006 Adoption of legislative grant of power
Texas Local Government Code, chapter 211, is hereby adopted, and the provisions of this article are adopted in the exercise of power granted to municipalities by such
statutes and pursuant to any and all other applicable laws. (1972 Code, sec. 30.106; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.006)
Secs. 15.02.007–15.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Rules of Construction and Definitions*
Sec. 15.02.051 Words and phrases, rules of construction
(a) Words, phrases and terms defined in this article shall be given the defined meaning.
(b) Words, phrases and terms not defined in this article but defined in the building code found in chapter 3 of the Leon Valley City Code (“this code”), shall be
construed as defined in the building code.
(c) Words, phrases and terms defined neither in this article nor in the building code adopted in chapter 3, shall be given their usual and customary meanings except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
(d) The text of this article shall control captions, titles and maps.
(e) The word “shall” is mandatory and not permissive; the word “may” is permissive and not mandatory.
(f) Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.
(g) Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words used in the future tense include the present tense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/349
(1972 Code, sec. 30.201; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.051)
Sec. 15.02.052 Definitions
Accessory. An object or device not essential in itself, but adding to the beauty, convenience or effectiveness of another item.
Accessory building. A subordinate structure attached to or detached from the main building.
Accessory use. A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the structure to which it is related; a use which is clearly incidental to, and found in connection
with, such primary use. See also, “incidental use.”
Adult entertainment establishment. An establishment consisting of, including, or having the characteristics listed in article 4.08 of the Leon Valley Code.
Agriculture. The production, storage, keeping, harvesting, grading, packaging, processing, boarding, or maintenance, for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and
animals useful to humans, including but not limited to: the tilling of the soil, raising of crops, animals, fowl, horticulture, gardening, beekeeping and aquaculture.
Agronomy. The science and management of field crop production and soil management and soil conservation.
Alley. Minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back of
properties otherwise abutting on a street. An alley affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
Alteration. Any change, addition or modification in construction, occupancy or use.
Alteration, apparel. Any change, addition or modification to material, fabric, or style used for clothing, garments, attire, or accessories.
Alternative tower structure. Either a primary or an accessory use on any developed parcel including clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative
antenna mounting structures, except for residential structures.
Amusement center. A facility used by the general public containing four or more games or game devices used for indoor and/or outdoor entertainment but not to include
gambling or gambling devices prohibited by law. Also see “Entertainment - indoor/outdoor” [sic].
Animal clinic. A place where animals are given medical care, and the boarding of the animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the hospital use.
Animal shelter. Any profit or nonprofit business, the primary use of which is the provision of lodging or shelter to animals. Also see “Veterinary clinic.”
Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for wireless radio, television, microwave or telephone communication through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic
waves.
Antenna height. The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the structure, even if the highest point is an antenna.
Antenna, receive-only antenna/amateur radio. Any tower or antenna that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned or operated by a federally licensed amateur
radio station operator or is used exclusively for reception only, including local television broadcast reception antennas, direct broadcast satellite antennas or multichannel
multipoint distribution services. Receive-only/amateur antennas are not subject to regulation under this article.
Antenna, telecommunications. An antenna used to provide a telecommunications service. This excludes lightning rods, private mobile radio systems, amateur radio
antennae less than 50 feet (150 meters) in height and whip antennae less than 4 inches (10 cm) in diameter and less than 10 feet (3 meters) in height.
Apartment. A single unit within an apartment house designed for independent housekeeping.
Apartment complex. Any structure, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as three (3) or more apartments or which is
occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate kitchen facilities.
Appeal. A procedure whereby a decision is questioned to a higher authority than the administrator or body which made the original decision. For example, a decision of
a zoning administrator to the board of adjustment or a decision of the board of adjustment to a court of law.
Appliance, major. A large device which is designed for household or office purposes, such as a refrigerator or air conditioner, the repair or maintenance of which involves
the disposal, storage or use of a federally or state regulated chemical such as freon or large quantities of oil.
Appliance, minor. A device which is designed for household or office purposes, the repair or maintenance of which does not involve the disposal, storage, or use of any
federally or state regulated chemical such as freon or large quantities of oil.
Arborist, certified. An individual who has a current and valid designation of “ISA Certified Arborist” by the International Society of Arboriculture.
Assembly/packaging. The fitting together and/or uniform wrapping or sealing of component parts to make a whole. This is commonly an intermediary step in the process
to make a finished product and the products from which it is put together are generally not raw materials.
Assisted living facility. A licensed establishment that furnishes food and shelter and provides personal care services which consist of assistance with one or more of the
following: meals, dressing, movement, bathing, or other personal needs or maintenance. This may also include assistance, supervision, or administration of medication
by a licensed individual.
Attended donation station. A manufactured building operated by an organization with nonprofit status, for the purpose of collecting goods, with an attendant present onsite
during collection hours.
Automobile. A self-propelled free-moving vehicle licensed by the appropriate state agency as a passenger vehicle, not to include commercial vehicles.
Automobile and boat storage. Any location or structure used for long-term storage of automobiles, trucks, boats and/or recreational vehicles. Long-term shall mean for
duration of one (1) week or more.
Automobile sales. The use of any building, land area, or other premise for the display and sale of new or used automobiles generally but may include light trucks or
vans, trailers, motorcycles or recreation vehicles and including any vehicle preparation or repair work conducted as an accessory use.
Automotive repair or heavy installation. The repair of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment, including paint, body and fender, and major engine
and engine part overhaul.
Awning. A roof-like cover extending over or before a place (as before a window) as a shelter, normally supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building.
Bar. Premises used primarily for the sale and/or dispensing of liquor by the drink for on-site consumption as regulated by the state and where food may be available for
consumption on the premises as accessory to the principal use.
Basement. That part of a building that is wholly or partly below ground level.
Bed and breakfast facility. A limited commercial activity, conducted within a structure, which may include dining and bathroom facilities with sleeping rooms for guest
lodging for a short-term period of less than 30 consecutive days. A bed and breakfast must be a secondary use to a single-family residence. Also see “lodging” in the
permitted use table.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/349
Block. Land or a group of lots, whether developed or undeveloped, surrounded by streets or other rights-of-way, other than an alley; or land which is designated as a
block on any recorded subdivision tract.
Boarding home for sheltered care. A group home for the sheltered care of persons with special needs, which in addition to providing food and shelter, may also provide
some combination of personal care, social or counseling services, and transportation.
Boarding house. A dwelling containing a single dwelling unit and not more than ten (10) guest rooms or suites of rooms, where lodging is provided with or without meals,
for compensation for more than one (1) week.
Board of adjustment. The Leon Valley board of adjustment. A public and quasi-judicial agency charged with the duty to hear and determine zoning appeals and other
specific duties as laid out in this article and state law.
Boundary street. A public street which is adjacent to and abutting one or more sides of the proposed site.
Buffer zone. An area zoned so as to separate conflicting uses by zoning such property with a use which is compatible with both. For example, an office district might
reasonably separate a single-family residential district from a commercial district. Dedicated park lands may shield a planned office development from nearby residential
areas.
Buildable area. The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of this code and article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance) have been met.
For recreational property or uses such as golf courses and baseball, soccer, football or similar athletic facilities, and public works projects such as water or wastewater
treatment plants, pump stations, storage tanks, and public streets and drainage improvements, the buildable area of the property shall include that portion of the property
necessary for the construction of such recreational and public works improvements, including sufficient adjacent area to allow the normal operation of construction
equipment.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The word “building” includes the word “structure.”
Building code.
(1) Article 3.02, division 2 of the Leon Valley City Code, which incorporates the International Building Code.
(2) The International Building Code, promulgated by the International Code Council and adopted by the city.
Building, construction. A building used temporarily for the storage of construction materials and equipment incidental and necessary to on-site permitted construction of
utilities, or other community facilities, or used temporarily in conjunction with the sale of property within a subdivision under construction.
Building, front of. That part of a building nearest the front property line.
Building height. The vertical distance above the average existing grade measured to the highest point of the building. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the
maximum height of any segment of the building.
Building line, front. A line established under this article or article 3.02, division 2 of the Leon Valley City Code measured from the perimeter of that portion of a building
nearest the front property line to the curbline or edge of the sidewalk and parallel thereto, or in the case of a corner lot, the side of such building if also parallel to a
curbline or edge of a sidewalk, but in any case such measurement shall exclude open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features projecting from the wall of
the building.
Building line, rear. A line established under this article or article 3.02, division 2 of the Leon Valley City Code measured from the perimeter of that portion of a building
nearest the rear property line of such property. Such measurement shall exclude open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features projecting from the wall of
the building.
Building line, side. A line established under this article or article 3.02, division 2 of the Leon Valley City Code measured from the perimeter of that portion of a building
nearest the side property line of such property. Such measurement shall exclude open steps, terraces, cornices and other ornamental features projecting from the wall of
the building.
Building, main. A building in which the principal use of the site is conducted.
Building permit. Authorization required for erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, conversion, or demolition of any
building.
Building restrictions. Regulations or restrictions under this article or article 3.02, division 2 of the Leon Valley City Code upon the materials allowed in the construction of
buildings and any provisions of federal or state law, or other city ordinances implanting [implementing] the federal emergency management act or the duties of the city
for floodplain regulation, applicable to the property.
Building specialty store. Any retail facility, the primary use of which is the sale or lease of specialized building materials; such as roofing, tile, or doors.
Building, temporary. A structure which is designed or intended to be used on a nonpermanent basis, authorized for a specific period of time through a specific use
permit. Includes prefabricated structures and manufactured/mobile housing which are not used for living space.
Caliper. The diameter of a tree four feet (4') above the natural grade measured with a tree caliper instrument or a flexible tape. If a tape is used, the circumference of the
tree is measured and the result divided by 3.14 to determine diameter.
Caliper of multi-trunk trees. The caliper of the largest trunk at a point four feet (4') above the natural grade added to half of the sum of the calipers of the remaining trunks
measured at the same height. If branching occurs less than four feet (4') above the natural grade, the diameter of the trunk may be measured below the branching for a
single measurement.
Canopy. A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material supported by the building or by support extending to the ground directly under the canopy placed so as
to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other openings.
Canopy tree. A self-supporting woody plant with one (1) well-defined trunk and a distinct and definite formed crown, which attains a height of at least twenty-five (25)
feet.
Car title loan business. An establishment that makes small short-term consumer loans secured by a title to a motor vehicle.
Carport. An open-sided automobile shelter sometimes formed by extension of a roof from the side of a building.
Carwash, automatic. A facility which utilizes automatic and semiautomatic machinery to wash, clean, and dry automobiles.
Carwash, self-service. A facility for self-service washing, cleaning, and drying of automobiles that does not include automatic application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water,
and heat or air for drying.
Check cashing business. A business that provides check cashing, payday cash advance, payroll advance, short-term cash loan, short term cash advance, instant
payday cash advance, short-term money loan services, or similar services to individuals for a specified fee.
Child care facility. An establishment for the care and/or instruction, whether or not for compensation, of six (6) or more children at any one time. Child nurseries and
preschool facilities are included in this definition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/349
Church. A facility for religious worship and related activities.
City. The City of Leon Valley, Bexar County, Texas.
Clinic. A facility for the examination, assessment, or treatment of outpatients including any location where more than one (1) doctor shares a facility, regardless of
whether there are laboratory facilities on-site.
Commercial. Relates to or is connected with trade and traffic or commerce in general; occupied with business and commerce.
Commercial, vehicle. Any motor vehicle including but not limited to delivery vans or trucks, trailers, or semitrailers designed to carry freight, passengers for
compensation, or merchandise for retail or commercial purposes and is appropriately licensed by a state agency.
Commission. See “Zoning commission.”
Communications distribution hub. An unmanned facility, without transmitter or dish, or antenna, containing optical and electronic signal processing equipment for
delivery, switching, and storage of video, audio, and data to homes served by the utility company.
Comprehensive (zoning) plan. The adopted official statement of a legislative body of local government that sets forth in words, maps, illustrations, and/or tables the
goals, policies, and guidelines intended to direct the present and future physical, social, and economic development that occurs within its planning jurisdiction. Also see
“Master plan.”
Condominium. A single dwelling unit in a multi-unit dwelling or structure, which is separately owned and which may be combined with an undivided interest in the
common areas and facilities of the property.
Congregate residence. Any building or portion thereof which contains facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation as required by this code, and may include facilities for
eating and cooking, for occupancy by other than a family. A congregate residence may be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house but does
not include jails, hospitals, convalescent homes, assisted living, special care, nursing homes, or hotels.
Contractor. A builder, plumber, electrician, air conditioning/heating installer, concrete installer, or tradesman or one who contracts to supply materials or do work.
Contractor facility. A facility which is used primarily for the office and/or vehicles, equipment and/or supplies of a contractor.
Convalescent home. A licensed facility which is intended for long-term patient care due to human illness, infirmity, or disability and employing the services of skilled and
licensed practitioners under the direction of a physician, licensed by the Texas Medical Board.
Convenience store. Any retail establishment which offers the sale of a limited line of convenience goods, to include groceries, packaged and/or processed food and
drink, tobacco, limited beer and wine, medicines and cosmetics, and may also sell gasoline, intended for the convenience of the neighborhood.
Cottage. An individual single-family dwelling unit, being less than 1500 heated square feet, situated with other similar dwelling units on one platted lot, for the purpose of
rental or leasing, as part of a multiple-family retirement community.
Curb. A stone or concrete or alternative edge asphalt boundary usually marking the edge of a roadway or paved area. Refer to article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance) for
further details.
Curbline. A line differentiating between the street and the edge of real property, marking the edge of the roadway, and contiguous to the roadway, not intended for normal
vehicular traffic. Such property may include a berm, but may or may not be built up or raised.
Dance hall. An establishment intended primarily for dancing and entertainment within an enclosed building, using either live or electronically produced music, either open
to the public or operated as a private club open to members only.
Density. The number of dwelling units which are allowed on an area of land or the number of persons allowed in a specific unit.
Depth of the lot. The linear measurement from the front property line to the rear property line of a lot.
Doctor. Any person under currently licensed [sic] by the state to practice any form of medicine or dentistry, including but not limited to, medical, dental science, dental
surgery, osteopathy, chiropractics, public health and veterinary medicine.
Dripline. The area of ground surrounding the trunk of the tree considered essential to protecting the root structure of a tree. For the purposes of this article, the dripline
shall be calculated at one foot (1') for every one inch (1") of caliper width measured at four feet (4') above natural grade level, i.e., a twelve-inch (12") tree would require
a dripline with a twelve-foot (12') radius (producing an area twenty-four feet (24') in diameter).
Driveway. A private road giving access from a public way to a building on abutting grounds.
Dwelling. A house or other structure in which a person or persons live; a residence; abode; habitation; an apartment or building, or group of buildings, occupied as a
place of residence.
Dwelling, garden house. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities, designed for occupancy as a residence.
Dwelling, manufactured home. A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, greater than 320 square feet in gross floor area designed with attached axles and wheels, which
may be used for permanent or semipermanent living space for humans, and which is designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle. The term shall not include any vehicle
meeting the above description which is used for an office, a classroom, a laboratory, processing, manufacturing, retail sales or other use; see “Building, temporary” for
these definitions. Also see “Manufactured housing.”
Dwelling, multiple-family. A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently, in structures containing three (3) or
more single-dwelling units in which they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units may be owned as condominiums, or
offered for rent.
Dwelling, single-family. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities, designed for occupancy as a residence.
Dwelling, single-family medium density. A detached dwelling unit with kitchen and sleeping facilities, designed for occupancy as a residence, with a minimum lot area of
6000 square feet.
Dwelling, townhouse. A building that has single-family dwelling units erected in a row as a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit
or units by a firewall, along the dividing lot line and each such building being separated from any other building by space on all sides.
Dwelling, two-family or duplex. A building designed or arranged to be occupied as two (2) separate residences, the structure having only two (2) dwelling units.
Dwelling unit. Any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, as required by this article,
for not more than one (1) family, or a congregate residence for six (6) or less persons.
Easement. That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement may be
for use under, on, or above said lot or lots.
EIA-222. Electronics Industries Association Standard 222, “Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antennae Support Structures.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/349
Encroachment, landscape. Any protrusion of a vehicle into a landscaped area from a parking space, display area or accessway.
Entertainment. To provide for diversion, engagement, or sporting activities, specifically excluding music which is not live, and is provided for the purpose of background
and not for diversion from the primary purpose of the establishment.
Extended dripline. An imaginary line on the ground equal to one point three (1.3) times the distance from the tree trunk to the dripline. In no case shall the dripline be
less than fifteen (15) feet from the trunk of the tree.
Family. An individual or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a group not to exceed six (6) unrelated persons living together as a single
housekeeping unit.
Farm. A tract of land, not less than five (5) acres, devoted to agriculture, pasturage, stock raising, or some allied industry. Includes dairy, stock, and poultry farms.
Federal Aviation Administration. Also known as FAA.
Federal Communications Commission. Also known as FCC.
Fence. A hedge, structure, or partition, erected for the purpose of enclosing a piece of land, or to divide a piece of land into distinct portions, or to separate two (2)
contiguous properties. An enclosure around a field or other space, or around any object; especially an enclosing structure of wood, iron or other materials, intended to
prevent intrusion from without or straying from within. See article 3.05 of the Leon Valley City Code for other specific regulations.
Flea market. An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public.
Floor area, net. The gross floor area exclusive of vents, shafts, courts, elevators, stairways, exterior walls and similar facilities.
Food processing facility. An establishment in which food is processed or otherwise prepared for eventual human consumption but not consumed on the premises.
Frontage. The width of a lot or parcel abutting a public right-of-way measured at the front property line.
Garage. A shelter for automotive vehicles.
Grade. The average elevation of the land around a building, or the percent rise or descent of a sloping surface.
Grade, finished. The final elevation of the average ground level adjoining a building at all exterior walls after development.
Grade, level. Roads, buildings, or structures built on the ground.
Grade, natural. The elevation of the ground level in its natural state, before construction, filling or excavation.
Gross floor area (GFA). The gross floor area of a building or lease space. The sum of the horizontal areas of floors of a building measured from the exterior face of
exterior walls or, if appropriate, from the centerline of dividing walls; this includes courts and decks or porches when covered by a roof.
Gross leasable area (GLA). The gross leasable area is the total floor area designed for both tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including both owned and leased
areas.
Ground cover. Plants, other than turf grass, normally reaching an average maximum height of not more than twenty-four (24) inches at maturity.
Group home. A dwelling for no more than six (6) legally unrelated, developmentally disabled persons and no more than two (2) supervisory personnel. Said persons and
personnel must live as a single housekeeping unit, for the primary purpose of providing shelter in a family-like atmosphere as part of the residential community, with onsite
medical treatment or therapy a secondary purpose. A group home must qualify as a family home under chapter 123 of the Texas Human Resources Code,
Community Homes for Disabled Persons Locations Act.
Guest house. Any living space with or without kitchen facilities which is to be used for the housing of two (2) or less persons, attached or unattached to the primary
structure of the site, intended to be used as an accessory use to the primary structure and not for profit purposes.
Guest room. Any room or rooms used or intended to be used by a guest for sleeping purposes. Every 100 square feet of superficial floor area in a dormitory shall be
considered to be a guest room.
Home occupation. The partial use of a dwelling unit for commercial or nonresidential uses by a resident thereof which is clearly and obviously subordinate and incidental
to the main use of the dwelling for residential purposes. Home occupations shall be conducted wholly within the primary structure or existing accessory building on the
premises.
Horticulture. The science of growing fruits, vegetables, flowers or ornamental plants.
Hospital. An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment and care of human illness or infirmity and providing health services, primarily for inpatients, and including as
related facilities, laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities and staff offices. May be either public or private and may be limited in their functions or services.
Hotel. Any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public and providing additional services, such as
restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and recreational facilities rented or leased on a daily, weekly, or semipermanent basis.
Incidental use. A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the structure to which it is related; a use which is clearly incidental to, and found in connection
with, such primary use. Also referred to as “accessory use.”
Inn. Any building containing five (5) or less guest rooms, the primary use of which is a commercial activity which is intended or designed to be used, or which are used,
rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
Kennel. Any lot or premises, other than a veterinary clinic, on which a combined total of three (3) or more unneutered adult dogs or cats, or a combined total of five (5) or
more neutered adult dogs or cats are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold; either for compensation boarded on a daily or weekly basis [sic].
Laboratory, dental or medical. Any facility for the biological, microbiological, serological, chemical, immuno-hematological, hematological, biophysical, cytological,
pathological, or other examination of materials derived from the human body for the purpose of providing information for the diagnosis, assessment, prevention, or
treatment of any disease, condition or impairment of human beings.
Laboratory, research. An establishment or other facility for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical, or social sciences, which may include engineering and
product development.
Laboratory, testing. An establishment or other facility whose primary purpose is to examine, observe or evaluate items, samples and/or substances which may include
engineering and product evaluation(s).
Landscaped area. Areas of a lot, land parcel or building site devoted to and consisting of plant material, including but not limited to turf grasses, grasses-bunch, trees,
shrub forms, flowers, vines and other ground cover, native plant materials, planters, brick pavers, stone, natural forms, water forms, public art forms, stone aggregate
and other landscape features, but excluding smooth concrete, asphalt or paving for vehicular traffic; provided that the use of brick, stone aggregate or other inorganic
materials shall not be greater in total area than that of organic plant material.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/349
Landscaping. The modification or ornamentation of a natural landscape by altering the plant cover. Landscaping shall consist of any of the following, or combination
thereof: material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, or palms; and nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping,
such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences - but excluding paving.
Lot. Any portion, piece, division or parcel of land, fractional part or subdivision of block, according to plat or survey. A single parcel of land. A measured parcel of land
having fixed boundaries. The word “lot” includes the word “plot.”
Lot, corner. A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135 degrees.
Lot frontage. The length of the front lot line, measured at the street right-of-way line, from one corner of the property to the other.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, irregular. A lot whose opposing property lines are generally not parallel, such as a pie-shaped lot on a cul-de-sac, or where the side property lines are not parallel to
each other.
Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Bexar County, or a parcel of land, the deed for
which was recorded in the office of the county clerk of Bexar County prior to the original adoption of this article on September 21, 1965.
Lot width. The distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at the minimum front building (setback) line.
Maintenance. To preserve from failure or decline.
Manufactured building. A transportable structure in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent frame or base and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
Manufactured home. See “Manufactured housing.”
Manufactured home park. A tract of land developed and operated as a unit with individual sites and facilities to accommodate two (2) or more manufactured homes.
Manufactured housing. Factory-built, single-family structures that meet the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 U.S.C. section
5401), commonly known as the HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) code.
Manufacturing. Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of
component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors.
Masonry. See “Building Code, Uniform” [sic].
Master plan. The city's overall guide for a rationally derived, future oriented, land use plan that divides the city into districts, imposes appropriate zoning regulations, and
takes into account the public interest in growth and preservation of essential community values. The plan includes land use, capital improvements, traffic, parks and
recreation, and transportation.
Money transfer business. An establishment that transmits funds for a fee.
Motel. Any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms providing sleeping accommodations with a majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without
the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.
Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle excluding a tractor having a saddle for the use of a rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground.
Multiple-family retirement community. A planned development consisting of a single platted lot, of at least five acres, completely screened from other development,
containing one or more residential clusters of cottages or apartment houses or a combination thereof, and appurtenant common areas, intended for rental or leasing to
seniors and including other features which are designed to increase safety and amenities to the elderly and/or disabled, such as increased security, on-site
management, food services, health services, handicapped accessible units, recreation facilities, or transportation services.
Multiple-family retirement community residential cluster. More than one (1) cottage or apartment located within reasonably close proximity to another and designed for
residency by seniors.
Native plant. A plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to the Bexar County region which is capable of sustaining growth and reproduction under local
climatic conditions.
Naturalized plant. A plant species introduced to the region which is capable of sustaining growth and reproduction under local climatic conditions.
Non-chartered financial institution. A non-chartered financial institution is defined as a use, other than a state or federally chartered bank, credit union, mortgage lender,
savings and loan association or industrial loan company, that offers deferred deposit transaction services or check cashing services and loans for payment of a
percentage fee or an establishment that provides financial services that are accessory to another main use. The term “non-chartered financial institution” shall include,
but is not limited to deferred deposit transaction (payday loan) businesses that make loans upon assignment of wages received, check cashing businesses that charge a
percentage fee for cashing a check or negotiable instrument, motor vehicle title lenders who offer a short-term loan secured by the title to a motor vehicle, and sub-prime
or nonprime home-equity lenders. Nonprofit financial institutions are not encompassed by the term non-chartered financial institution.
Nonconforming building. A building the area, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but now fails
to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
Nonconforming lot. A lot the area, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but now fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
Nonconforming use. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time this article became effective, which has been lawfully continued and which does not now
conform to the use regulations.
Nonemergency medical transport service. Transportation service that provides transport of medical patients on a nonemergency basis.
Nursing home. A licensed facility which provides nursing care and related medical services on a 24-hour-per-day basis to individuals due to illness, disease, or physical
or mental infirmity but not for persons in need of hospital care.
Occupancy, certificate of. A document issued by the city allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will
be used in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city.
Office, professional. A location used primarily for conducting the affairs of a commonly recognized business, profession, service, industry, government, or like activity.
Open space. A land area that is not occupied by a building, structure, parking area, street, alley or required yard.
Park. A public or private area of land, with or without buildings, intended for outdoor active or passive recreational uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/349
Park and ride facilities. Parking lots or structures located along public transit routes designed to encourage transfer from private automobile to mass transit or to
encourage carpooling for purposes of commuting, or for access to recreation areas.
Parking lot. An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of automobiles.
Parking space. A space within a building or private or public parking lot, exclusive of driveways, ramps, columns, office and work areas, for the parking of a vehicle or
motorcycle.
Parking, stacked. On-site space designed to provide vehicle queuing.
Peak hour trips (PHT). Average number of trips generated by a development at its most intense hours of operation.
Person. A natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent
of any of the aforesaid.
Pet store. A retail sales establishment primarily involved in the sale of domestic animals, such as dogs, cats, fish, birds, reptiles, excluding exotic animals and farm
animals such as horses, goats, sheep, pigs and poultry.
Planter. A raised area containing plant material defined by a hard edge such as walls, large pots and other similar physical containment design.
Plant nursery I. Any business, the primary use of which is the cultivation of plant material for transplanting, for use as stocks, for budding and grafting or for sale,
consisting of one (1) acre minimum, with no outside storage of equipment or supplies other than live plant material, subject to screening requirements as stated in article
3.05.
Plant nursery II. Any business, the primary use of which is the cultivation of plant material for transplanting, for use as stocks, for budding and grafting or for sale,
consisting of one (1) acre minimum, for temporary sales, subject to screening requirements as stated in article 3.05.
Plant nursery III. Any business, the primary use of which is the cultivation of plant material for transplanting, for use as stocks, for budding and grafting or for sale,
consisting of one (1) acre minimum, to include greenhouse, with outside storage subject to screening requirements as stated in article 3.05.
Plant nursery IV. Any business, the primary use of which is the cultivation of plant material for transplanting, for use as stocks, for budding and grafting or for sale,
consisting of one (1) acre minimum, to include nursery sales, greenhouse, and wholesale, subject to screening requirements as stated in article 3.05.
Plat/plot. A plat of a lot, drawn to scale, showing the actual measurements, the size and location of any existing buildings or buildings to be erected, the location of the lot
in relation to abutting streets, and other such information.
Primary use. The primary or predominant use of any lot or parcel.
Projected traffic. The traffic which is projected to be at an existing or proposed street during the proposed development's peak hour of use. Also refer to “Peak hour
trips.”
Public improvement. Work within dedicated rights-of-way or easements.
Public trees. Any trees, shrubs, bushes and all woody vegetation on city-owned property and rights-of-way, city parks, and in all areas owned by the city to which the
public has access.
Public way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently
appropriated to the public for public use.
Quorum. The number of member(s) or alternate(s) of a body that when duly assembled, is legally competent to transact business.
Recreation. See “Entertainment.”
Recreational vehicle. A vehicular unit, other than a manufactured home, whose gross floor area is less than 320 square feet, which is designed as a temporary dwelling
for travel, recreational and vacation use, and which is either self-propelled, mounted on or pulled by another vehicle. Examples include, but are not limited to, a travel
trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home, fifth-wheel trailer or van.
Renovation. To restore to a former or better state through interior and/or exterior remodeling of a structure, other than ordinary repair.
Repair shop. An establishment which restores by replacing or putting together that which is broken.
Restaurant. An establishment, the primary use of which is the provision of food and beverages for on-premise consumption, and where any sale of alcohol is accessory
to the primary use.
Restaurant, drive-in/take-out. An establishment where food and/or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption, where all or a significant portion of the
consumption takes place or is designed to take place outside the confines of the restaurant, and where ordering and pickup of food may take place from a vehicle.
Retail sales. Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public of personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to
the sale of such goods.
School, public. Any institution, the primary function of which is to provide primary or secondary education or a scholastic institution accredited by the State of Texas.
School, vocational and/or technical. A school establishment to provide for the teaching of industrial, clerical, managerial or artistic skills. This definition applies to schools
that are owned and operated privately for profit and that do not offer a complete educational curriculum.
Screening. A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby structure or use from another by a barrier or device constructed of metal, wood, brick,
stone, block, or other suitable materials, singly or in combination. See also article 3.05 of the Leon Valley City Code.
Self-service storage facility. A facility or area with limited access, which is divided into separate compartments no larger than 500 square feet in size and is accessible
from an interior or exterior door for use by individuals or businesses for the storage of property.
Service. Provision of something which is helpful to others whether for profit or nonprofit, not including repair or maintenance of goods, but specifically including
establishments where the primary use is the provision of food or alcohol.
Setback. See “Building line.”
Site plan. A plan which outlines the use and development of any tract of land.
Special exception. A procedure for approving the specific location of designated uses that are allowed in certain districts, but that require specific screening and
supervision to minimize adverse neighborhood impacts. The enabling act anticipates that the board of adjustment will decide special exceptions, with authority to
approve, deny or condition permits for such use(s).
Specific use permit (SUP). A permit required through public hearing determining whether or not the use will adversely affect the character and appropriate use of the
area or neighborhood in which the use is proposed to be located; that it will not substantially depreciate the value of adjacent and nearby properties for the use in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/349
accordance with the regulations of the zoning district in which the use will be located; that it will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this code; that it will not
adversely affect the implementation of the approved master plan; that it will comply with applicable standards of the district in which it is proposed to be located; and that
it will not adversely affect traffic, public health, public utilities, public safety and the general welfare of the city.
Specific use permit, continuous. A specific use permit, which is continuous in nature, and runs with the property as opposed to being occupant specific.
Storage. Safekeeping of goods and/or materials in a warehouse or other depository; where the safekeeping is the principal object of deposit, and not for consumption or
sale.
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that
portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a usable or unused
under-floor space is more than six (6) feet above grade as defined herein for more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above
grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or unused under-floor space shall be considered as a story.
Street. Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive, or other roadway in a city, town, or village, generally paved, and lined or intended to be lined by
structures on each side. It includes all urban ways which can be and are generally used for travel, but does not normally include service entrances or driveways leading
off from the street onto adjoining premises.
Street presumption. The condition of a street (classification and carrying capacity) as it will exit [exist] after final improvement as proposed by the city's major
thoroughfare plan or the capacity indicated by the right-of-way acquired by city on any boundary street.
Street, private. A right-of-way or easement in private ownership not dedicated or maintained as a public street, which affords the principal means of access to two (2) or
more sites.
Street yard area. The area of a lot which lies between the property line at a dedicated street right-of-way and the actual front wall line of the building, or, if no building, to
the rear property line. Such building wall lines extend from the outward corners of the buildings as illustrated in appendix A [appendix B] of this article.
Structure. Any construction, or any production or piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. That which is built or
constructed; an edifice or building of any kind.
Study area boundary. The limits of the area in which analysis is conducted or for which information is provided. This area is determined by the property owner or its
representative based on the size of the development and the peak hour trips projected to be generated by the proposed development. In the case of a Level 1 or 2 traffic
impact analysis, this area may include the site, and the area within a distance no greater than 1/4 mile along the boundary streets from the boundary of the site. In the
case of a Level 3 traffic impact analysis, this area will be determined by the property owner based on sound engineering judgment and agreed to by the city, but in all
cases shall be less than the area contained in a one-mile radius from the site. In those instances where the property owner has neither submitted preliminary plans nor
applied for an initial development permit prior to the effective date of this article; the determination of the area to be studied by the property owner must be approved by
the city engineer for all levels of traffic impact analyses; and before granting approval of a Level 2 traffic impact analysis, the city engineer may require the area of the
study to exceed the maximum area prescribed above by 1/4 mile.
Subdivision. The division of a tract, lot or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plats, sites or other divisions of land.
Sub-prime or nonprime loans. A type of loan that is offered at a rate above prime to individuals who do not qualify for prime rate loans.
Suite hotel. A suite of rooms in a structure arranged, designed, or occupied for temporary housing and rented or leased on a daily, weekly, or semipermanent basis, and
which includes kitchen facilities for cooking and complete housekeeping.
Telecommunication. The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of audio and/or visual information of the user's choosing, without change in the
form or content of the information as sent and received.
Telecommunications service. The offering of telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the
public, regardless of the facilities use[d].
Temporary use. A use that is authorized by this article to be conducted for a fixed period of time. Temporary uses are characterized by but not limited to such activities as
the sale of agricultural products, clothing and/or accessories, construction buildings and equipment sheds, fireworks, carnivals, flea markets, seasonal and/or holiday
products and garage sales.
Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers,
or monopole towers.
Tower, electric transmissions. A self-supporting structure in excess of 50 feet (15 meters) in height designed to support high voltage electric lines. This does not include
local utility or distribution poles (with or without transformers) designed to provide electric service to individual customers.
Tower, guyed. Any telecommunications tower supported in whole or in part by cables anchored to the ground.
Tower, ham radio. An accessory use or [of] property involving a self-supporting or guyed tower, less than 50 feet (15 meters) in height, used for private, noncommercial
radio communications.
Tower, monopole. A self-supporting telecommunications tower which consists of a single vertical pole fixed into the ground and/or attached to a foundation.
Tower, self-supporting lattice. A telecommunications tower which consists of an open network of metal braces forming a tower which is usually triangular or square in
cross-section.
Tower, telecommunications. A self-supporting or guyed structure more than twenty feet (6 meters) in height, built primarily to support one or more telecommunications
antennae.
Tractor. A farm device used for drawing, towing, pulling or powering other farm machinery which cannot propel itself.
Traffic impact analysis (TIA). A report analyzing anticipated roadway conditions with and without an applicant's development.
Tree, heritage. Any tree that has been designated by the city council, after public hearing and due notice to the owner of the tree, as a tree of notable interest and value
to the city because of its location, size, age, or historical association with the community or having a diameter of twenty-four inches (24") or greater.
Tree, large. Trees of any species that are twelve inches (12") or larger in diameter.
Tree, living. Trees having at least fifty percent (50%) of the total normal canopy intact and in a healthy condition.
Tree, medium. Trees that are eight inches (8") in diameter or larger, up to twelve inches (12").
Tree, multi-trunk. A tree having two (2) or more trunks arising from the root collar or main trunk.
Tree, small. Trees that are four to seven inches (4" to 7") in diameter, sometimes providing an underlying layer of tree canopy for medium to large and heritage trees.
Trees, shrub forms, vines, ground covers, turf grasses and grasses-bunch. Shall be defined as any of the above, such as those listed within this article. Tree is
additionally defined. In order to qualify under the provisions of this code as a tree, said tree, when planted, must be at least two (2) inches in diameter at a height no less
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/349
than twelve (12) inches above the ground. The tree diameter must be determined from a single trunk.
Trip distribution. The measure of the number of vehicles or passenger movements that are or will be made between geographic areas.
Trip generation. The total number of vehicle trip ends produced by a specific land use or activity.
Trip generation summary. A table summarizing the trip generation characteristics of the development (on site only) for the entire day and the a.m. and p.m. peak periods
including the rates and units used to calculate the number of trips. Information on appropriate trip generation rates and procedures may be obtained by contacting the
development department. Institute of Transportation Engineers trip rates will be used whenever possible.
Truck. A vehicle designed primarily for hauling cargo and material.
Truck, heavy. Trucks with a weight over 33,000 pounds which are primarily used to pull heavy trailers. Such trucks are referred to as semi-trucks/trailers, or tractor-trailer
trucks.
Truck, light. Trucks with a weight of up to 14,000 pounds used for light hauling or towing, as well [as] everyday transportation. Light trucks include but are not limited to
pickups, minivans, full-sized vans, and sport utility vehicles.
Truck, medium. Trucks with a weight of up to 33,000 pounds which are typically used as dump trucks, garbage trucks, local freight delivery trucks, and utility vehicles.
Turf. Continuous plant coverage consisting of grass species such as bermuda, buffalo, zoysia or any other native species of grass, designed to be drought tolerant to the
South Texas area.
Understory tree. A self-supporting wood plant with one (1) or more trunks which attains a height of no taller than fifteen (15) feet.
Unnecessary hardship. Special circumstances applicable to a piece of property, whereby a property owner may be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other
properties in the same vicinity and zone, and which may result in a disparity of privileges. Also known as “undue hardship.”
Use. The activity occurring on a lot or parcel for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied,
including all accessory uses.
Use, change of. The change within the classified use of a structure or premise.
Variance. An authorization to a property owner to depart from literal requirements of zoning regulations in utilization of his property in cases in which strict enforcement
of the zoning regulations would cause undue hardship because of special circumstances applicable to it, where the property owner is deprived of privileges commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone, and which adjustment remedies disparity in privileges.
Vehicle, motor. A self-propelled device licensed by the state as a motor vehicle and used for the transportation of people or goods over roads.
Veterinary clinic or hospital. A facility for the medical and clinical treatment of animals by an individual licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Texas,
including short-term boarding of animals.
Warehouse. Structure used for the reception and storage of goods and merchandise. The term may include any structure used to hold goods, stores or wares for longor
short-term storage.
Wholesale. Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business
users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
Xeriscape. A landscaping method that employs drought-resistant plants and landscaping arrangements in an effort to conserve resources, especially water.
Yard. An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures except as otherwise provided in
this article.
Yard, front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto.
Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto.
Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building and between the building line and the side lot line.
Zoning. The division of a city by legislative regulation into districts and the prescription and application in each district of regulations having to do with structural and
architectural designs of buildings and of regulations prescribing use to which buildings within designated districts may be put.
Zoning amendment. A legislative change of an existing comprehensive zoning ordinance. Amendments must be adopted with all formalities required by the enabling act,
including zoning commission recommendations, notice to landowners in a designated area, when required, published notice of legislative consideration, public hearings,
and final passage of an amending ordinance.
Zoning commission. An appointed group of citizens with delegated authority to recommend boundaries of original zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be
enforced therein; to hold public hearings and prepare a final report for the city council on recommendations for changes in zoning district boundaries or regulations in
zoning districts; to hold public hearings and prepare a final report for the city council on recommendations for the enforcement of regulations in zoning districts including
specific use permits and nonspecified uses; and to prepare and maintain a city's master plan, zoning code, master sign plan, and other tasks as outlined/requested by
the city council.
Zoning map. The official map as approved by the city council, as amended from time to time, which displays the various zoning districts.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.202; Ordinance 07-034, sec. 1, adopted 8/8/07; Ordinance 07-054, sec. 1, adopted 11/5/07; Ordinance 10-048, sec. 1, adopted 11/16/10; 2008
Code, sec. 14.02.052; Ordinance 14-02, sec. II(A), adopted 4/14/14)
Secs. 15.02.053–15.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Administration
Sec. 15.02.101 Primary responsibility for enforcement
The zoning officer(s) shall be the designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this article. The zoning officer(s) shall be appointed by the city
manager. The zoning officer(s) also serves as the staff advisor to the city council, zoning commission, board of adjustment, city staff, and citizens relating to the
administration, interpretation, implementation, and enforcement of the provisions of this article. (1972 Code, sec. 30.301; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.101)
Sec. 15.02.102 Duties
The zoning officer(s) shall have the following duties:
(1) The zoning officer(s) shall have the power to make inspections of buildings and premises to carry out the duties prescribed herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/349
(2) The zoning officer(s) shall examine all building permit applications and shall certify that the proposed construction, moving, alteration, or use complies
with the provisions of this article.
(3) The zoning officer(s) shall certify all certificates of occupancy prior to their issuance.
(4) The zoning officer(s) shall investigate alleged violations of this article, and shall conduct a visual inspection of all uses within the city. If a violation or
suspected violation is found, enforcement efforts shall be undertaken by the zoning officer(s).
(5) The zoning officer(s) shall perform such other duties as assigned by the mayor relating to the administration, interpretation, implementation, and
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.302; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.102)
Sec. 15.02.103 Certificate of occupancy
When required a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained for any of the following:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered;
(2) Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification;
(3) Occupancy and use of vacant land;
(4) Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification; and
(5) Any major or significant modification, alteration, or change in a nonconforming use.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.303; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.103)
Sec. 15.02.104 Occupancy without certificate prohibited
No such use, or change of use, shall be permitted unless a certificate of occupancy, approved by the zoning officer(s), has been issued. (1972 Code, sec. 30.304; 2008
Code, sec. 14.02.104)
Sec. 15.02.105 Procedure for new or altered buildings
Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for
the building permit for such building. Said certificate shall be issued within ten (10) days after a written request for the same has been made to the zoning officer(s) or his
agent, and only after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this article. The zoning officer(s)
shall issue the certificate of occupancy not more than ten (10) days after the erection or alteration has been approved by the city. (1972 Code, sec. 30.305; 2008 Code,
sec. 14.02.105)
Sec. 15.02.106 Procedure for vacant land use or change in building use
Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use to a
conforming use, as herein provided, shall be submitted to the zoning officer(s) for review on forms available in the zoning officer(s)'s office. If the proposed use is in
conformity with the provisions of this article and has been approved by the zoning officer(s), the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within ten (10) days after the
application has been made. (1972 Code, sec. 30.306; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.106)
Sec. 15.02.107 Contents of certificate of occupancy
Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of Leon Valley's codes and ordinances. A
record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning officer(s) or a designee and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person
having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected. (1972 Code, sec. 30.307; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.107)
Sec. 15.02.108 Temporary certificate
Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the zoning officer(s) for a period not exceeding six (6) months,
during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary certificates shall not be construed as in any way
altering the respective rights, duties, or obligations of the owners or of the city relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this
article. (1972 Code, sec. 30.308; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.108)
Sec. 15.02.109 Amendments to the zoning map and text
(a) Purpose of amendments. The purpose of an amendment procedure is to provide for changes in the text of the zoning ordinance (text amendment) and to change
the boundaries of zoning districts (rezoning) shown on the official zoning map. Since these regulations represent the city's effort to provide for the orderly development of
the community, no change shall be made in these regulations except:
(1) To correct an error in the regulations or map;
(2) To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality or area; or
(3) To recognize a change in public plans or policies that affect the property.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.309; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.109)
Sec. 15.02.110 Comprehensive planning activities
The zoning administrator shall assist the zoning commission in the development and implementation of the city's comprehensive master plan. There shall be no
amendment made to this article which is not in compliance with the city's long-range comprehensive planning program and the city's master plan. (1972 Code, sec.
30.310; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.110)
Sec. 15.02.111 Applicant qualifications
Any person, corporation, or authorized agent interested in any property, or owner of property may initiate proceedings to allow the consideration of a change in the
zoning classification of such property or to the regulations pertaining to said property. In the event that ownership stated on the application and that shown on city
records are different, the applicant shall submit proof of ownership or legal standing to submit the application or must provide a notarized letter of authorization from the
property owner. The zoning commission or city council may, on its own motion, initiate proceedings to consider a change to the zoning on any property or to the
regulations pertaining to property, when it finds that the public interest would be served by consideration of such a request. (1972 Code, sec. 30.311; 2008 Code, sec.
14.02.111)
Sec. 15.02.112 Application form and content
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/349
Each application for a text amendment, rezoning, specific use permit, or nonspecified use permit shall be made in writing on a form provided by the zoning officer(s) and
shall be filed with the zoning officer(s). Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the fees as set forth in Leon Valley City Code, appendix A, Fee Schedule
as amended or revised by ordinance from time to time. An application for a rezoning shall also include any plat(s), field notes, metes and bounds descriptions, plans
and/or drawings in a form acceptable to the zoning officer(s) and containing sufficient information necessary to determine the impact on properties affected by the
rezoning request. Where information is lacking or inadequate at the time of submission, the applicant shall be notified as to the nature and extent of the deficiency, and
the record shall be retained as an intent to apply until such deficiency is remedied. No docket number shall be assigned in such cases until the required information has
been supplied. (1972 Code, sec. 30.312; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.112; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 15.02.113 Scheduled dates and notification–Zoning map amendment applications
(a) Applications must be submitted to the zoning administrator and all appropriate fees paid. Upon receipt of a complete application for a zoning map amendment
(rezoning), and all outstanding issues having been resolved, the zoning officer(s) shall assign the application a docket number and set a date for a public hearing before
the zoning commission and the city council. Not less than ten (10) days before the public hearing, written notice shall be sent to all owners of real property, as indicated
on the most recently approved municipal tax roll, located within two hundred feet (200') of the property to be rezoned or as otherwise resolved by the city council. The
notice may be served by its deposit in the United States mail, within the city, properly addressed with postage paid.
(b) Not less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation.
(c) All applications received shall be heard at a public hearing within seventy (70) days of the date of assignment of docket numbers and decided at the same meeting,
at the next regular meeting of the commission, or at a special meeting prior to such regular meeting; but in any event, within thirty-six (36) days of the initial meeting at
which the hearing on the particular case was first held.
(d) From the date of recommendation by the commission, application must be made for public hearing before the city council regarding the same matter within ninety
(90) days of such commission recommendation or the recommendation is void.
(e) At his option, the applicant may choose to request public hearings before both the commission and the city council by paying the total applicable fees for both
hearings at the same time. If such option is elected, the date of the public hearing before the city council shall be set at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city
council following the public hearing at which a decision is made by the commission.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.313; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.113)
Sec. 15.02.114 Withdrawal of application
Prior to the issuance of the notice of a public hearing before the zoning commission and city council, the applicant may, by written notice to the zoning officer(s),
withdraw the application or request rescheduling of the public hearing to a later regular meeting date. Once public notice is given, the applicant may withdraw the
application or request for rescheduling only with the approval of the city council. The city council may reject a request to withdraw an application or request to reschedule
and conduct the public hearing as stated in the notification and take action as appropriate within the context of the public notice provided. Not less than fifteen (15) days
before the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the city. (1972 Code, sec. 30.314;
2008 Code, sec. 14.02.114)
Sec. 15.02.115 Denial of request–Time period for reapplication
No application for rezoning, specific use or nonspecific use of any lot(s) or block(s) of land situated in the city shall be received or filed with the commission and no
hearing had thereon, if within six (6) months prior thereto an application was received or filed on the same lot(s) or block(s) of land. This time restriction shall apply
whether said application was withdrawn before or after action by the commission, and whether or not final hearing and action has been filed by the city council. (1972
Code, sec. 30.315; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.115)
Sec. 15.02.116 Zoning commission report
After public hearing, the zoning commission shall submit a report to the city council with a recommendation that the application be approved, tabled, or denied, and state
the vote of the commission. (1972 Code, sec. 30.316; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.116; Ordinance 2017-45 adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 15.02.117 Protests
In the event a protest to an application is filed with the zoning officer(s), duly signed and acknowledged, by the owners of either:
(1) Twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change; or
(2) By twenty percent (20%) or more of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending two
hundred [feet] (200') from such area; such application shall not become effective except by affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the city
council. In computing the percentage of land area to be considered, the area of streets and alleys shall be included.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.317; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.117)
Sec. 15.02.118 Action by the city council
Upon receipt of the report from the zoning commission the city council shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of consideration the proposed change to the zoning
map or text. Not less than fifteen (15) days before the public hearing, notice of the hearing shall be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. (1972 Code, sec. 30.318; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.118)
Sec. 15.02.119 Approval and execution of changes
If finally approved by the required number of votes of the city council, the mayor shall execute the ordinance. (1972 Code, sec. 30.319; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.119)
Sec. 15.02.120 Expiration of an application
Any pending application shall be automatically approved if no action of any kind has been taken on it by the city council for a period of one year. (1972 Code, sec.
30.320; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.120)
Sec. 15.02.121 Liability
This article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any person owning, operating or controlling any building or parcel of land for any
damages to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the enforcement agency or its jurisdiction be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the reviews or
permits issued under this article. (1972 Code, sec. 30.321; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.121)
Secs. 15.02.122–15.02.180 Reserved
Division 4. Nonconformance
Sec. 15.02.181 Purpose
Within the districts established by this article or amendments thereto, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were
lawful before this ordinance was enacted, amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but which do not conform to the regulations of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/349
district in which they are located. It is the intent of this section of the ordinance to permit such nonconformance to continue, under regulations herein contained, until the
same are removed, but not to encourage their survival. (1972 Code, sec. 30.401; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.181)
Sec. 15.02.182 Nonconformance incompatibility
Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved. (1972 Code, sec. 30.402; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.182)
Sec. 15.02.183 Enlargement prohibited
It is further the intent of this article that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used as a basis for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. Except as herein provided, no nonconforming use of land or buildings, or any nonconforming structure shall be enlarged,
changed, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations contained in this article. (1972 Code, sec. 30.403; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.183)
Sec. 15.02.184 Nonconformance status
Any use or structure which does not conform to the regulations contained in the zoning district in which it is located is deemed to be a legal nonconforming use when:
(1) The use or structure was in existence and lawfully operating at the time of the passage of this ordinance, and has since been in regular and continuous
use; or
(2) The use or structure was lawfully being used at the time of the adoption of any amendment to this ordinance and by such amendment was placed in a
district where it is not otherwise permitted; or
(3) The use or structure was in existence at the time of annexation to the city and has since been in regular and continuous use.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.404; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.184)
Sec. 15.02.185 Continuing lawful use of property
(a) The lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this ordinance, although it does not conform to the provisions herein, may be continued until
termination is required in accordance with the provisions of this article. During the period between designation as a nonconforming land use activity and notification of a
prescribed termination date, if discontinuance occurs, any future use of the premises must be in conformity with the general provisions of this article.
(b) A legal nonconforming use, when discontinued or abandoned, cannot be resumed. Prima facie evidence of continuance [discontinuance] or abandonment is as
follows:
(1) When land associated with a legal nonconforming use ceases to be used in such a manner for a period of one hundred and twenty (120) days.
(2) When a structure associated with a nonconforming use ceases to be used in such a manner for a period of one hundred and twenty (120) days.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.405; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.185)
Sec. 15.02.186 Development of nonconforming lots
Nonconforming lots which do not meet the minimum area, width, or depth requirements for the district in which they are located may be used for any lawful purpose
permitted within the zoning district in which they are located. However, the use of such a lot shall be subject to a determination by the zoning officer(s) that a good faith
effort has been made to follow all rules and regulations associated with this article. (1972 Code, sec. 30.406; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.186)
Sec. 15.02.187 Proof of legal nonconformance
It shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator, or occupant to provide proof that a nonconforming structure or use of land or building existed prior to the enactment of
this ordinance. (1972 Code, sec. 30.407; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.187)
Sec. 15.02.188 Restoration of damaged property
Nothing in this article shall prevent the restoration of a building that is destroyed by fire, explosion, or other casualty or act of God, or a public enemy by less than 50% of
the appraised value of the building, nor the continued occupancy or use of such a building or part which existed at the time of such destruction. (1972 Code, sec. 30.408;
2008 Code, sec. 14.02.188)
Sec. 15.02.189 Substitution of nonconforming uses or structures prohibited
No nonconforming use or structure may be substituted for any other nonconforming use or structure. Only uses permitted by right and approved specific uses may be
substituted for nonconforming uses or structures. (1972 Code, sec. 30.409; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.189)
Sec. 15.02.190 Enlargement of nonconformance prohibited
No nonconforming use or structure may be extended or enlarged, and no nonconforming use of land may be enlarged or increased, to occupy a greater area of land
than was occupied at the time the site achieved nonconforming status. (1972 Code, sec. 30.410; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.190)
Sec. 15.02.191 Termination of nonconformance
The right to use a parcel of land or a structure in a nonconforming manner shall terminate under any of the following circumstances:
(1) When the use is abandoned.
(2) When any provision of this or any other ordinance of the city is violated.
(3) When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use by means of an amendment to the zoning text or map.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.411; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.191)
Sec. 15.02.192 Lot size and densities
No lot shall be reduced or diminished so that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than as prescribed in this article, nor shall the density of population be
increased in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations established herein. Side yard areas, used to comply with minimum requirements of this article,
for a building, shall not be included as a part of the required areas of any other building. (1972 Code, sec. 30.412; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.192)
Secs. 15.02.193–15.02.250 Reserved
Division 5. Fees
Sec. 15.02.251 Fees schedule
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/349
Fees for zoning text amendments, rezoning, specific use permits, nonspecified use permits, board of adjustment requests and any other permits or review procedures
associated with this article shall be established by the city council and shall be set as per Leon Valley City Code, appendix A, Fee Schedule as amended or revised by
ordinance from time to time. (1972 Code, sec. 30.501; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.251; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. 15.02.252 Waiver of fees
The city council, upon a vote of the majority of members present, may waive the fee for an amendment, specific use permit, or any other permit or review procedure
associated with this article. However, fees may be waived only in the case of extreme hardship on the applicant or in cases where a submission of a zoning action is
required by the city council, zoning commission or the board of adjustment. (1972 Code, sec. 30.502; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.252)
Sec. 15.02.253 Attributable fees
All fees attributable to non-staff consultants such as a city attorney, city engineer, contract inspector, and other similar contract personnel shall be payable by the
applicant. Failure to pay such fees shall suspend or nullify the review or approval of an application until such fees are paid in full. (1972 Code, sec. 30.503; 2008 Code,
sec. 14.02.253)
Secs. 15.02.254–15.02.300 Reserved
Division 6. Districts, Boundaries, and Use Regulations
Sec. 15.02.301 Districts
The city is hereby divided into thirteen (13) zoning districts and boundaries as follows:
“R-1” Single-Family Dwelling District
“R-2” Two-Family Dwelling District
“R-3” Multiple-Family Dwelling District
“R-3A” Multiple-Family Retirement Community District
“R-4” Townhouse Dwelling District
“R-5” Manufactured Home Dwelling District
“R-6” Garden House District
“MX-1” Mixed Use Development
“O-1” Office District
“B-1” Small Business District
“B-2” Retail District
“B-3” Commercial District
“I-1” Industrial District
(1972 Code, sec. 30.601; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.301)
Sec. 15.02.302 Boundaries
(a) General. The boundaries of these districts are indicated on the zoning map of the city, which is on file in the official office of the city.
(b) Interpretation. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the following districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such
centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be said boundaries;
(2) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries;
(3) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines or right-ofway
lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If
no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale on said zoning map;
(4) In property which is not subdivided, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by use of scale appearing on the map, or by more
detailed descriptions that may be available in the official records of the city;
(5) In the case of a district boundary line dividing a property into two (2) parts, the district boundary line shall be determined by use of the scale appearing
on the zoning map, or by more detailed descriptions that may be available in the official records of the city;
(6) Where the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the streets or alleys as shown on the zoning map, the streets or alleys on the ground shall control;
and
(7) Where conflict exists between the official zoning map of the city and the official records of the city, the records shall control.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.602; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.302)
Sec. 15.02.303 Annexation zoning
(a) “Temporary R-1” zoning established. All territory annexed to the city shall be automatically classified as “temporary R-1” single-family dwelling district and the only
uses which shall be permitted therein are those permitted in the permanent “R-1” district. If within six (6) months from annexation such property has not been
permanently zoned, the city shall appropriately zone such property on behalf of the property owner.
(b) Permanent zoning upon annexation. The owner or owners of property being annexed to the city upon petition (as provided in chapter 43, of the Texas Local
Government Code) may apply at the time of annexation for a permanent zoning on the land being annexed and such application shall be processed as any other request
for zoning. If timely filed and the proper notice and hearing procedures have been followed prior to the council meeting in question, the city council can give such territory
its permanent zoning at the same meeting at which it is annexed.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.603; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.303)
Sec. 15.02.304 Description and purpose of districts
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/349
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section:
(1) To protect the character of the residential areas by regulating the placement of certain uses and any unenclosed activities or uses which could intrude
upon the lifestyle of the community through inappropriate lighting, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or pollutants; and
(2) To protect the character of the business community by allowing certain incidental uses appropriate to certain zoning districts which would not intrude
upon the character of the residential areas.
(b) Purpose of overlay districts and applicability.
(1) Purpose of overlay district standards. It is the purpose of the Sustainability, [Gateway] and Commercial/Industrial Overlay District standards:
(A) To establish standards to protect and improve the character of business areas in the city, and to guide the appropriate mixing of residential and
nonresidential uses where permitted within the overlay districts.
(2) Applicability of overlay district standards. The overlay district standards shall apply to all areas currently zoned R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, MX-1, O-1, B-1, B-
2, B-3, and I-1 within the city limits.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.604; Ordinance 10-049, sec. 1, adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.304)
Sec. 15.02.305 Regulations for all districts
(a) Use. No land shall be used for and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than provided in the regulations prescribed for the district in which
it is located, except as hereinafter provided.
(b) Height. No building shall be erected, constructed, extended, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which such building is situated, with the following exceptions:
(1) Those exceptions listed in the definition of height found in this article;
(2) In any district any main structure may be erected or altered to a height in excess of that specified for the district in which the structure is located
provided that each required side and rear yard is increased one (1) foot for each two (2) feet of such excess height.
(c) Area. No lot shall be reduced or diminished so that the yards or other open spaces shall be smaller than as prescribed in this article, nor shall the density of
population be increased in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations established herein. Side yard areas, used to comply with minimum requirements of
this article, for a building, shall not be included as a part of the required areas of any other building. Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein
defined and in no case shall there be more than one (1) main structure/building on a lot in the “R-1”, “R-2” or “B-1” districts, or as otherwise provided herein, and in no
case shall any building be hereafter erected on more than one (1) lot.
(d) Vision clearance.
(1) On any corner lot on which a front yard is required by this article, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no hedge, shrub, tree or other
growth shall be maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting such street lines at points twentyfive
(25) feet from the point of intersection, measured along such street lines.
(2) On any corner lot on which front and side yards are required, no wall, fence, structure, sign, tree, shrub, or hedge may be maintained as to cause
danger to traffic by obstructing the view, and when topography prevents a clear view, this obstruction shall be removed.
(e) Front yard. The front yard heretofore required shall be adjusted in the following cases:
(1) Where forty (40) percent or more of frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is developed with buildings that have observed,
with a variation of five (5) feet or less, a front yard greater or lesser in depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be erected closer to the street than
the building line so established by the existing buildings, however, this regulation shall not be interpreted as requiring a building line of more than fifty (50)
feet.
(2) Open and unenclosed terraces or porches and eaves and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4)
feet; provided, however, that no supporting structure for such extensions may be located within the required front yard. The supporting structure of an open
carport or other structure for the storage of automobiles shall not be located within the required front yard. An unenclosed, freestanding canopy for a gasoline
filling station or similar business may extend beyond the building line but shall never be closer to the property line than fifteen (15) feet. The building line of a
gasoline filling station shall mean the actual wall of the filling station and shall not be interpreted as being the curb of a walk or driveway or as the front of a
canopy or the columns supporting same.
(f) Side and rear yard.
(1) Every part of the required side or rear yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory buildings as permitted herein and the ordinary
projection of window sills, belt courses and other ornamental features projecting not to exceed twelve (12) inches. Eaves and awnings on main residential
structures may project to within three (3) feet of a side lot line.
(2) Noncombustible accessory buildings may be built in the rear yard except that when such accessory building is combustible or located closer than fifteen
(15) feet to the main building, it shall observe the same side yard as required of the main building.
(3) Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, balconies opening upon fire towers, and ordinary projections of chimneys and flues
into rear yard may project in the side or rear yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet.
(4) Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms, and ornamental features which do not extend more than three (3) feet above the ground (first) floor level of the
building may project into a required side yard provided such projections not be erected closer than two (2) feet from the side lot line.
(g) Lot area. On any lot separately platted as of September 21, 1965, a single-family house may be erected even though of less area than required by these
regulations, with the requirement that it be connected to a public sewage disposal system.
(h) Location of dwellings and buildings. Only one (1) main building for single- or two-family use, with permitted accessory buildings, may be located upon a lot.
(i) Outer courts. Whenever an outer court in a building used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes is formed by three (3) exterior walls of the building in which
are located any openings, windows or doors for light, access, air or ventilation, the mean depth of the court measured from the base wall to a line projected from the
outer edge of one (1) protruding wall shall not be greater than one and one-half (1-1/2) times the distance between the two (2) protruding walls. Whenever the depth of
the court equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the distance between the protruding walls, the minimum width of an outer court shall be twelve (12) feet for one (1)
standard story buildings, twenty (20) feet for two (2) standard story buildings, thirty (30) feet for three (3) standard story buildings, and for buildings exceeding three (3)
standard stories in height, the width of an outer court shall be increased one (1) foot for each (2) feet the building exceeds three (3) standard stories.
(j) Fences.
(1) Fences shall be required to be in compliance with article 3.05 of this code, as amended, with the following exception which is intended to take
precedence over and govern any conflict with article 3.05 of this code:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/349
(A) In I-1 districts, not fronting residential or commercial districts, and not located to adversely affect site distance at street and/or alley intersections,
there shall be no limitation as to fence height.
(k) Summary of height, area and yard requirements.
(1) The requirements for height, yard and area set out in this article are intended to protect the health, safety and welfare of property owners by
establishing minimum standards. These standards are outlined for the individual districts in table format. In some cases, additional details regarding height,
yard and area standards are provided for certain districts in the sections below. This section is intended to be interpreted in its entirety as it relates to the
specific requirements for each zoning district.
(2) In the case of any lot or land parcel, it is hereby required that such lot or parcel must front onto a public street and be provided with public utilities and
fire protection.
(l) Residence in nonresidential zone. It is the intention of this article that no residential use of any type occur in the B-2, B-3 or I-1 zones and that R-3 uses not occur in
any other zoning district and that R-5 uses not occur in any other zoning district, unless:
(1) The use provides a residence for a caretaker residing on the premises in the B-2, B-3 or I-1 zones; or
(2) The use is constructed as a part of, and provides a residence used in conjunction with, the nonresidential use.
(3) The use is a part of an approved mixed use development (MX-1 district).
(m) Overlay districts. The Sustainability, [Gateway] and Commercial/Industrial Overlay Districts incorporate additional requirements which may supersede certain
requirements of the following divisions of this article and article 3.04 (signs), as follows;
(1) Division 6, districts, boundaries and use regulations.
(2) Division 7, permitted use table.
(3) Division 8, parking regulations.
(4) Division 9, landscaping.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.605; Ordinance 10-049, sec. 2, adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.305)
Sec. 15.02.306 “R-1” single-family dwelling
(a) Purpose and description.
(1) This district provides areas for low density single-family uses which provide a buffer between agricultural and higher density areas of the city. Minimum
lot size requirements are provided in order to allow for market and design flexibility while preserving neighborhood character. The district regulations are
designed to encourage a suitable neighborhood environment for family life by including among the permitted uses such facilities as schools, libraries, and
neighborhood recreation centers. The district regulations are designed to: (1) protect the residential character of the areas by prohibiting commercial and
industrial activities; (2) encourage a suitable neighborhood environment; and (3) preserve the openness of the area by requiring that certain minimum yard
and area standard requirements are met.
(2) The R-1 district implements the following policies of the master plan:
(A) Encourage patterns of urban development that provide a full range of housing choices and promote a sense of community, urban vitality and the
efficient provision of infrastructure.
(B) Encourage connectivity throughout the city.
(b) Lot regulations.
(1) Area. Lots must have a minimum area of 8,400 square feet.
(2) Frontage. Minimum frontage of 70 feet along a public right-of-way.
(3) Depth. Minimum of 120 feet.
(4) Floor space. Minimum floor space of 1200 square feet of heated living space shall be provided in each one-story dwelling, 1400 square feet for each
two-story dwelling.
(5) Height. Maximum of two and one-half (2-1/2) stories allowed.
(c) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum of 25 feet from front property line to main structure.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 30 feet from rear property line to rear of main structure.
(3) Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than 5 feet from side property line to main structure. On corner lots the external side yard shall be not
less than ten (10) feet. See article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance) for garage setbacks.
(4) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard.
(5) Reverse frontage. On corner lots, where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided on the street
side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front line of the lots in the rear.
(d) Other.
(1) Accessory buildings. Shall be allowed, but shall be located no closer than 5 feet from any property line, and must be located in the rear yard. In no case
shall an accessory building occupy more than 30% of the total open space in the rear yard.
(2) Landscaping. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is
strongly recommended.
(3) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lights affixed to the buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said building. Lights affixed to a
pole shall be mounted no higher than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(4) Masonry required. A minimum of 75% of total overall exterior walls shall be constructed of masonry, or other similar noncombustible materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/349
(5) Nonconforming dwellings. The provisions of floor space and masonry above shall not be applicable to nonconforming dwellings in existence on the date
of the adoption thereof or to dwellings built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming dwellings as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm or
other involuntary cause.
(6) Parking. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each residential structure.
(7) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system, and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(8) Storage. Outside storage is not allowed in the R-1 district, with the exception of vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats in accordance with
article 3.05 and article 12.03 of the Leon Valley City Code. All items to be stored must be completely contained in either the main structure, garage or an
accessory building.
Figure 1 (R-1 Single-Family Dwelling)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.606; Ordinance 07-033 adopted 8/8/07; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.306)
Sec. 15.02.307 “R-2” two-family dwelling
(a) Purpose and description.
(1) This district provides areas for low and medium density one- and two-family dwelling uses, which provide a buffer from agricultural and single-family
districts and the higher density areas of the city. Minimum lot size requirements are provided in order to allow for market design and flexibility while preserving
the neighborhood character. The district regulations are designed to: (1) protect the residential character of the area by prohibiting commercial and industrial
activities, apartments and manufactured homes; (2) encourage a suitable neighborhood environment; and (3) preserve the openness of the area by requiring
that certain minimum yard and area standard requirements are met. The district regulations are designed to encourage a suitable neighborhood environment
for family life by including among the permitted uses such facilities as schools, libraries, and neighborhood recreation centers.
(2) The R-2 district implements the following policies of the master plan:
(A) Encourage patterns of urban development that provide a full range of housing choices and promote a sense of community, urban vitality and the
efficient provision of infrastructure.
(B) Encourage connectivity throughout the city.
(b) Lot regulations.
(1) Area. A minimum lot area of 10,200 square feet shall be provided.
(2) Depth. A minimum depth of one hundred and twenty (120) feet, shall be provided, except as hereinafter provided.
(3) Floor space. Must provide a living area in each one-story structure of not less than 1,600 square feet; and in each two-story structure of not less than
1,800 square feet; and shall be heated living space as in the R-1 (single-family dwelling) district.
(4) Frontage. Minimum frontage of the lot shall be eighty-five (85) feet along a public right-of-way.
(5) Height. A maximum of two and one-half (2-1/2) stories allowed.
(c) Setbacks.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a minimum front yard of twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet shall be provided.
(3) Side yard. There shall be a minimum of five (5) feet shall be provided on each side, except on corner lots the external side shall be not less than twenty
(20) feet.
(4) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard.
(5) Reverse frontage. On corner lots, where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided on the street
side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front line of the lots in the rear.
(d) Other.
(1) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings are allowed, but shall be located no closer than five (5) feet from any property line and shall not occupy more
than 25% of the open space in the rear yard of each unit. In no case is an accessory building allowed in the front yard.
(2) Landscaping. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is
strongly recommended.
(3) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lights affixed to buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said buildings. Lights affixed to a pole
shall be mounted no higher than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(4) Masonry required. Masonry or other similar noncombustible materials to the extent of not less than seventy-five (75) percent of overall exterior walls.
(5) Nonconforming structures. The provisions of floor space and masonry above shall not be applicable to nonconforming dwellings in existence on the
date of the adoption thereof or to dwellings built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming dwellings as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm or
other involuntary cause.
(6) Parking. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each separate unit in the structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/349
(7) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(8) Storage. Outside storage is not allowed in the R-2 district, with the exception of vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats in accordance with
article 3.05 and article 12.03 of the Leon Valley City Code. Items to be stored must be completely contained in either the main structure, garage or an
accessory building.
Figure 2 (R-2 Two-Family Dwelling)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.607; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.307)
Sec. 15.02.308 “R-3” multiple-family dwelling district
(a) Purpose and description.
(1) The R-3 district is composed of areas containing multiple-family dwellings. The district regulations are designed to: (1) protect the residential character
of the area by prohibiting commercial and industrial activities and manufactured homes; (2) encourage a suitable neighborhood environment; (3) prevent
overcrowding of the land by requiring certain minimum yard and other open spaces for all buildings; (4) avoid excessive population density by requiring a
certain minimum building site area for each building unit; and (5) provide a buffer between retail and single-family dwelling areas.
(2) The R-3 district implements the following policies of the master plan:
(A) Encourage patterns of urban development that provide a full range of housing choices and promote a sense of community, urban vitality and the
efficient provision of infrastructure.
(B) Encourage connectivity throughout the city.
(b) Lot regulations.
(1) Area. A lot on which there is erected or converted a multiple-family dwelling shall contain an area of not less than 10,400 square feet for the first three
(3) units and 1,200 square feet for each additional unit.
(2) Depth. Minimum of 120 feet.
(3) Floor space. Minimum of 600 square feet.
(4) Frontage. A minimum frontage of 95 feet is required along a public right-of-way.
(5) Height. A maximum of three stories is allowed in the R-3 district.
(6) Density. None.
(c) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum of 20 feet from the property line to the building structure.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum of 25 feet from the structure to the rear property line.
(3) Side yard. There shall be a side yard having a minimum of ten (10) feet from the structure to the side property line.
(4) Vision clearance area. On any corner lot no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no hedge, shrub, tree or other growth shall be maintained
within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting such property lines at points twenty-five (25) feet from the point
of intersection, measured along such street lines.
(5) Building distance. The required space between buildings is fifteen (15) feet.
(d) Other.
(1) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall in no case consist of more than twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area.
(2) Landscaping. A total of 35% of the total overall area must be landscaped and not less than five percent (5%) of the R-3 area shall be covered by
plantings and amenities other than sod, subject to the approval of the city. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or
combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is strongly recommended. See appendix A for a list of trees, shrubs and plants suitable for the
region. Also see Landscaping, division 9 of this article, for other applicable regulations.
(3) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lights affixed to the buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said building. Lights affixed to a
pole shall be mounted no higher than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(4) Masonry required. Multiple-family dwellings shall be constructed of masonry or similar noncombustible materials to the extent of not less than seventyfive
(75) percent of overall exterior walls.
(5) Nonconforming structures. The provisions of subsection (b) above shall not be applicable to nonconforming dwellings in existence on the date of the
adoption thereof or to dwellings built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming dwellings as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm or other
involuntary cause.
(6) Parking. A minimum of one (1) space for each one-bedroom unit, two (2) spaces for each two-bedroom unit and one (1) space for each additional unit
shall be provided.
(7) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(8) Storage. Outside storage is not allowed in the R-3 district, with the exception of vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats in accordance with
article 3.05 and article 12.03 of the Leon Valley City Code. Items to be stored must be completely contained in either the apartment units, garages or
accessory buildings.
Figure 3 (R-3 Multiple-Family Dwelling)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/349
(1972 Code, sec. 30.608; Ordinance 07-033 adopted 8/8/07; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.308)
Sec. 15.02.309 “R-3A” multiple-family retirement district
(a) Purpose and description. The R-3A multiple-family retirement district is designed for more planned developments consisting of at least five acres, containing one
or more residential clusters of cottages or apartment houses or a combination thereof, and appurtenant common areas, intended for rental or leasing to individuals of
retirement age (seniors). The R-3A district implements the policies of the master plan by 1) protecting the residential character of the area by prohibiting commercial and
industrial activities and manufactured homes; 2) encourage a suitable neighborhood environment; 3) prevent overcrowding of the land by requiring certain minimum
square footage standards for all buildings; 4) avoiding excessive population density by requiring a certain minimum site area for each retirement community; and 5)
protecting the community resources in light of increased housing demands for seniors.
(b) Lot regulations.
(1) Area. Not less than five acres will be zoned or used for an R-3A multiple-family retirement community. Except that one hundred percent (100%) of the
area zoned R-3A may be used for R-1 or R-6, to the extent that either: 1) all of the R-3A area is used, or 2) no less than 5 acres of R-3A area remains for use
as R-3A.
(2) Density. In any cottage area of the R-3A zone, the number of units per acre shall not exceed ten (10). For apartment house areas of the R-3A zone, the
requirement of R-3 multifamily dwellings shall apply. Apartment house areas shall in no case consist of more than twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area.
(3) Depth. A minimum of 120 feet.
(4) Floor space. For cottages there shall be a heated living area of not less than 850 square feet and not more than 1,500 square feet per unit.
(5) Frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 95 feet on a public right-of-way.
(6) Reverse frontage. On corner lots where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side streets, a side yard shall be provided on the side
street equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front line of the lots in the rear.
(7) Double frontage. Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets.
(8) Height. No cottage shall exceed one standard story in height. No apartment buildings shall exceed three standard stories in height.
(c) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of thirty (30) feet, except as hereinafter provided.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of thirty (30) feet.
(3) Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of all lots of not less than ten (10) feet.
(4) Corner lot. On corner lots the external side yard shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.
(5) Building distance. The required space between buildings is fifteen (15) feet.
(d) Other.
(1) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall in no case consist of more than twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area.
(2) Landscaping. A total of not less than thirty-five percent (35%) of the total overall area, and not less than five percent (5%) of the R-3A area shall be
covered by plantings and amenities other than sod, subject to the approval of the city, must be landscaped [sic]. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses,
such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is strongly recommended. See appendix A for a list of trees,
shrubs and plants suitable for the region. Also see division 9 of this article of the landscaping regulations for other applicable regulations.
(3) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lights affixed to the buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said building. Lights affixed to a
pole shall be mounted no higher than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(4) Masonry required. Cottages shall be constructed of masonry to the extent of not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of overall exterior walls.
(5) Nonconforming structures. The provisions of the above shall not be applicable to nonconforming dwellings in existence on the date of the adoption
thereof or to dwellings built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming dwellings as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm or other involuntary
cause.
(6) Parking. A minimum of two (2) spaces for each two-bedroom unit and one (1) for each additional bedroom unit shall be provided.
(7) Public facilities. All R-3A developments shall be connected to the city's water and sewer system and shall provide sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(8) Storage. Outside storage is not allowed in the R-3A district, with the exception of vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats in accordance with
Leon Valley City Code. Items to be stored must be completely contained in either a living unit, garage or an accessory building.
Figure 4 (R-3A Multiple-Family Retirement)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/349
(1972 Code, sec. 30.609; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.309)
Sec. 15.02.310 “R-4” townhouse district
(a) Purpose and description. The R-4 district is composed mainly of areas suitable for townhouse dwellings. The R-4 townhouse district implements the policies of the
master plan by 1) protecting the residential character of the areas by prohibiting commercial and industrial activities; 2) encouraging a suitable neighborhood
environment for family life; 3) preserving the openness of the area and the unique residential design of a townhouse, by requiring that certain minimum yard and area
standards and building construction standard requirements are met; 4) recognizing that land is a valuable resource and is in short supply within the city; 5) encouraging
a level of growth that provides housing opportunities to meet the different housing needs of all income types of the city's present and future populations.
(b) Lot regulations.
(1) Area. See density requirements.
(2) Density. No development shall exceed a density of more than twenty (20) units per acre, nor contain less than 10,000 square feet. The total dwelling
units in any group of attached dwellings shall not be less than three (3).
(3) Depth. The minimum depth of the lot shall be one hundred and twenty (120) feet.
(4) Floor space. There shall be a total heated living area in each townhouse unit of not less than the following: One-story - 1,000 square feet; two- or threestory
- 1,400 square feet.
(5) Frontage. There shall be a minimum of 45 feet per lot of frontage on a public right-of-way.
(6) Height. A maximum of three (3) stories shall be allowed in the R-4 district.
(c) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of thirty (30) feet, except as hereinafter provided.
(2) Rear yard. A rear yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet is required. A rear yard shall not be required when the townhouse lot abuts an alley or access
easement having a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet which is used to provide ingress and egress to such townhouse development, except that a 25-foot
setback is required if a garage entry is used. For townhouse lots that abut at the rear, an alley or access easement having a minimum width of twenty-four
(24) feet shall be required.
(3) Side yard. A minimum of ten (10) feet, or twenty-five (25) feet if garage entry is used, shall separate any townhouse or garage structure from the
property line that parallels the curb. Each corner lot shall have a side yard of at least twenty-five (25) feet. No portion of a townhouse or accessory structure
in, or related to, one group of contiguous townhouses shall be closer than ten (10) feet to any portion of a townhouse or accessory structure related to
another group. In cases of reversed frontage, a side yard equal, at least, to the depth of the front yard required for a structure fronting the side street shall be
required. A side yard of ten (10) feet shall be provided when townhouse lots abut a side lot line outside of the development.
(4) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard.
(5) Reverse frontage. On corner lots, where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided on the street
side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front line of the lots in the rear.
(d) Other.
(1) Accessory buildings. Shall be allowed, but shall be located no closer than 5 feet from any property line, and must be located in the rear yard. In no case
shall an accessory building occupy more than 25% of the total open space in the rear yard.
(2) Firewall. A two-hour rated firewall of materials and construction, as required by the currently adopted versions of the International building and fire
codes, shall separate each adjacent townhouse unit. The firewall is to be constructed so as to be continuous from the foundation to the roof deck.
(3) Landscaping. A total of 35% of street yard area must be landscaped. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or
combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is strongly recommended. See appendix A for a list of trees, shrubs and plants suitable for the
region. Also see division 9 of this article for other landscaping regulations.
(4) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lights affixed to the buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said building. Lights affixed to a
pole shall be mounted no higher than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(5) Masonry required. Townhouses shall be constructed of masonry or other similar noncombustible materials to the extent of not less than seventy-five
(75) percent of overall exterior walls.
(6) Nonconforming dwellings. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to nonconforming dwellings in existence on the date of the adoption
thereof or to dwellings built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming dwellings as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm or other involuntary
cause.
(7) Parking. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each separate townhouse unit. Garage areas shall not be counted as off-street parking
areas. Each townhouse unit shall have at least one (1) street curb parking area twenty (20) feet long.
(8) Public facilities. All townhouse developments shall be connected to the city's water and sewer system and shall be provided sidewalks and fire
protection. See article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(9) Storage. Outside storage is not allowed in the R-4 district, with the exception of vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats in accordance with
article 3.05 and article 12.03 of the Leon Valley City Code. Items to be stored must be completely contained in either the townhouse units, garage or an
accessory building.
Figure 5 (R-4 Townhouse)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/349
(1972 Code, sec. 30.610; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.310)
Sec. 15.02.311 “R-5” manufactured home district
(a) Purpose and description. The R-5 district is composed of areas suitable for manufactured homes and manufactured home parks. The R-5 district implements the
policies of the master plan by 1) providing adequate protection for both the manufactured home sites and surrounding developments; 2) protecting the residential
character of the areas by prohibiting commercial and industrial activities; 3) encouraging a suitable neighborhood environment for family life; 4) providing alternative
housing solutions; and 5) preserving the openness of the area and the unique residential design of a manufactured home development, by requiring that certain
minimum yard and area standards are met.
(b) Restrictions.
(1) No land shall be used and no building shall be erected for or converted to any use other than manufactured home parks as defined and regulated in
article 3.07 (manufactured home parks) of the Leon Valley City Code.
(2) Reference is hereby made to article 3.07 (manufactured home parks) of the Leon Valley City Code (as cited above), and particularly to division 4
thereof, for other regulations pertaining to manufactured home parks. Area and other regulations applicable to permitted uses in this district, other than
manufactured homes, shall be the same as provided for the R-3 district, as set out in this article.
(c) Lot requirements.
(1) Area. The total area of a manufactured home park shall be not less than four (4) acres, with served manufactured home spaces.
(2) Space requirements. Each manufactured home space shall provide a minimum area of 3,200 square feet, however, no manufactured home space shall
have dimensions of less than forty feet (40') on the narrow dimension, nor eighty feet (80') on the long dimension.
(d) Setback requirements.
(1) General. No manufactured home shall be closer than ten feet (10') to any property line, nor closer than twenty-five feet (25') to the property line
adjoining a public or private street.
(2) Front yard. A minimum of 10 feet shall be provided, from the nearest corner of the manufactured home to the front line of the manufactured home
space. For other structures on each space, a minimum front yard of ten feet (10') shall be provided.
(3) Rear yard. A minimum of twenty-five feet (25') shall be provided.
(4) Side yard. A minimum of twenty feet (20') at any point shall be provided between each manufactured home. If the lot abuts on two (2) streets, a side
yard of ten (10) feet shall be provided.
(5) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard.
(e) Other.
(1) Accessory buildings. Accessory buildings are allowed, but shall in no case consist of more than twenty percent (20%) of the total manufactured home
space.
(2) Landscaping. A total of 25% of street yard area must be landscaped. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or
combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is strongly recommended. See appendix A for a list of trees, shrubs and plants suitable for the
region. Also see division 9 of this article for other landscaping regulations.
(3) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lights affixed to the buildings and manufactured homes shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said
buildings or homes. Lights affixed to a pole shall be mounted no higher than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(4) Masonry. Not required for a manufactured home, but that any permanent office, laundry or other facility shall consist of 75% masonry of overall exterior
walls.
(5) Parking. Two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home space, two (2) spaces provided for each office, and five (5)
spaces for each laundry or other facility.
(6) Public facilities. All R-5 developments shall be connected to the city's water and sewer system and shall provide sidewalks and fire protection, except
as provided in article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(7) Recreational area. Not less than five percent (5%) of the total park area of the manufactured home park shall be devoted to recreational facilities.
(8) Storage. Outside storage is not allowed in the R-5 district, with the exception of vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats in accordance with
article 3.05 and article 12.03 of the Leon Valley City Code. All items to be stored must be completely contained in either a manufactured home, garage or
other building.
Figure 6 (R-5 Manufactured Home)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.611; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.311)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/349
Sec. 15.02.312 “R-6” garden house district
(a) Purpose and description. The R-6 district is composed mainly of areas containing single-family dwellings. The R-6 district regulations implement the policies of the
master plan by 1) protecting the residential character of the areas by prohibiting commercial and industrial activities, apartments, two-family dwellings and manufactured
homes; 2) encouraging a suitable neighborhood environment; 3) preserving the openness of the area by requiring that certain minimum yard and area standard
requirements be met, however, with greater density being permitted than in the R-1 district.
(b) Lot regulations.
(1) Area of total development. Not less than three (3) lots with common side lot lines will be zoned for “R-6” garden house. When facing on the same street
within the same block, “R-1” single-family dwellings and “R-6” garden houses will not be mixed. However, this does not preclude “R-1” on one side of a street
with an “R-6” on the opposite side of the street within the same block or different blocks.
(2) Area of each lot. 4,500 square feet.
(3) Depth. A minimum of 100 feet.
(4) Floor space. There shall be a heated living area in each garden house of not less than the following: one story - 1000 square feet; two story - 1400
square feet; two and one-half story - 1800 square feet. When “R-6” is mixed with “R-1” in the same subdivision, the average heated living area of “R-6”
housing shall be at least seventy-five (75) percent of the average size of the “R-1” structures, but in no event shall the minimum square footage be less than
as described above.
(5) Frontage. A minimum of 45 feet on a public right-of-way is required.
(6) Height. A maximum of two and one-half (2-1/2) stories is allowed.
(c) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet, except as hereinafter provided.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum depth of fifteen (15) feet except where the garage is entered from the rear in which case the
minimum rear yard shall be twenty-five (25) feet exclusive of the area used as a garage. Total square footage of accessory buildings exclusive of a detached
garage shall not exceed 150 square feet.
(3) Side yard. There shall be a side yard on each side of all lots of not less than five (5) feet, except on corner lots on which external side yard shall not be
less than ten (10) feet. Alternatively, one side yard may be reduced to zero (0) feet provided the other side yard is increased to ten (10) feet. However, in no
event shall the outside walls of a structure be closer than ten (10) feet to the outside walls of a structure built on an adjacent lot.
(4) Zero lot line exterior wall. When a structure is built with a side yard of zero (0) feet, no windows or doors will be built into an exterior side wall so
situated. In addition, a six-foot privacy fence will be constructed and maintained by the owner from the rear-most point of such an exterior wall to the rear lot
line of the property.
(5) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard.
(6) Double frontage. Where lots front upon two (2) parallel streets or front upon two (2) streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot, a rear yard
shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard.
(7) Reverse frontage. On corner lots, where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided on the street
side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front line of the lots in the rear.
(d) Other.
(1) Accessory building. Shall be allowed, but shall be located no closer than 5 feet from any property line, and must be located in the rear yard. In no case
shall an accessory building occupy more than 20% of the total open space in the rear yard.
(2) Landscaping. A total of 35% of street yard area must be landscaped. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or
combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is strongly recommended.
(3) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lights affixed to the buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said building. Lights affixed to a
pole shall be mounted no higher than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(4) Masonry required. Garden houses shall be constructed of masonry or other similar noncombustible materials to the extent of not less than seventy-five
(75) percent of overall exterior walls.
(5) Nonconforming dwellings. The provisions above shall not be applicable to nonconforming dwellings in existence on the date of the adoption thereof or
to dwellings built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming dwellings as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm or other involuntary cause.
(6) Parking. A total of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided.
(7) Public facilities. “R-6” garden houses are permitted only on lots that are connected to the city's water and public sewage disposal system and must
conform to the regulations in article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(8) Storage. Outside storage is not allowed in the R-6 district, with the exception of vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats in accordance with
article 3.05 and article 12.03 of the Leon Valley City Code. Items to be stored shall be completely contained in either the main structure, garage or an
accessory building.
Figure 7 (R-6 Garden Home)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.612; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.312)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/349
Sec. 15.02.313 “R-7” single-family medium density dwelling
(a) Purpose and description.
(1) This district provides areas for other forms of medium density single-family uses which provide a buffer between agricultural and higher density areas of
the city. Minimum lot size requirements are provided in order to allow for market and design flexibility while preserving neighborhood character. The district
regulations are designed to encourage a suitable neighborhood environment for family life by including among the permitted uses such facilities as libraries,
and neighborhood recreation centers. The district regulations are designed to: (1) protect the residential character of the areas by prohibiting commercial and
industrial activities; (2) encourage a suitable neighborhood environment; and (3) preserve the openness of the area by requiring that certain minimum yard
and area standard requirements are met.
(2) The R-7 district implements the following policies of the master plan:
(A) Encourage patterns of urban development that provide a full range of housing choices and promote a sense of community, urban vitality and the
efficient provision of infrastructure.
(B) Encourage connectivity throughout the city.
(b) Lot regulations.
(1) Area. Lots must have a minimum area of 6050 square feet.
(2) Frontage. Minimum frontage of 55 feet along a public right-of-way.
(3) Depth. Minimum of 110 feet.
(4) Floor space. Minimum floor space of 1200 square feet of heated living space shall be provided in each one-story dwelling, 1400 square feet for each
two-story dwelling.
(5) Height. Maximum of two and one-half (2-1/2) stories allowed.
(c) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum of 20 feet from front property line to main structure.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 15 feet from rear property line to rear of main structure.
(3) Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than 5 feet from side property line to main structure. On corner lots the external side yard shall be not
less than ten (10) feet, unless there is a side entry garage, then the side setback shall be twenty feet (20').
(4) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard.
(5) Reverse frontage. On corner lots, where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided on the street
side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front line of the lots in the rear.
(d) Other.
(1) Accessory buildings. Shall be allowed, but shall be located no closer than 5 feet from any property line, and must be located in the rear yard. In no case
shall an accessory building occupy more than 25% of the total open space in the rear yard.
(2) Landscaping. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is
strongly recommended. See division 9 of this article for other landscaping requirements.
(3) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lights affixed to the buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said building. Lights affixed to a
pole shall be mounted no higher than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(4) Masonry required. A minimum of 75% of total overall exterior walls shall be constructed of masonry, or other similar noncombustible materials.
(5) Parking. Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each residential structure.
(6) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system, and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(7) Storage. Outside storage is not allowed in the R-7 district, with the exception of vehicles, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats in accordance with
article 3.05 and article 12.03 of Leon Valley City Code. All items to be stored must be completely contained in either the main structure, garage or an
accessory building.
(Ordinance 07-054, sec. 3, adopted 11/5/07; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.313)
Sec. 15.02.314 Residential use table
P - Allowed by right
X - Not allowed
Use R-1 R-2 R-3 R-3A R-4 R-5 R-6 Notes
Adult care P P P P P P P **No more than six (6)
adults. See section
15.02.315, “Home
occupations” and section
15.02.316 [15.02.317], “Adult
care facilities”
Child care P P P P P P P **No more than six (6)
children. Also see section
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/349
15.02.315, “Home
occupations” and section
15.02.316, “Child care
facilities”
Dwelling, singlefamily
P P X X P P P
Dwelling, twofamily
X P X X X X X
Dwelling,
multiple-family
X X P P X X X
Multiple-family
retirement
X X X P X X X
Dwelling,
townhouse
X X X X P X X
Dwelling,
manufactured
X X X X X P X
Dwelling, garden
house
X X X X X X P
Bed and
breakfast
P P X X X X P
Boarding house P P X X X X P **Allowed in B-1 (small
business) zoning district with
a SUP. Also see division 7,
“Permitted Use Table”
Club (private) X X P P P P X **Allowed in B-1 (small
business) with a SUP (No
sale of alcoholic beverages
in R-3, R-3A, R-4, or B-1)
Congregate
residence
P P P P P P P
Cottages X X X P X X X
Group home P P X X X X P **Allowed in B-1 (small
business) zoning district
Home occupation P P P P P P P **See section 15.02.315,
“Home occupations”
Lodge (private) X X P P P P X **Allowed in B-1 (small
business) with a SUP (No
alcohol sales in R-3, R-3A R-
4, R-5 or B-1)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.613; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.314)
Sec. 15.02.315 Home occupations
(a) Purpose and description.
Home occupation regulations.
(1) General. Home occupations shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts, provided the home occupation is clearly and obviously subordinate to
the main use or dwelling unit for residential purposes. Home occupations shall be conducted wholly within the primary structure or existing accessory building
which is on the premises.
(2) Conditions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/349
(A) Area. Not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the primary structure or fifty (50) percent of all accessory buildings on the
premises.
(B) Personnel. Other than those related by blood, marriage or adoption, no more than one (1) person, other than the owner, can be employed in the
home occupation;
(C) Inventory and supplies. Shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the area permitted to be used as a home occupation;
(D) Outside display/storage. None allowed;
(E) Signage. The home occupation shall not involve the use of advertising signs on the premises or any other advertising media which calls attention
to the fact that the dwelling unit is being used for a home occupation, with the exception of a telephone number listing and one nameplate, not
exceeding one (1) square foot in area, provided the nameplate is nonilluminated and attached flat to the dwelling unit or visible through a window;
(F) Prohibited home occupations. Auto repair or maintenance, beauty culture schools, beauty parlors, barbershops, electricians, plumbers,
sheetmetal shops, furniture repair, sexually oriented commercial enterprises, catering or other similar uses, shall not be allowed. The use of electrical or
mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the dwelling or create visible or audible interference in radio or television receivers or cause
fluctuations in line voltage outside the dwelling unit is prohibited; and/or the home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for
delivery of materials to and from the premises, nor shall any commercial vehicles be stored at the residence;
(G) Child care facilities. The care for payment of more than six (6) unrelated children shall require a specific use permit;
(H) Parking. Sales and services to patrons shall be arranged by appointment and scheduled so that not more than one (1) patron vehicle is on the
premises at the same time; two (2) additional parking spaces shall be provided on the premises, except only one (1) need be provided if the home
occupation does not have an employee;
(I) Appearance. The dwelling unit shall not be altered nor shall the home occupation be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to
differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, increased traffic or the emission of odors, sounds
or vibrations.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.614; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.315)
Sec. 15.02.316 Child care facilities
Child care is allowed by right in residential zoning districts, if the number [of] children being cared for does not exceed six (6) children. Various options are hereby
adopted which shall apply partially or totally to the operation of a child care facility, nursery or kindergarten, in a residential zone. The following conditions are adopted:
(1) No construction features shall be permitted which would place structure out of character with the surrounding neighborhood;
(2) The child care facility shall be registered and/or licensed and the operator shall be approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services
(TDSHS) when such licensing and/or approval is available from TDSHS. Proof of said licensing/approval by TDSHS and any other state agency which
regulates child care operators is a requirement for obtaining a permanent certificate of occupancy;
(3) A specific use permit “SUP” is required for the operation of any child care facility in residential districts if the number of children being cared for is more
than six (6) (see table of permitted uses).
(4) A certificate of occupancy is required for operation of a child care facility in a residence where more than six (6) children are being cared for, for a fee;
(5) In residential districts, the child care facility will be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential
character of the dwelling (refer to home occupation regulations);
(6) In residential districts, the operator of the child care facility must reside on subject property;
(7) In residential districts, hours of operation shall not be permitted before 6:30 a.m. or after 7:30 p.m.;
(8) In residential districts, the child care facility shall be located within the main structure on the lot, and the lot [the facility] shall not utilize more than
seventy-five (75) percent of the gross floor area of the main structure.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.615; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.316)
Sec. 15.02.317 Adult care facilities
Adult care facilities are allowed by right in residential zoning districts, if the number [of] adults being cared for does not exceed six (6) persons. Various options are
hereby adopted which shall apply partially or totally to the operation of an adult care facility in a residential zone. The following conditions are adopted:
(1) No construction features shall be permitted which would place structure out of character with the surrounding neighborhood;
(2) The adult care facility shall be registered and/or licensed and the operator shall be approved by the Texas Department of State Health Services
(TDSHS) when such licensing and/or approval is available from TDSHS. Proof of said licensing/approval by TDSHS and any other state agency which
regulates adult care operators is a requirement for obtaining a permanent certificate of occupancy;
(3) A specific use permit “SUP” is required for the operation of any adult care facility in residential districts if the number of adults being cared for is more
than six (6) (see table of permitted uses).
(4) A certificate of occupancy is required for operation of an adult care facility;
(5) In residential districts, the adult care facility will be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the essential residential
character of the dwelling (refer to home occupation regulations);
(6) In residential districts, the operator of the adult care facility must reside on subject property;
(7) In residential districts, hours of operation shall not be permitted before 6:30 a.m. or after 7:30 p.m.;
(8) In residential districts, the adult care facility shall be located within the main structure on the lot, and the lot [the facility] shall not utilize more than
seventy-five (75) percent of the gross floor area of the main structure.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.616; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.317)
Sec. 15.02.318 “MX-1” mixed use district
(a) Purpose and description. The purpose of the MX-1 district is to concentrate various mixed uses into an area such that residential housing related to the allowed
business activities is within a reasonable walking distance from the job opportunity. It is intended that the district have a unique character created by the mix of zoning
uses allowed together with identifiable pedestrian, social, recreational and green space areas. Another unique character intended is the absence (or reduction) of on-site
parking areas and the use of common parking areas. The mixed uses may be created vertically in a multi-story building or spaced horizontally. This special district may
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/349
be created altogether new or by proximity to existing structures and uses. Municipal participation may be created as a central recreational or promotional feature in the
district.
(b) Locational criteria. An MX district may be designated for areas:
(1) With an existing mix of retail, office, service and residential uses located within one-quarter (1/4) mile of each other; or
(2) On a tract or parcel of at least five (5) acres in size, for which a mixed-use development is proposed.
(c) Sub-areas. The site shall be divided into the following sub-areas:
(1) A “center” consisting of retail, civic, professional office; service and multifamily uses.
(A) The center shall have a minimum area of 3,000 square feet.
(B) The center shall be located on a commercial standard street.
(C) Each center shall face or surround a community gathering area (plaza).
(D) The center shall be connected to adjacent streets, crosswalks or lanes that provide access to dwelling units.
(2) A “neighborhood” or series of neighborhoods, consisting of multifamily or single-family uses, small-scale retail and service uses, and public outdoor
gathering areas. Each multifamily unit containing more than 250 units shall have not less than 600 square feet per dwelling unit. All areas of a neighborhood
should be within a 10-minute walk from edge to edge. A neighborhood shall not be less than five nor more than 10 acres in size.
(3) Parks and open spaces, including a plaza and a greenbelt area shall be provided. The plaza shall serve as a community focal point and public
gathering area. The greenbelt shall provide an identifiable edge to the district, open space for residents and natural areas. Stormwater management must be
considered.
(4) Landscaping, using drought tolerant, hard and softscape materials shall be provided for each of the uses in the district.
(d) Density. The application for a MX-1 mixed use district shall include a master development plan layout that shall set forth the number of units per gross residential
acre and the total number of dwelling units. The development plan shall show all uses intended and features such as landscape, sidewalks, lanes and streets that
demonstrate that the plan accomplishes the purposes and intentions of this document. The development plan shall be subject to review by the fire marshal, city engineer
and building inspector and shall otherwise conform to the codes and ordinances of the city.
(e) Abutting uses. Subject to review by the city engineer, different uses may abut on the side or rear lot lines, or face across streets or parks, regardless of whether
they are in the same or different land use category. Retail or service uses may abut single-family uses only where the retail or service use is located at the intersection of
a main street, boulevard or avenue.
(f) Use matrix. The use matrix is not applicable to the MX-1 district provided that no building permit shall be issued unless the requested use conforms to a master
development plan approved as a part of rezoning to an MX-1 district. If an MX-1 district is not approved pursuant to a rezoning request, permitted uses shall abide by the
individual zoning district regulations.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.617; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.318)
Sec. 15.02.319 “O-1” office district
(a) Purpose and description. The O-1 district is composed mainly of land and structures occupied by, or suitable for, office uses, while excluding offices which are
incidental to a primary use. The district regulations are designed to protect the character of the residential areas by regulating unenclosed activities or uses, which could
intrude upon the lifestyle of the community through inappropriate lighting, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or pollutants. The district regulations implement the policies of
the master plan by the following:
(1) Protecting residential areas; and
(2) Encouraging the transitional character of certain land parcels by permitting a limited group of office uses that are compatible with adjoining residential
properties.
(b) Height, area and lot regulations.
(1) Lot area. Except as hereinafter provided, all structures hereafter erected, enlarged, relocated, reconstructed, or converted, shall be located upon lots
containing the following areas: A lot on which there is erected or converted an office shall contain an area of not less than 8,400 [square feet] for one unit,
10,000 square feet for the first two (2) units and 1,200 square feet for each additional unit.
(2) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum frontage of 70 feet along a public right-of-way.
(3) Minimum depth. Minimum of one hundred and twenty (120) feet.
(4) Floor space. None.
(5) Masonry required. Office buildings shall be constructed of masonry or similar noncombustible materials to the extent of not less than seventy-five (75)
percent of overall exterior walls.
(6) Height. There shall be a maximum of two and one-half (2-1/2) stories allowed in the O-1 district.
(c) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum of 20 feet from the property line to the building structure.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard having a minimum of 25 feet from the structure to the rear property line.
(3) Side yard. There shall be a side yard having a minimum of ten (10) feet from the structure to the side property line.
(4) Corner lot. On any corner lot on which a front yard is required by this article, no wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no hedge, shrub, tree
or other growth shall be maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines and a straight line connecting such street lines at points
twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection, measured along such street lines.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/349
(5) Landscaping. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is
strongly recommended. Building(s) for which sixty (60) percent or more of the available interior space is used or proposed to be used for office shall provide
twenty percent (20%).
(6) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lighting facilities shall be arranged so as to reflect the illumination away from any residentially zoned property.
All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or
other public way. Lights affixed to the buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said building. Lights affixed to a pole shall be mounted no higher
than forty percent (40%) of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(7) Nonconforming structures. The provisions above shall not be applicable to nonconforming dwellings in existence on the date of the adoption thereof or
to structures built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming structures as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm or other involuntary cause.
(8) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(9) Outside storage. There shall be no outside display or storage of any retail merchandise, equipment, or other business related items, all business
activities must be conducted within an enclosed structure, there shall be no outside service or repair of any kind or nature, and there shall be no outside
entertainment.
Figure 9 (O-1 Office)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.618; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.319)
Sec. 15.02.320 “B-1” small business district
(a) Purpose.
(1) The B-1 district is composed of land and structures occupied or suitable for such uses as offices, light service, and light retail. B-1 uses are usually
located between residential areas and business areas, and there is no outside storage allowed. The district regulations implement the policies of the master
plan by 1) protecting and encouraging the transitional character of certain areas by permitting a limited group of uses of an office, service or retail nature to
provide goods and services to surrounding residential districts; and 2) protecting surrounding districts by requiring certain minimum yard and area standard
requirements that are compatible with those essential in residential districts.
(2) A B-1 small business is a completely enclosed business not exceeding 3,000 square feet of gross floor area (GFA), where the primary use specifically
meets one (1) or more of the following, and no ancillary use conflicts herewith:
(A) A retail facility for the purpose of the sale or lease of personal, novelty, or household items, not including the sale [of], appliances, firearms,
vehicles, vehicle parts, or wholesale items;
(B) A repair facility for the purpose of repair or maintenance of personal, novelty, or household items, not including vehicles, machinery, or appliances;
(C) A service facility for the purpose of providing a service to surrounding districts, but not including vehicle, cremation, embalming, or any service in
which there may be disposal, storage, or use of any federally or state regulated chemical, even if incidental to the primary use.
(D) Professional offices.
(E) Low density residential uses are allowed in B-1 (small business) districts.
(b) Height, area and lot regulations.
(1) Structures. Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a lot as herein defined and in no case shall there be more than one (1) building on one
(1) lot in the “R-1”, “R-2” or “B-1” districts, or as otherwise provided herein, and in no case shall any building be hereafter erected on more than one (1) lot.
(2) Lot area. There shall be a minimum area of 8400 square feet.
(3) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum frontage of 70 feet along a public right-of-way.
(4) Minimum depth. There shall be a minimum of 120 feet.
(5) Floor space. A minimum floor space of 1200 square feet of heated living space shall be provided in each one-story structure and 1400 square feet for
each two-story structure. In no case shall there be any structure with over 3000 square feet in the B-1 district.
(6) Masonry required. A minimum of 75% of total overall exterior walls shall be constructed of masonry, or other similar noncombustible materials.
(7) Height. There shall be a maximum of two and one-half (2-1/2) stories allowed.
(c) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line to the structure.
(2) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet from rear property line to rear of main structure.
(3) Side yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet from side property line to structure.
(4) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side equal to the front yard.
(5) Reverse frontage. On corner lots, where interior lots have been platted or sold, fronting on the side street, a side yard shall be provided on the street
side equal to the front yard on the lots in the rear. No accessory building on said corner lot shall project beyond the front line of the lots in the rear.
(6) Accessory buildings. Shall be allowed, but shall be located no closer than 5 feet from any property line, and must be located in the rear yard. In no case
shall an accessory building occupy more than 25% of the total open space in the rear yard.
(7) Landscaping. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is
strongly recommended. Landscaping shall consist of twenty percent (20%) of the street yard. Refer to division 9 of this article, “Landscaping,” for other
regulations regarding site landscaping requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/349
(8) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lighting facilities shall be arranged so as to reflect the illumination away from any residentially zoned property.
All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or
other public way. Lights affixed to the buildings shall be mounted no higher than the eaves of said building. Lights affixed to a pole shall be mounted no higher
than 40% of the distance from the front property line to the main structure.
(9) Nonconforming structures. The provisions of floor space and masonry above shall not be applicable to nonconforming structures in existence on the
date of the adoption thereof or to structures built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming structures as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm
or other involuntary cause.
(10) Parking. Refer to parking table and site requirements.
(11) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system, and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(12) Outside storage. There shall be no outside display or storage of any retail merchandise, equipment, or other business related items, all business
activities must be conducted within an enclosed structure, there shall be no outside service or repair of any kind or nature, and there shall be no outside
entertainment.
Figure 10 (B-1 Small Business)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.619; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.320)
Sec. 15.02.321 “B-2” retail district
(a) Purpose and description.
(1) The B-2 district is composed of land and structures occupied by or suitable for the furnishing of retail goods and services to surrounding residential
areas. The B-2 district is intended to allow a limited amount of outside storage of retail merchandise. The district regulations implement the policies of the
master plan by 1) promoting the offering of goods and services which are appropriate for surrounding business districts; 2) protecting surrounding residential
districts by requiring certain minimum yard and area standards are met; 3) encouraging economic viability and stability within the city.
(2) A general description of a “B-2” retail use is a business where the primary use specifically meets one (1) or more of the following, and no ancillary use
conflicts herewith:
(A) A retail facility the purpose of which is the sale or lease of personal, novelty, food, alcohol or household items, not including the sale or lease of
vehicles, firearms, or wholesale items, with incidental alcohol consumption allowed on-site;
(B) A repair facility the purpose of which is the repair or maintenance of personal, novelty, or household items, including minor appliances, but not
including vehicles, machinery or major appliances; and/or
(C) A service facility the purpose of which is providing a service to surrounding districts, including food services if incidental to the primary use, but not
including vehicle, cremation, embalming, or any service in which there may be disposal, storage, or use of any federally or state regulated chemical,
even if incidental to the primary use.
(b) Outside storage regulations.
(1) There shall be no outside storage of any retail or nonretail merchandise, equipment, or other business related items, specifically including six (6) or
more business related vehicles and/or any customer vehicles which remain on the property beyond the normal business hours of operation.
(2) A limited amount of outside display is allowed in the B-2 district, including display of plants for sale, display of lawn furnishings for sale, and occasional
display of new goods for sale. These items are to be on display for retail purposes only, and shall only be displayed at such times as the store is actually open
for business;
(3) There shall be no outside service or repair allowed in the B-2 district, except for food services, and alcohol services if ancillary to food services, but
these must meet the requirements of article 3.05 of the Leon Valley City Code regarding screening requirements.
(c) Height, area and lot requirements.
(1) Lot area. There shall be a minimum area of 9,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum frontage of 70 feet along a public right-of-way.
(3) Minimum depth. There shall be a minimum of 130 feet.
(4) Masonry required. None.
(5) Height. There shall be a maximum of three (3) stories allowed.
(d) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum of 25 feet from the front property line to the structure.
(2) Rear yard. None, except in those instances where the retail lot adjoins residential zoning to the rear, a rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet or twenty
percent (20%) of the average depth of the lot (whichever is less) shall be provided. In both cases, if the two (2) districts are separated by an alley, said alley is
not to be used for purposes of calculating the required setback and the building setbacks are required as if the lots adjoined the residential zoning district.
(3) Side yard. None, except in those instances where the property adjoins a residential property to the side, then a side yard of twenty (20) feet shall be
provided.
(4) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side of twenty (20) feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/349
(5) Landscaping. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is
strongly recommended. Landscaping shall consist of twenty percent (20%) of the street yard. Refer to landscaping section [section 15.02.501] for other
regulations regarding site landscaping requirements.
(6) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lighting facilities shall be arranged so as to reflect the illumination away from any residentially zoned property.
All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or
other public way.
(7) Parking. Refer to parking table for site parking requirements.
(8) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system, and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(9) Nonconforming structures. The provisions of floor space and masonry above shall not be applicable to nonconforming structures in existence on the
date of the adoption thereof or to structures built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming structures as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm
or other involuntary cause.
Figure 11 (B-2 Retail)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.620; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.321)
Sec. 15.02.322 “B-3” commercial district
(a) Purpose and description.
(1) The B-3 district is composed of land and structures used to furnish commercial needs, wholesale services, and some light assembling of goods, in
addition to most of the uses found in the B-2 district. The B-3 district regulations are designed to protect the character of the residential areas by regulating
unenclosed activities or uses, which could intrude upon the lifestyle of the community through inappropriate lighting, noise, vibration, smoke, dust, or
pollutants. The district regulations implement the policies of the master plan by 1) permitting the development of districts for the purpose of providing
commercial and wholesale uses; 2) protecting surrounding and abutting areas by requiring certain minimum yard and area standards are met; and 3)
encouraging economic viability and stability in the city.
(2) A B-3 use is a business where the primary use specifically meets one (1) or more of the following, and no ancillary use conflicts herewith:
(A) A retail facility the purpose of which is the sale or lease of personal, novelty, food, household, or business items, including wholesale;
(B) A repair facility the purpose of which is the repair or maintenance of personal, novelty, or household items, including appliances and vehicles;
and/or
(C) A service facility the purpose of which is providing a service to surrounding districts.
(D) Although it may occur in certain instances, it is not intended that the B-3 district abut R-1, R-2, R-4 or R-6 districts.
(b) Outside storage regulations.
(1) Outside display of retail merchandise is allowed in a B-3 district.
(2) Outside storage of retail merchandise is allowed in a B-3 district only if such merchandise is screened in accordance with article 3.05 of the Leon Valley
City Code.
(3) Outside storage of nonretail equipment, vehicles, including the vehicles of any customers which remain on the property beyond the normal hours of
operation, or other business related items, or any hazardous or toxic chemicals or substances shall be allowed in the B-3 district, only with a specific use
permit.
(4) A limited amount of outside repair or service is allowed in the B-3 district, but only with a specific use permit, except that food services shall not require
a specific use permit, however, they must meet the requirements of article 3.05 of the Leon Valley City Code regarding screening requirements.
(c) Lot requirements.
(1) Lot area. There shall be a minimum lot area of 9,100 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum frontage of 70 feet along a public right-of-way.
(3) Minimum depth. There shall be a minimum of 130 feet.
(4) Masonry required. None.
(5) Height. None.
(d) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum of 25 feet from the front property line to the structure.
(2) Rear yard. None, except in those instances where the retail lot adjoins residential zoning to the rear, a rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet or twenty
percent (20%) of the average depth of the lot (whichever is less) shall be provided. In both cases, if the two (2) districts are separated by an alley, said alley is
not to be used for purposes of calculating the required setback and the building setbacks are required as if the lots adjoined the residential zoning district.
(3) Side yard. None, except in those instances where the property adjoins a residential property to the side, then a side yard of twenty (20) feet shall be
provided.
(4) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side of twenty (20) feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/349
(5) Landscaping. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is
strongly recommended. Landscaping shall consist of twenty percent (20%) of the street yard. Refer to landscaping section [section 15.02.501] for other
regulations regarding site landscaping requirements.
(6) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lighting facilities shall be arranged so as to reflect the illumination away from any residentially zoned property.
All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or
other public way.
(7) Parking. Refer to parking table for site parking requirements.
(8) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system, and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(9) Nonconforming structures. The provisions of floor space and masonry above shall not be applicable to nonconforming structures in existence on the
date of the adoption thereof or to structures built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming structures as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm
or other involuntary cause.
Figure 12 (B-3 Commercial)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.621; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.322)
Sec. 15.02.323 “I-1” industrial district
(a) Purpose and description.
(1) The I-1 district is composed of land and structures used for assembling, manufacturing or wholesaling where the use and its operation do not affect
abutting and/or surrounding uses. The district regulations are designed to allow a wide range of industrial activities subject to limitations designed for mutual
protection of land use. The I-1 district includes retail and commercial uses; however, I-1 districts are to be separated from residential areas by business areas
or natural and/or man-made barriers. The district regulations implement the policies of the master plan by 1) protecting the character of the business and
residential areas by regulating unenclosed activities or uses, which could intrude upon the lifestyle of the community through inappropriate lighting, noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, or pollutants; 2) encouraging economic viability and stability in the city.
(2) An I-1 business is a business where the primary use specifically meets one (1) or more of the following, and no ancillary use conflicts herewith:
(A) A repair facility the purpose of which is the repair and maintenance of goods, including vehicles;
(B) A service facility the purpose of which is providing a service to surrounding districts including vehicle and alcohol services; and/or
(C) A facility the purpose of which is the assembling, manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or testing of goods or equipment within an
enclosed area, serviced by trucks or vans and imposing a negligible impact on the surrounding environment by noise, vibration, smoke, dust or
pollutants.
(b) Outside display and storage regulations.
(1) Outside display of retail merchandise is allowed in an I-1 district.
(2) Outside storage of retail merchandise is allowed in an I-1 district only if such merchandise is screened in accordance with article 3.05 of the Leon Valley
City Code.
(3) Outside storage of nonretail equipment, vehicles, or other business related items, shall be allowed as long as the requirements of article 3.05 of this
code are met.
(4) Any business activity not conducted in an enclosed structure must have appropriate screening, as required by article 3.05 of the Leon Valley City Code.
(c) Lot requirements.
(1) Lot area. There shall be a minimum area of 10,500 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum frontage of 70 feet along a public right-of-way.
(3) Minimum depth. There shall be a minimum of 150 feet in depth of the lot.
(4) Masonry required. None.
(5) Height. No limit to height in this district.
(d) Setback requirements.
(1) Front yard. There shall be a front yard having a minimum of 25 feet from the front property line to the structure.
(2) Rear yard. None, except in those instances where the retail lot adjoins residential zoning to the rear, a rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet or twenty
percent (20%) of the average depth of the lot (whichever is less) shall be provided. In both cases, if the two (2) districts are separated by an alley, said alley is
not to be used for purposes of calculating the required setback and the building setbacks are required as if the lots adjoined the residential zoning district.
(3) Side yard. None, except in those instances where the property adjoins a residential property to the side, then a side yard of twenty (20) feet shall be
provided.
(4) Corner lot. Where lots abut on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets, where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed 135
degrees, a side yard shall be provided on the street side of twenty (20) feet.
(5) Landscaping. The use of drought tolerant turf grasses, such as zoysia or buffalo tif or combination, or other drought tolerant plantings and hardscape is
strongly recommended. Landscaping shall consist of twelve percent (12%) of the street yard. Refer to landscaping section [section 15.02.501] for other
regulations regarding site landscaping requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/349
(6) Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be hooded and all light emissions shielded, and shall be oriented such that light is directed towards the property and
does not trespass onto surrounding properties. Lighting facilities shall be arranged so as to reflect the illumination away from any residentially zoned property.
All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or
other public way.
(7) Parking. Refer to parking table and regulations for site parking requirements.
(8) Public facilities. Each lot shall be connected to the city's public water and sewer system, and shall have appropriate sidewalks and fire protection. See
article 10.02 (subdivision ordinance).
(9) Nonconforming structures. The provisions of floor space and masonry above shall not be applicable to nonconforming structures in existence on the
date of the adoption thereof or to structures built hereafter on the same lot to replace such nonconforming structures as may be destroyed by fire, windstorm
or other involuntary cause.
Figure 13 (I-1 Industrial)
(1972 Code, sec. 30.622; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.323)
Sec. 15.02.324 Table of minimum requirements
(a) In all cases regarding minimum standards set forth in the following table, the table is intended to be used in conjunction with the area requirements set forth in the
zoning district sections of this article.
District Use
Min.
Front
Yard in
Ft.
Min. Side
Yard in
Ft.
Min. Rear
Yard in
Ft.
Min. Area
in SF
Min.
Width in
Ft.
Max.
Story
Height
***
R-1 Singlefamily/
other 25 5 30 8,400 70 2.5
R-2 Two-family/other 20 5 30 * 85 2.5
R-3 Multiple-family 20 10 25 * 85 3
R-3A Multiple-family
retirement 25 10 25 5 acres 85
1 cot.
3 apt.
R-4 Townhouse 25 10 25 * 45 3
R-5 Mobile home 20 10 25 4 acres 70 2.5
R-6 Garden house 20 5* 15 4,500 45 2.5
MX-1 Mixed use * * * 5,000 85 *
O-1 Office 20 10 25 10,000 85 3
B-1 Small business 25 5 30 8,400 70 2.5
B-2 Retail 25 ** None ** None 9,100 70 3
B-3 Commercial 25 ** None ** None 9,100 70 No limit
I-1 Industrial 25 ** None ** None 10,500 70 No limit
* Refer to appropriate zoning district of [for] district height, yard and area requirements.
** In those instances where the retail, commercial or industrial lot adjoins on the side of a residential zoning district, a side yard of twenty (20) feet shall be provided.
Where the retail, commercial or industrial lot adjoins residential zoning to the rear, a rear yard of twenty-five (25) feet or twenty (20) percent of the average depth of the
lot (whichever is less) shall be provided. In both cases, if the two (2) districts are separated by an alley, said alley is not to be used for purposes of calculating the
required setback and the building setbacks are required as if the lots adjoined the residential zoning district.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/349
*** Refer to development regulations [section 15.02.305] “Height” for allowed exceptions to the minimum height requirement.
(b) Procedural regulations for use classification.
(1) Divisions 6 and 7 of this article shall be utilized in determining use classification, permitted zoning district(s), and restrictions regarding uses.
(2) When specified in the permitted use table, a use shall be allowable in the zoning district(s) as shown, unless further restrictions make such use(s) in
that zone impermissible.
(3) When not specified in the permitted use table or section 15.02.382, the use shall be subject to the rules applicable to nonspecified uses, found
elsewhere in this article, unless every aspect of the use is consistent with the intent of this article, and such use meets the criteria of the district categories.
(4) Whether a use falls under a table or category shall be determined by the zoning administrator.
(5) Where a site has more than one (1) use, the primary use shall override. In cases where each use is equal, the use which has the most restrictive zoning
district and regulations shall override.
(6) Any wholesale use not specifically denoted as such in the permitted use table shall be classified as a wholesale facility.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.623; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.324)
Sec. 15.02.325 Non-chartered financial institution regulations
(a) Non-chartered financial institutions shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) May not be located within a radius of 1,000 feet from the nearest existing non-chartered financial institution.
(2) May not be located within 500 feet from the following land uses: residentially zoned parcels, any state or federally chartered bank, savings association,
credit union, or industrial loan company, religious institutions, school or day care facility, bar or liquor store, and pawnshops.
(3) Storefronts shall have glass or transparent glazing in the window and doors and as prescribed by article 3.04 shall have no more than 10 percent of any
window or door area covered by signs, banners or opaque coverings of any kind.
(4) Animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving or similar type on-premises signs are prohibited.
(5) May only operate within a freestanding building and may not operate in the same structure as any other use of the same type.
(Ordinance 14-02, sec. II(B), adopted 4/14/14)
Secs. 15.02.326–15.02.380 Reserved
Division 7. Permitted Use Table
Sec. 15.02.381 Permitted use table
P - Allowed by right CIO - Commercial and industrial overlay
X - Not allowed SO - Sustainability overlay
U - Per underlying zoning GO - Gateway overlay
SUP - Specific use permit
Use O-1 B-1 B-2 B-3 I-1 SO CIO GO Notes
Adult care facility SUP SUP P P P U U U **See section
15.02.317, “Adult
care facilities”
Air conditioning repair X X X P P X U X
Air conditioning sales -
repair and/or service
incidental
X X P P P X U X
Alcoholic beverage sales -
no on-premises
consumption
X X P P P U U U Not within 200 ft of
SF zone
Alteration and repair of
apparel
X X P P P U U U
Ambulance service X X X P P U U U
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/349
Animal clinic X X P P P U U U SO or GO: P with no
overnight kennel
CIO: P for clinic and
kennel
Animal shelter/pound X X X P P X U X
Antique store X P P P P U U U
Appliance, minor - repair X X P P P U U U
Appliance, major - repair X X X P P X U X
Appliance store repair
and/or service incidental
X X P P P U U U
Art gallery X P P P P U U U
Assembly/packaging X X X SUP P U U U
Attended donation
station/facility
X X SUP SUP P U U U
Auditorium, convention
center, and other similar
meeting facilities
X X X SUP P U U U
Automobile accessories -
retail sales w/ installation
and/or repair incidental
X X SUP P P X U X
Automobile accessories,
parts and components to
include inspection
Retail sales only w/o
installation and/or repair
incidental
X X P P P X* U X* *SO or GO: Allowed
in B-3 only with SUP
Automobile boat storage X X X SUP P X U X
Automobile auction X X X X P X U X **Vehicles to be in
operating condition
w/current sticker and
license
Automobile lubrication
service facility - lubrication
only
X X P P P X U X
Automobile parts and
components
Retail sales with installation
and/or repair incidental
X X X P P X U X
Automobile rental with
unenclosed on-site storage
of not more than twelve (12)
private passenger vehicles
X X P P P X U X
Automobile rental on-site
storage
X X X P P X U X
Automobile rental and/or X X X P P X U X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/349
sales
Automobile repair and/or
service
X X X P P X U X
Automobile repair and/or
service - brake repair facility
X X X P P X U X
Automobile service station -
gasoline sales only
X X P P P SUP U SUP
Automobile service station -
repair incidental
X X X P P SUP U SUP
Automobile and truck sales
- service incidental
X X X P P X U X
Automobile/vehicle
inspection station
X X P P P SUP U SUP
Automobile/vehicle storage X X X P P X U X **Vehicles to be in
operating condition
w/current sticker and
license
Automobile wrecker service X X X X P U U U
Bait store X X X P P X U X
Bakery X X P P P U U U
Bank, savings & loan X X P P P U U U
Bar X X X SUP SUP U U U
Barber or beauty equipment
and supplies
X X P P P U U U
Barber or beauty shop P P P P P U U U
Bicycle sales and repair X X P P P U U U
Boat sales and service
facility
X X X SUP SUP X U X
Bookstore P P P P P U U U
Building specialty store X X P P P U U U
Cabinet or carpenter shop X X X P P X U X
Camera/photographic
supply
X X P P P P U P
Candy, nut and
confectionery store
X X P P P P U P
Carwash (automatic) X X P P P X U SUP Vacuum cleaners
must be set back a
minimum of 50 feet
from residential areas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/349
GO: All exterior
carwash-related
activities such as
vacuum areas,
washing, and drying
must be screened
from view from any
residential districts or
uses, streets, rightsof-
way, major access
drives or public park
areas within 150' of
the property
Carwash (self-service) X X SUP P P X U X Vacuum cleaners
must be set back a
minimum of 50 feet
from residential areas
Catering facility X X P P P U U U
Cemetery X X X SUP SUP U U U
Child care facility SUP SUP P P X U U U **See section
15.02.316, “Child
care facilities”
Churches X X X P X U U U
Cleaning products X X P P P X U X
Clinic, dental or medical P P P P X U U U
Clothing and accessory
store
X X P P X U U U
Club or lodge (private) X X X SUP SUP U U U **No sale of alcoholic
beverages in B-1
Cold storage plant X X X SUP P X U X
Communications distribution
hub
X X SUP SUP P U U U
Computer store/similar
business machines retail
sales with installation and/or
repair incidental
X X P P P P U P
Contractor facility X X P P P X U X
Convenience store X X P P P U U U **If the use is 24
hours a SUP is
required
Cosmetics store P P P P X U U U
Creamery X X X X P U U U
Dairy product sales X X P P P U U U
Dance hall X X X SUP SUP U U U Also see bar, club or
lodge (private)
Department and/or variety X X P P P U U U
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/349
store
Drugstore X P P P P U U U
Dry cleaning - pickup station
only
P P P P P U U U
Dry cleaning plant X X X SUP SUP X U X
Electroplating X X X X SUP U U U
Entertainment - indoor
Billiard parlor, bowling
center, playground, skating
center, video/game room,
playroom/birthday party
room, children only
X SUP SUP SUP P U U U
Entertainment - outdoor
Baseball/softball/volleyball
park, equestrian center,
fairground, football field, gokarts,
golf - miniature or
other, sports complex
X SUP SUP SUP X U P U
Exterminator X X X P P X U X
Farm equipment sales and
service
X X X P P X U X
Feed, seed, and/or fertilizer
retail sales only
X X P P P U U U
Firearms and/or ammunition X X SUP SUP SUP U U U
Fish market (fully enclosed) X X P P P U U U
Fish market, wholesale X X X X SUP U U U
Flea market X X X P P U* U U* *SO and GO: Where
permitted, SUP
required **See
additional regulations
section 15.02.382
Floor cleaning service X X SUP P P U U U
Floor covering sales X X P P P U U U
Floral shop P P P P P U U U
Food processing facility X X X X SUP U U U
Food product sales X X P P P U U U
Freight depot (truck) X X X X SUP U U U
Fruit and produce market X X P P P U U U
Funeral home/mortuary X X SUP P P U U U
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/349
Furniture repair and/or
upholstery shop
X X X P P U U U
Furniture sales X X P P P U U U
Garden specialty store X X P P P U U U
Gift shop P P P P X U U U
Glass, sheet - sales only X X P P P U U U
Grocery store w/food and
produce market incidental
X P P P P U U U
Gymnasium/physical fitness
facility
X X X P P U U U
Hardware store X X P P P U U U
Hobby supply store (crafts) X P P P P U U U
Hospital X X X P P U U U
Intradermal permanent
cosmetics
X SUP SUP P P U U U
Interior decorating studio P P P P P U U U
Jewelry sales and repair P P P P P U U U
Kennel X X X SUP SUP U U U
Laboratory, dental or
medical
X X SUP P P U U U
Laboratory, research X X X P P U U U
Laboratory, testing X X X X P U U U
Laundromat X X P P P U U U
Laundry supply - to include
uniform/linen/diaper service
X X X SUP P U U U
Leather goods or luggage
store
X P P P P U U U
Library X X X P P U U U
Locksmith X P P P P U U U
Lodging:
Boarding house X SUP X X X SUP U SUP **Also see section
15.02.314
“Residential use
table”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/349
Convalescent ctr. X X SUP P P U U U
Nursing home X SUP SUP P P U U U
Hotel X X X P P U U U
Inn X SUP P P X U U U
Motel X X X P P U U U
Suite hotel X X X P P U U U
Lumberyard X X X SUP P X U X
Machine, tools and
construction equipment to
include sales, service and
repair
X X X P P X U X
Manufacturing X X X SUP P U U U
Medical equipment and
supplies
X X P P P U U U
Motorcycle sales, repair,
and service
X X X SUP P U* U U* *In SO and GO:
Sales only. Where
permitted, requires
SUP
Moving and transfer
company
X X X P P X U X
Museum X X X P P U U U
Music store X X P P P U U U
Non-chartered financial
institution
X X P P P U U U ***Not be located
within a radius of
1,000 feet from the
nearest existing nonchartered
financial
institution.
***Not located within
500 feet from the
following land uses:
residentially zoned
parcels, any state or
federally chartered
bank, savings
association, credit
union, or industrial
loan company,
religious institutions,
school or day care
facility, bar or liquor
store, and
pawnshops.
***Storefronts shall
have glass or
transparent glazing in
the window and
doors and as
prescribed by article
3.04 shall have no
more than 10 percent
of any window or
door area covered by
signs, banners or
opaque coverings of
any kind. Animated,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/349
moving, flashing,
blinking, reflecting,
revolving or similar
type on-premises
signs are prohibited.
***May only operate
within a freestanding
building and may not
operate in the same
structure as any
other use of the
same type.
Nonemergency medical
transport service
X X P P P SUP U SUP
Office equipment and
supply
X X P P P P U P
Office, professional
Also see Clinic, dental or
medical
P P P P P U U U
Optical store X P P P P U U U
Paint and wallpaper X X P P P U U U
Park and ride X X X SUP SUP U U U
Parking lot or parking
garage
X X P P P U U U
Pawnshop X X X X P U U U
Pet grooming X X P P P U U U
Pet store X X P P P U U U
Photographic equipment
and supplies
X X P P P P U P
Picture framing shop X X P P P P U P
Plant nursery I SUP SUP P P P SUP U SUP There shall be no
sales or advertising
signs and accessory
buildings shall not
exceed 600 square
feet, nor be closer
than fifty (50) feet to
any property line.
Subject to screening
requirements as
stated in article 3.05.
Plant nursery II X X SUP SUP SUP U U U In a B-2 zone, there
shall be no outside
storage except live
plant material.
Subject to screening
requirements as
stated in article 3.05.
Plant nursery III X X SUP P P U* U U* *Where permitted, an
SUP is required. In a
B-2 zone, there shall
be no outside storage
except live plant
material. Subject to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/349
screening
requirements as
stated in article 3.05.
Plant nursery IV X X X P P U* U U* Where permitted, an
SUP is required. In a
B-2 zone, there shall
be no outside storage
except live plant
material. Subject to
screening
requirements as
stated in article 3.05.
Plant nursery sales,
greenhouse
X X P P P U* U U* Where permitted, an
SUP is required.
Playground equipment
sales
X X X P P U U U SO or GO: Indoor
only, no outdoor
display or storage
Plumbing fixture store X X P P P U U U
Pool and spa sales X X P P P U* U U* SO or GO: Indoor
only, no outdoor
display or storage.
*SUP required
Portable building sales -
manufactured, modular,
mobile, prefabricated
X X X P P X U X
Post office X X P P P U U U
Printing and reproduction
services
X X SUP P P P U P Does not include
major offset printing
services
Propane facility X X X SUP SUP X U X
Radio or television station -
without transmitter tower or
disc
X X P P P U U U A station with a
transmitter requires
an SUP in all the
allowed districts
Recreational facility,
neighborhood
X X X P P U U U
Restaurant and/or food
establishment
Cafeteria, cafe,
delicatessen, frozen dessert
shop and other similar uses
(completely enclosed)
X X P P P U U U Drive-thru see
section 15.02.441(c)
(8)(D), “Off-street
stacking
requirements”
Residential: Townhouse,
loft, live-work
P X P Allowed only per
standards in the SO
or GO district
Restaurant and/or food
establishment (not
completely enclosed)
X X SUP P P U U U Drive-thru see
section 15.02.441(c)
(8)(D), “Off-street
stacking
requirements”
Repair shop X X X P P
Retail outlet store X X P P P U U U
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/349
Salon specialty - tanning,
reducing, nail, massage
X P P P P U U U
School X X X P P U U U
School, vocational X X X P P U U U
Self-storage facility X X P P P X U X SO or GO: Not
allowed
Shoe sales and/or repair X X P P P U U U
Sign shop X X SUP P P X U X SO: Allowed as
ancillary to small
scale retail copy/print
service
Small arms firing range -
indoor
X X X SUP SUP X U X
Sporting goods store X X P P P U U U
Stamp and/or coin store P P P P P U U U
Stationery sales X P P P P U U U
Studio for fine arts SUP SUP P P P U U U
Tailor shop X P P P P U U U
Taxidermist X X X SUP SUP X U X
Telecommunication
antennae/towers
X X X SUP SUP U U U **See “additional
regulation,” section
15.02.382
Telephone sales - to include
mobile
X X P P P P U P
Temporary use X X X SUP SUP U U U **See “additional
regulation,” section
15.02.382
Theater, indoor X X X P P U U U
Theater, outdoor X X X SUP SUP X U X
Tobacco store X X P P P U U U
Tool and equipment rental X X P P P U U U SO or GO: No
outside storage,
small tools and
equipment only
Toy store X X P P P U U U
Trophy sales X P P P P U U U
Truck (heavy)
repair/maintenance
X X X X P U U U
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/349
University X X X P X U U U
Videotape sales and rental X X P P P U U U
Warehouse storage facility P X X P P X U X
Watch and clock repair X P P P P U U U
Welding shop X X X X P U U U
Wholesale facility X X X P P X U X
(Ordinance 11-024 adopted 9/20/11; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.381; Ordinance 14-02, sec. II(C), adopted 4/14/14)
Sec. 15.02.382 Permitted uses which require additional regulation
(a) Temporary uses.
(1) Uses that are temporary in nature shall require a specific use permit for the duration of the use, regardless of whether they are the primary use of the
site.
(2) The specific duration of the use shall be determined during the specific use permit process.
(3) Temporary uses are characterized by such activities as the sale of agricultural/floral products, Christmas tree sales, fireworks, carnivals, flea markets,
clothing, shoe or accessory tents and special events not included under article 1.10, division 2 (parades) but is not intended to include those structures used
to house contracting office(s) during temporary construction phases.
(4) A continuous specific use permit is necessary for any duration of more than six (6) weeks, whether such use is daily, weekly, or monthly.
(b) Antenna, tower, and/or alternative tower structures. Antennas, towers and alternative tower structures, other than receive-only antennas, are permitted only in the
B-3 or I-1 zoning districts and only if the minimum requirements as established herein are met, or any other applicable requirements of the specific use permit, if so
required:
(1) Purpose and goals. The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the placement of towers and antennas on public and private property. The
goals of this section are to:
(A) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
(B) Encourage strongly the joint use of the new and existing tower sites;
(C) Require users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
(D) Require users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas, and
(E) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently.
(2) Application requirements.
(A) The proponent of a new tower site other than a radio, television or microwave broadcasting or transmission facility shall provide the following
documentations for review by the development department:
(i) Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for one or more towers shall provide to the development department and [an] inventory of its
existing towers, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The development department shall maintain an
inventory of existing towers, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share such
information with other persons, organizations or governmental authorities to locate antennas within the city;
(ii) Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the
reasonable satisfaction of the development department that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
Evidence submitted may consist of the following:
a. No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements;
b. Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements;
c. Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment
and cannot be reinforced to provide sufficient structural strength;
d. The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or
the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna;
e. The fees or costs required to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable.
Costs below new tower development are presumed reasonable;
f. Property owners or owners of existing towers or structures are unwilling to accommodate the applicant's needs;
g. The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
h. Site plan. Each applicant requesting a permit under this section shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other
supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate professional engineers, showing the location
and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements,
setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information necessary to assessment [of] compliance with this
article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/349
i. Prior to the installation of any building/roof-mounted telecommunications antenna, antenna array or support structure the city building
official may require an engineer's certification that the structure will support and not be adversely affected by the proposed antenna and
associated equipment.
(3) Residential setback. Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure and shall not be placed
within the minimum yard setback requirement in the zoning district in which they are located.
(4) Yard setback. Towers and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum yard setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are located.
(5) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height, shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing
device, and shall be screened and landscaped from view.
(6) Signage. Except as otherwise permitted in this article, no signage, lettering, symbols, images, or trademarks in excess of 200 square inches (1290
square cm) shall be placed on or affixed to any part of a telecommunications tower, antenna, antenna array, equipment building, or security fencing other than
as required by FCC regulations or other applicable law.
(7) Lighting. Except as otherwise permitted in this article, no signals, lights or illumination of any kind shall be permitted on or directed toward any tower
unless required by the FCC, the FAA or other appropriate public authority.
(8) Aesthetics. Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted sky blue or gray, so as
to reduce visual obtrusiveness. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a
tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of
the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
(9) Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal
government with authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas
governed by this section shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the
effective date of such standards and regulations.
(10) Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with
standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for tower that are published by the Electronic Industries Association (EIA-
222), as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons and
property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance. If the owner
fails to bring such tower into compliance within the said thirty (30) days, the city may remove such tower or cause such tower to be removed at the owner's
expense.
(11) Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna of tower shall remove same within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the
owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the city may cause such antenna or tower to be removed
at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.
(12) Refusal to grant request. Rejection of an application for a permitted use request for an antenna, tower or alternative tower structure by the
development department shall require the proponent to submit a zoning case for a specific use permit in accordance with division 12 of this article or by
appeal to the board of adjustment.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.701; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.382)
Secs. 15.02.383–15.02.440 Reserved
Division 8. Parking Regulations
Sec. 15.02.441 Parking regulations
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to:
(1) Establish specific standards for the provision of off-street parking and loading space for every type of land use within the city;
(2) Lessen congestion on public thoroughfares;
(3) Reduce public safety hazards caused by failure to provide adequate parking and loading space; and
(4) Facilitate the adequate and safe provision of transportation and expedite the movement of traffic on public thoroughfares through recognition that the
provision of off-street parking must be responsive to the diverse requirements of individual land uses.
(b) General provisions.
(1) No land shall be used, and no building shall be erected, altered, used, or occupied, and no use shall be operated in any zoning district unless the offstreet
parking facilities herein required are provided.
(2) Off-street parking facilities and off-street truck loading facilities in excess of the amounts heretofore required, need not be provided nor maintained for
land, structures, or uses actually used, occupied and operated on the effective date of this article, but may be provided, if so desired by the owner and not in
conflict with any other city ordinances.
(3) In the event that after the effective date of this article existing land, structures, or uses are enlarged or expanded, the land, structures, and uses hereby
included shall not be used, occupied, or operated unless there is provided, for the increment only, of such land, structures and uses, at least the amount of
off-street parking facilities and off-street truck loading facilities that would be required hereunder if the increment were a separate land, structure or use.
(4) The provisions of this article shall be in conjunction with the general guidelines established in the 7th edition Trip Generation Manual, 2003, and as
amended, regarding parking. Where such manual is in conflict herewith, this article shall override. Where guidelines are laid out in that manual, and not
precluded under this article, the zoning administrator shall have the option, in appropriate cases, of referring to that manual. To that extent and only to that
extent such manual is hereby adopted.
(c) Regulations.
(1) Off-street parking and loading spaces required.
(A) In all districts, for every use, there shall be provided at the time any building is erected or increased in capacity, or at the time any other use is
established, off-street parking and loading space in accordance with the provisions specified herein.
(B) The provision for and maintenance of off-street parking facilities herein required shall be the joint and several responsibility of the operator and
owner of the use, structure and/or land on which is located the use for which off-street parking facilities are required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/349
(C) The minimum requirements for off-street parking facilities are found in “Off-street truck loading requirements.” These classifications of uses
enumerated in said table are general and are intended to include all similar uses. As part of the procedure for the review and consideration of the
required parking, the applicant may be required to submit a parking analysis, prepared in accordance with the provisions established herein. Where a
classification of uses is not determinable from said table, the zoning administrator, or his designate, shall fix the classification.
(D) Notwithstanding the amount of off-street parking required by this article, the zoning administrator may approve less off-street parking when the
proponent of a use demonstrates that, due to special circumstances involved with a particular use, it is obvious that the off-street parking required by
this article exceeds any reasonable likely need.
(2) Off-street parking size and location.
(A) Minimum dimensions for off-street parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be determined by the application of the parking dimension matrix
as shown in the Trip Generation Traffic Manual.
(B) Each off-street parking space shall be an area of not less than 162 square feet (not less than nine (9) feet in width or eighteen (18) feet in length),
exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps and other appurtenances, except as specifically provided in other portions of this article.
(C) Except as otherwise permitted under a special plan for location or sharing of facilities, off-street parking facilities shall be located on the lot on
which the use or structure for which they are provided is located.
(D) All parking areas containing three (3) or more parking spaces shall include a turnaround which is designed and located so that vehicles can enter
and exit the parking area without backing onto a public right-of-way. Each required parking stall shall be individually and easily accessible based on
good engineering practice. All portions of a public lot or garage shall be accessible to other portions thereof without requiring the use of any public
street.
(E) Small-car parking spaces, whether provided to satisfy the minimum parking requirements of this article or to provide excess or overflow parking,
shall not be permitted unless in compliance with the compact car system of parking as described in the Trip Generation Traffic Manual.
(3) Design and construction standards of off-street parking.
(A) All off-street parking areas and spaces shall be designed and constructed so as to have unencumbered ingress and egress to a public
thoroughfare at all times. All maneuvering for off-street parking shall be accomplished on private property, except in R-1 (single-family), R-2 (two-family)
and R-6 (garden home) dwelling areas.
(B) Off-street parking facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following specifications:
(i) Drainage and surfacing. Parking areas shall be properly graded for drainage, with an all-weather paved surface and maintained in good
condition, free of weeds, dirt, trash, and debris.
(ii) Wheel guards. Boundary or perimeter areas shall be provided with wheel guards, so located that no part of parked vehicles will extend
beyond the property line of the parking area. All parking lots and garages serving nonresidential uses shall be provided with a concrete or masonry
inner curb or freestanding wheel stop to separate the parking area from public right-of-way. The wheel stop shall be set back from the property line
so that no part of a vehicle shall extend onto public property, streets, or sidewalks. Such wheel stop shall be a minimum of six (6) inches in width
and six (6) inches in height, and shall be permanently and securely anchored to the pavement. The zoning administrator may require the
placement of curbs or freestanding wheel stops in specific locations as needed to correct existing problems caused by vehicular overhang onto
right-of-way, streets or sidewalks. The property owner shall replace any damaged, missing, or unanchored curbs or wheel stops as necessary or
required by the city.
(iii) Lighting. All parking areas shall be lighted, with the exception of R-1, R-2, R-6 areas. Lighting facilities shall be arranged so as to reflect the
illumination away from any residentially zoned property. All lighting facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination
or glare shall not create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or other public way. [All lighting facilities] shall be so arranged that they neither
unreasonably disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties nor interfere with traffic.
(iv) Entrances/exits. Facilities shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion.
(v) Prohibition of other uses. Parking areas shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials,
or supplies nor for parking lots, or garages unless specifically permitted in the zoning district.
(vi) Pavement and identification required. All required off-street parking and loading areas, maneuvering aisles, and accessways to any required
off-street parking or loading areas, in all zoning districts, shall be paved in accordance with the standards prescribed by the city. Except for singlefamily,
duplex and townhouse dwellings, parking stalls and spaces shall be permanently and clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs,
barriers or other approved methods.
(vii) Maintenance. Internal curbs and wheel stops shall be continuously poured in place or shall be attached to the pavement to prevent
movement. Nonpermanent type markings, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure continuous identification of the space or stall.
(viii) Driveway and ramp slopes. The maximum slope of any driveway or ramp shall not exceed fourteen percent (14%). Transition slopes in
driveways and ramps shall be provided in accordance with the standards set by the city and the jurisdiction's engineer.
(4) Reduction of off-street parking. Pursuant to the procedure hereinafter set forth, either part or all of the required off-street parking facilities may be
located on a site other than the one occupied by the use or structure requiring such facilities. Two (2) or more uses may share the same off-street parking
facilities and each of such uses may be considered as having provided such shared space individually. Such shared parking space, however, shall not be
considered as having been provided individually unless the schedules of operation of all such uses are such that none of the uses sharing the facilities
require the off-street parking facilities at the same time.
(A) Cooperative parking plan. The arrangement for sharing of off-street parking facilities shall be known and described as a cooperative parking plan.
(B) Application procedure. An application for approval of a cooperative parking plan shall be filed with the zoning administrator, or his designate, by
the owner(s) of all structures then existing on a subject land area, and all parties having a legal interest in such land area and structures. Sufficient
evidence to establish the status of the applicants as owners or parties in interest shall be provided. The application shall include 1) a parking analysis
with plans showing the location of the uses or structures for which off-street parking facilities are required and the location of the off-street parking
facilities; 2) the schedule of times used by those sharing in common; and 3) any miscellaneous pertinent information as may be applicable to the
request or as may be requested by city staff.
(C) Review of application. The application shall be reviewed for approval or disapproval by the zoning administrator or his designate.
(D) Registration of cooperative parking plans. Upon approval of the plan, a copy of such plan shall be registered among the records of the city
secretary and shall thereafter be binding upon the applicants, their heirs, successors and assigns. This registration shall limit and control the issuance
and validity of permits and certificates and shall restrict, limit and control the use and operation of all land structures included within such cooperative
parking plan.
(E) Amendment or withdrawal of cooperative parking plan. Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by
which the cooperative parking plan was approved and registered, any such plan may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely, if all land
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/349
and structures remaining under such plan comply with all the conditions and limitations of the plan and all land and structures withdrawn from such plan
comply with the regulations of this article.
(5) Alternate landscaping. In all districts in which a shopping center or office building is a permitted use, and where such shopping center or office building
contains in excess of 50,000 square feet of gross leasable area or where not less than 200 off-street parking spaces are required, then the first eighteen (18)
feet of the parking lot serving such facility, and which portion abuts an arterial thoroughfare, may be devoted to landscaped open space in lieu of the required
off-street parking spaces that would otherwise occupy such space. Such alternate landscaping shall be subject to the following conditions:
(A) That such credit shall result in a reduction of at least ten (10) percent of the required off-street parking spaces for the shopping center or office
building;
(B) That the shopping center or office building would otherwise meet all applicable off-street parking requirements if such area was devoted to parking
space rather than alternate landscaped area;
(C) Such credit shall not be applicable to a reduction in off-loading [off-street loading] requirements;
(D) Such alternate landscaping area shall not count toward satisfying the minimum on-site landscaping requirements as may be applicable to the
district in which the shopping center or office building is located;
(E) Such alternate landscaping area shall be measured from, and be perpendicular to, the property line which abuts an arterial thoroughfare. Where
landscaped open space is provided on private property in accordance with the required on-site landscaping provisions of the applicable zoning district,
and such required landscaping is located adjacent to an arterial thoroughfare, the alternate landscape area shall be measured from the edge of, and in
addition to, such required landscape area. In any event, all required dimensions of vehicle maneuvering areas and aisles as prescribed by this section
shall be complied with.
(F) All landscape areas shall be landscaped with living plant material, shall incorporate trees in accordance with division 9 of this article, shall be
planted and maintained in compliance with the American Nursery and Landscape Association, “American Standard for Nursery Stock” and ANSI Z60.1-
2004 and ANSI A300 “Tree Care Standards” guidelines, and shall have installed an irrigation system meeting all applicable requirements of the city and
approved by the zoning administrator, or shall be located within seventy-five (75) feet of a bibcock, faucet or other water source; and
(G) The alternate landscape area may not be converted to parking spaces, designed and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this
section, at any time.
(6) Retention of existing trees. Refer to division 9 of this article [and chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances], for regulations regarding mandatory retention
and preservation of existing trees, prior to the removal of any trees on-site. In all districts, where an existing tree is maintained in a living and growing
condition and is located internally within the parking area of any use or facility, such tree may be credited in lieu of four (4) required off-street spaces. Such
credit shall be subject to the following conditions:
(A) Each existing tree shall be of at least four (4") inches in trunk diameter, measured four feet (4') [above grade];
(B) Each tree counted toward a parking credit shall be maintained in a living and growing condition. In the event of the death of the existing tree, such
parking credit shall remain in effect only if the tree is replaced with a tree of equal or greater caliper;
(C) Each tree shall be located within a landscape island, peninsula or median, delineated from the surrounding paved area by a masonry or concrete
curb of not less than six (6) inches in height around the entire perimeter of the island or module;
(D) At least half (1/2) of the tree's extended dripline at maturity must be in permeable area;
(E) The area devoted to each landscape island or module shall not count toward satisfying the on-site landscaping requirements of any use in any
zoning district if such area is to be applied as a credit toward the off-street parking standard;
(F) Such reduction of off-street parking shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total required off-street parking for the use or facility; and
(G) The landscape islands, peninsulas or medians may not be converted to parking spaces, designed and constructed with these provisions, at any
time. Any conversion of parking spaces into landscape areas shall not be in conflict with, or in lieu of, the minimum landscape requirements set forth
elsewhere within this article.
(7) Table of minimum off-street parking requirements. The minimum requirements for off-street parking facilities in all zones shall be governed by the
following table:
Residential Use Parking Requirements
Low-density residential (both detached and
medium density such as duplex, triplex,
fourplex, townhouse, garden house, and
patio home)
Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
Multiple-family retirement community 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
High-density residential (apartments,
condominiums)
One (1) space for each one-bedroom unit,
two (2) spaces for each two-bedroom unit,
and one additional space for each
additional bedroom.
Office and Commercial
(excluding shopping centers)
Parking Requirements
Automotive repair (to include body and
paint shops, tire, muffler, suspension, and
other associated automotive repair
facilities, including said repair activities
associated with auto and truck sales and
service dealerships. Said dealerships must
provide dedicated parking at the required
1:200 sf GFA for retail sales.
1:150 sf GFA for service floor area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/349
ratios for the portion of the GFA dedicated
to automotive repair.)
Bowling centers 1:200 sf GFA.
Child care facilities 1:450 sf GFA.
Drive-in eating establishments, where food
or drink is served to customers in their
vehicles
2:100 sf GFA, with a minimum of twenty
(20) spaces for on-premise consumption to
be provided.
General business, retail, clinic, and
personal service establishments (excluding
office/warehouse)
1:200 sf GFA for retail sales and service
areas.
1:800 sf GFA used exclusively for storage,
processing or related activities separate and
apart from retail sales activity.
Hospitals/home, nursing One (1) space for each two (2) beds plus,
One (1) space for each hospital or staff
doctor plus,
One (1) space for each five (5) employees;
parking for each enumerated user group is
to be physically separated from the other
and identified by user-group.
Hotel and motel establishments One (1) space per guest room and one (1)
space per two (2) employees (associated
independent commercial and/or recreational
areas open to the general public require
appropriate, additional spaces).
Libraries, museums, art galleries, clubs,
lodges
1:300 sf GFA.
Lumber, nursery (plant) and affiliated
activities
1:200 sf GFA for retail sales area/service
floor area, and one (1) space per 800 sf
GFA of enclosed storage and/or display
area, and 1:200 sf of open
sales/storage/display area.
Office/warehouse 1:250 GFA for that portion dedicated to
office use; and
1:1000 GFA for that portion dedicated to
warehouse use.
One (1) space for each five (5) employees;
parking for each enumerated user group is
to be physically separated from the other
and identified by user-group.
Professional offices/studios 1:250 sf GFA.
Recreation and amusement, entertainment
- indoor and outdoor, dance hall, nightclub,
bar, club or lodge (private)
1:800 sf of specified outdoor recreational
area.
1:100 sf GFA for indoor recreational area up
to 20,000 sf.
1:200 sf GFA for indoor recreational area in
excess of 20,000 sf.
Restaurants, cafeterias, delicatessens and
other food serving establishments, except
drive-in eating establishments
1:100 sf GFA.
Schools Elementary: One (1) space per 600 square
feet of classroom area;
Middle: One (1) per each 400 square feet of
classroom area;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/349
High: One (1) per each 90 square feet of
classroom area
Shopping centers Refer to the shopping center parking
requirements section of this article
[subsection (9)].
Theaters, health clubs, physical fitness,
gymnasiums, convention halls, assembly
halls, stadiums, funeral homes, churches,
racquetball/ handball/tennis facilities
One (1) space per four (4) seats or one (1)
space per 800 sf of specified outdoor
recreational area; and
1:100 sf GFA for indoor recreational area up
to 20,000 sf
1:200 sf GFA of indoor recreational area in
excess of 20,000 sf.
(8) Off-street stacking requirements.
(A) Vehicle stacking space shall mean a paved area of not less than eight (8) feet in width nor less than twenty-two (22) feet in length, constructed in
accordance with the applicable standards of the city.
(B) Off-street vehicle stacking spaces shall be provided, at a minimum, in accordance with the following table.
(C) No off-street vehicle stacking shall be permitted within a designated fire lane. Areas designated to satisfy the requirements for off-street stacking
spaces shall not be permitted to encroach upon or occupy a fire lane or maneuvering aisle.
(D) Table of off-street stacking requirements.
Uses Stacking Requirements
Automobile quick lube facility One (1) space in service bay and three (3)
additional stacking spaces for each service
bay.
Carwash: full service One (1) space at each vacuum or pump
station, plus seven (7) additional stacking
spaces for each vacuum or gas pump lane.
Self-service (to include drive-thru, and
automated)
One (1) space in wash bay, plus three (3)
additional stacking spaces for each wash
bay.
Self-service (open bay) One (1) space per bay, plus two (2)
additional stacking spaces for each vacuum
or wash bay.
Vehicle drying area (full service) Ten (10) spaces per carwash, located at the
wash bay exit.
Financial institution One (1) space at each drive-up service
window or station, plus six (6) additional
stacking spaces for each service lane.
Kiosk: food sales or service One (1) space at each drive-up service
window, plus five (5) additional stacking
spaces for each window.
Kiosk: no food sales or service One (1) space at each drive-up service
window, plus one (1) additional stacking
space for each window.
Kindergarten and child care center *See below.
Retail uses with drive-up facilities One (1) space for each drive-up window,
plus two (2) additional stacking spaces for
each window.
Restaurant with drive-up facilities One (1) space for each drive-up window,
plus five (5) additional stacking spaces for
each window.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/349
Gasoline service pump island Two (2) spaces per side at each pump
island.
*Kindergarten and child care center: In the event that the front entrance or designated student disembarkation point of a kindergarten or child care center is less than
250 feet from the main entrance, then one (1) off-street vehicle stacking space shall be required for each twenty (20) students, based upon the number of students
allowed by the specific use permit relative to such use. Such vehicle stacking areas shall be designed such that students will not be required to cross a fire lane,
driveway, or any other point of vehicular travel to enter the building or facility.
(E) Parking spaces may be designated to satisfy such vehicle stacking requirements, provided that all of the following provisions are complied with:
(i) Such parking spaces shall be on the same lot or tract of land as the kindergarten or child care center;
(ii) The kindergarten or child care center shall be located in a detached building on a separate lot or tract of land;
(iii) Such parking space shall be located adjacent to the main entrance of the kindergarten or child care center, and situated such that children
will not be required to cross a fire lane, driveway, or any other point of vehicular travel to enter the building or facility;
(iv) A sidewalk, with a minimum width of six (6) feet excluding vehicular overhang, shall be provided adjacent to the parking spaces between the
building and parking spaces;
(v) Such parking spaces shall conform to the dimension requirements of a paved area of not less than eight (8) feet in width nor less than
twenty-two (22) feet in length, constructed in accordance with the applicable standards of the city; and
(vi) Parking spaces designated to satisfy the stacking requirements shall not be counted towards satisfying required parking for the kindergarten
or care center.
(9) Shopping center parking requirements.
(A) A shopping center developer, owner, user or tenant may request to have parking requirements determined by providing, for city inspection and
review, calculations based on the gross leasable area (GLA) as opposed to the gross floor area (GFA). If such a request is not made, parking
requirements will be determined based on GFA as if it were GLA.
(B) Gross leasable area (GLA) is the total floor area designed for both tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including both owned and leased areas.
(C) Centers with less than 400,000 sf GLA shall require 1:250 sf GLA.
(D) Centers with 400,001 to 600,000 sf GLA shall require 1:222 sf GLA.
(E) Centers with over 600,000 sf of GLA shall require 1:200 sf GLA.
(F) Cinemas: For each 100 cinema seats three (3) additional parking spaces shall be provided.
(G) Food service stores, including both full service and fast food restaurants, as well as specialty stores, such as ice cream parlors and doughnut
shops:
(i) For centers with less than 100,000 sf GLA, ten (10) additional parking spaces are required per 1,000 sf GLA of food service store tenant
area.
(ii) For centers with 100,001 to 200,000 sf GLA, six (6) additional parking spaces are required per 1,000 sf GLA of food service store tenant
area.
(H) In cases where individual tenant uses are uses which require parking in excess of the requirements for the shopping center as a whole (such as
nightclubs, gymnasiums, etc.) the more stringent requirement shall prevail and shall be a requirement for issuance of permits and certificates for said
use. (Example: A 30,000 sf GLA shopping center with a 5,000 sf GLA restaurant would thus require 170 parking spaces (30,000/250) + (5 x 10) = 170).
(I) Compact car system of parking. In recognition of the impact of compact cars on the space requirements for shopping center parking, as much as
twenty (20) percent of the required parking spaces for shopping centers may be allocated for small-car parking spaces. Such an allocation shall only be
made according to the compact car system of parking detailed below.
(i) Small-car parking spaces shall be no less than seven (7) feet, six (6) inches in width and no less than fifteen (15) feet in length.
(ii) The compact car system of parking shall use 90-degree angle spaces for small-car parking spaces which are in the same bay in which 45-
degree angle standard parking spaces or 60-degree angle standard parking spaces are provided for larger cars.
(iii) The compact car system of parking shall be in accordance with the Trip Generation Traffic Manual.
(10) Off-street truck loading requirements.
(A) General. Truck loading facilities, as hereinafter provided shall be required in all zones, for structures containing uses devoted to business,
industry, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, processing, offices, professional buildings, hotels, multiple-family dwellings, hospitals, airports, railroad
terminals and any buildings of a commercial nature. The zoning administrator shall determine the off-street loading requirements for a use not specified,
based on the most similar use listed above or using certified service/goods handling data for the specific use.
(B) Responsibilities. The provision for and maintenance of the off-street truck loading facilities required shall be the joint and several responsibility of
the operator and owner of the land upon which the structure requiring the facilities is located.
(C) Types. For the purpose of this article there shall be two (2) sizes of off-street truck loading spaces designated “large” and “small.”
(i) Large spaces. Each “large” space shall have an overhead clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet, shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, and
shall be at least fifty (50) feet long, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, platform, and other appurtenances.
(ii) Small spaces. Each “small” space shall have an overhead clearance of at least ten (10) feet, shall be at least eight (8) feet wide, and shall be
at least twenty (20) feet long, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, platform and other appurtenances.
(D) Location. Off-street truck loading facilities shall be located on the same lot on which the structure for which they are provided is located; provided,
however, that facilities provided under cooperative arrangement as hereinafter permitted may be located on another site not more than 300 feet from the
structure for which they are provided.
(E) Construction and maintenance. Off-street truck loading facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following
specifications:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/349
(i) Drainage and surfacing. Areas shall be properly graded for drainage, with an all-weather surface and maintained in good condition, free of
weeds, dust, trash, and debris;
(ii) Protective screen fencing. Areas shall be provided with protective screen fencing such that occupants of adjacent structures are not
unreasonably disturbed, during day or night, by the movement of vehicles, and in accordance with article 3.05 of this code;
(iii) Lighting. All lighting facilities shall be arranged so as to reflect the illumination away from any residentially zoned property. All lighting
facilities shall be placed, masked or otherwise arranged such that illumination or glare shall not create a hazard to motorists on any street, alley or
other public way. shall be so arranged that they neither unreasonably disturb occupants of adjacent residential properties nor interfere with traffic;
and
(iv) Entrances and exits. Areas shall be provided with entrances and exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion.
(F) Combined facilities. The requirements for the provision of off-street truck loading facilities, with respect to two (2) or more structures, may be
satisfied by the permanent allocation of the requisite number of spaces for each use in a common truck loading facility, cooperatively established and
operated. However, such common facility is conditioned such that the total number of spaces designated is not less than the sum of the individual
requirements unless, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, a lesser number of spaces will be adequate, taking into account the respective times of
usage of truck loading facilities by the individual users, character of the merchandise and related factors. In order to eliminate a multiplicity of individual
facilities, to conserve space where space is at a premium and promote orderly development generally, the zoning administrator is hereby authorized to
plan and group off-street truck loading facilities cooperatively, for a number of structures requiring such facilities and being within close proximity to one
another in a given area, in such a manner as to obtain a maximum of efficiency and capacity, provided consent thereto is obtained from the participants
in the cooperative plan.
(G) Minimum requirements - Area. The following minimum truck loading spaces shall be provided in all districts for structures containing the uses
enumerated in 30.404c(11) [this subsection (10)]:
Square Feet of GFA in Structure Required No. of Spaces
0 - 12,500 1 (small)
12,501 - 25,000 2 (small)
25,001 - 40,000 1 (large)
40,001 - 100,000 2 (large)
For each add'l 80,000 over 100,000 1 (large)
(H) Waiver. The zoning administrator is authorized to waive the off-street loading requirements for structures that are required to provide and maintain
fewer than five (5) off-street parking spaces, or any other structure if the design and the proposed use of the structure shows no need for off-street
loading. Applicant may be required to submit a parking analysis to demonstrate that the proposed use shows no need for off-street loading.
(11) Miscellaneous requirements.
(A) Conflicts. Where such provisions are in conflict with the requirements of article 1.10, division 2 (parades) of this code, or the Uniform Traffic Code
of the State of Texas, or are in conflict with special off-street parking or loading requirements within certain zoning districts of this article, then the more
restrictive requirement shall apply.
(B) General provisions.
(i) Off-street parking facilities shall be provided on the lot or tract occupied by the main use, or upon a lot or tract of land dedicated to parking
use by an instrument filed for record, provided that such arrangement is in accordance with the schedule of allowable uses in the district in which it
is located. Such parking facility shall be located within 300 feet of the main use to be served, measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures.
(ii) In determining the required number of off-street parking and loading spaces, fractional spaces shall be counted to the nearest whole space.
(iii) No parking space located on a public street or alley may be included in the calculation of the required off-street parking requirements.
(iv) Floor area of a structure devoted to off-street parking of vehicles shall be excluded in computing the floor area for off-street parking
requirements.
(C) Requirements.
(i) Vehicle storage and display.
a. Off-street parking areas shall be used for passenger vehicles only, and in no case shall such areas be used for sales, repair, storage,
display, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies.
b. Any area utilized for the storage of vehicles in connection with a motor vehicle repair establishment shall be screened from the view of
any adjacent public street in accordance with the provisions set forth in article 3.05 of this code.
(ii) Combination of uses.
a. Where a lot or tract of land is used for a combination of uses, the off-street parking requirements shall be the composite or sum of the
requirements for each type of use.
b. Parking spaces used for the parking of trucks or buses shall not be counted toward meeting the off-street parking requirements for the
particular use.
(iii) Trash receptacles. All driveways to trash receptacles shall be designed to accommodate the weight of a standard sanitation truck. Lifting
pads shall be provided in front of each trash receptacle location to accommodate the front wheels of the sanitation truck. Access to the trash
receptacle and lift pad shall be in a “straight in” manner, or other manner as approved by the zoning administrator or his designate. Trash
receptacles shall not be located directly beneath any overhead utility line nor directly abut residential areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/349
(iv) Parking behind retail and commercial structures. Not more than twenty (20) percent of the total off-street parking for any retail or commercial
use shall be located within the designated rear yard of such use or behind any and all buildings or structures occupied by a retail or commercial
use where:
a. The depth of the site occupied by such retail or commercial use is less than 500 feet;
b. The main point of public entry and exit into the building, lease space or tenant spaces does not face upon nor directly access the
designated rear yard or any areas behind a building; or
c. The designated rear yard or areas behind such building does not abut a street.
(v) Parking analysis. As defined for the purpose of this section, where a parking analysis is requested, the following shall be considered
necessary to constitute such analysis:
a. Summary of the characteristics which are unique to such use or uses that warrant special determination;
b. Analysis of the arrival and departure frequency for such use or uses;
c. Analysis of the anticipated hours of operation of such use or uses;
d. Summary of peak parking demand for such use or uses;
e. Total square footage of floor area of such use or uses;
f. Employment, customer or congregation characteristics of such use or uses, whichever is applicable; and
g. Miscellaneous pertinent information as may be applicable to the request or as may be requested by staff, as appropriate to the specific
item under consideration.
(vi) Handicap parking.
a. In the R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, O-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, and I-1 zones, any property owner or person who controls property used for parking will
designate and mark, according to the provisions of federal and state law (see the Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS)), at least the minimum
as required by said law for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons.
b. Such parking space(s) shall be clearly marked by applied, installed and maintained in accordance with applicable federal and state
laws.
c. Such parking space(s) stall dimensions shall be provided and designed in accordance with all applicable state and federal standards.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.800; Ordinance 07-034, sec. 2, adopted 8/8/07; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.441)
Secs. 15.02.442–15.02.500 Reserved
Division 9. Landscaping
Sec. 15.02.501 Landscaping*
(a) General provisions. It is the intent of this section:
(1) To recognize the particular characteristics, qualities and beauty of the natural environment of Leon Valley;
(2) To establish specific standards for the installation and maintenance of trees, shrubs, landscaping and buffering elements and other means of site
improvement on developed property; and
(3) To enhance the community's ecological, environmental, and aesthetic qualities for the preservation of these unique features.
(4) To promote xeriscape concepts and practices in order to conserve valuable water resources.
(b) Findings. The city council finds that the peculiar characteristics, qualities and natural beauty of the city justify the following regulations to perpetuate the aesthetic
appeal of Leon Valley on a city-wide basis.
(c) Objectives. The objectives of the landscape chapter [this division] include:
(1) Improvement in the appearance of certain setback and yard areas in the city, including off-street vehicular parking and open-lot sales and service areas;
(2) Protection and preservation of the appearance, character and value of the surrounding properties and neighborhoods, thereby promoting the general
welfare by providing for the installation and maintenance of landscaping for screening and aesthetic purposes;
(3) Reduction of the negative effects of increases in air temperature, glare, noise, erosion and sedimentation caused by expanses of impervious,
nonvegetated surfaces within the urban environment;
(4) Provision of visual buffering between land uses of different character;
(5) Preservation and improvement of the natural and urban environment by recognizing that the use of landscaping elements can contribute to the process
of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, abatement of noise, glare and heat, and enhance the aesthetic qualities of the city;
(6) Preservation of existing native and naturalized plants and incorporate them into landscape design; and
(7) Promotion of water conservation through use of landscape design, soil preparation, species selection and management, appropriate to local climate.
(d) Minimum standard and applicability.
(1) Regulations shall be a minimum standard, and shall apply to the entire incorporated area of Leon Valley, Texas. A minimum percentage of the total area
of the lot upon which development, construction or reconstruction occurs for any use after the effective date of this article shall be devoted to landscaping in
accordance with the provisions contained herein.
(2) This section shall apply to any new development or to the expansion of existing development within the city, unless specifically exempted. Split
ownership, planning or construction in phases, or multiple building permits for a project shall not prevent it from complying with these requirements.
(3) Projects, which are expansions of existing development, shall provide landscaping based upon the ratio of the area of the expansion to the area of the
existing development. Projects for which building permits total fifty (50) percent or more of the appraised value of the existing improvements shall comply with
all landscaping requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/349
(4) This section shall become applicable to a lot with existing improvements when an application is made for a building permit for construction work that:
(A) Increases the combined floor areas of all buildings on a lot by more than twenty-five (25) percent or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less; or
(B) Increases the impermeable coverage on a lot by more than 2,000 square feet.
(5) When this section becomes applicable to a lot, its requirements are binding on all current and subsequent owners of the lot.
(e) Conformance. No building and/or occupancy permits shall be issued unless and until such issuance conforms to the requirements set forth in the landscaping
requirements (this section).
(f) Landscaping requirements.
(1) A buffering landscaped area shall be provided along all dedicated streets and highways. This area shall be a minimum of six (6) feet from the property
line to any vehicular paving and/or building line.
(2) Areas of a lot, land parcel or building site devoted to and consisting of plant material, including but not limited to turf grasses, grasses-bunch, trees,
shrub forms, flowers, vines and other ground cover, native plant materials, planters, brick pavers, stone, natural forms, water forms, public art forms, stone
aggregate and other landscape features, but excluding smooth concrete, asphalt or paving for vehicular traffic; provided that the use of brick, stone aggregate
or other inorganic materials shall not be greater in total area than that of organic plant material, and further provided that turf/grass shall not qualify to meet
the landscaping requirements where they exceed forty (40) percent of the total landscape area.
(3) Landscaping shall consist of any of the following, or combination thereof: material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines,
hedges, trees, or palms; and nonliving durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences - but
excluding paving. Consideration shall be given toward choosing drought tolerant plant cover.
(4) An overall percentage of a residential lot (see appendix A [B],) in a residential zoning district, and an overall percentage of the street yard area, within
the property line of all other zoning districts, shall be landscaped according to the use of the property and not necessarily the zoning of the property, as
follows:
(A) R-1 single-family, R-2 two-family, R-3 multiple-family, R-3A multiple-family retirement, R-4 townhouse, R-6 garden house and R-7 single-family
medium density projects - thirty-five percent (35%). R-5 manufactured home - twenty-five percent (25%). In the R-1 and R-6 districts, a minimum of two
trees shall be planted and maintained in living condition at all times. In the R-2 district, a minimum of four trees per lot shall be planted and maintained.
In the R-3, R-3A, R-4 and R-5 districts, a minimum of two trees for every 8400 square feet shall be planted and maintained. Such trees shall be of a
species or type as prescribed by appendix A, Approved Tree Planting List, and shall be maintained as per the American Standard for Nursery Stock
ANSI Z60.1-2004.
(B) Building(s) for which sixty percent (60%) or more of the available interior space is used or proposed to be used for office - twenty percent (20%) of
the street yard area. See section 14.02.501(j) [chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances] for tree preservation and planting requirements.
(C) All other retail and commercial uses, including all uses allowed in the B-1, B-2, or B-3 zoning districts in the city - twenty percent (20%) of the
street yard area. See section 14.02.501(j) [chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances] for tree preservation and planting requirements.
(D) Light industrial, I-1 - twelve percent (12%) of the street yard area. See section 14.02.501(j) [chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances] for tree
preservation and planting requirements.
(E) The landscaping requirements of this article shall apply to governmental, educational, institutional uses and churches. Where such uses are
located in any residential district, not less than thirty-five percent (35%) of the total area of the lot upon which such use occurs shall be devoted to
landscaping. Where a governmental, educational, institutional use or church, is located in any nonresidential district, the landscaping requirements of
such district shall apply. See section 14.02.501(j) [chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances] for tree planting requirements.
(F) If a project consists of more than one (1) building (use) type the percentage of landscaped area should be that derived by prorating the linear
street frontage used by each particular building type.
(5) In all street yard areas there shall be a minimum number of trees, depending on the size of the total street yard area. This minimum number of trees
should be:
(A) One (1) tree for each 1,500 square feet of the first 9,000 square feet of street yard area.
(B) One (1) tree for each 3,000 square feet of the portion of street yard area between 9,000 square feet and 90,000 square feet.
(C) One (1) tree for each 6,000 square feet of the portion of street yard area over 90,000 feet.
(6) To encourage the preservation of existing large trees and planting of large new trees, a credit can be used toward either the total number of trees
required by subsection (5) above or toward the amount of landscaped area required by subsection (4) above.
(A) Each tree over three inches (3") in diameter can count as two (2) trees or the required landscaped area may be reduced by fifty (50) square feet.
Each tree over eight (8) inches in diameter may count as three (3) trees or the required landscaped area may be reduced by 100 square feet. Each tree
over twelve (12) inches in diameter may count as four (4) trees or the required landscaped area may be reduced by 150 square feet. Tree diameter
shall be measured at a main trunk height of twelve (12) inches or more above ground level.
(B) This credit is given only for trees of a variety listed in appendix A or as recognized by Bexar County extension service as native or drought
tolerant, excluding oak trees, except that the building official may in special circumstances, allow the credit on tree varieties other than those named.
(7) Vehicular use areas, parking areas, parking lots, and the vehicles associated with them shall have effective buffering from the street view. The following
requirements are set forth as minimum standards for vehicular use areas, parking areas, and parking lots and are intended to be applied in conjunction with
the landscaping requirements for street yard areas. For example, the landscaping of a parking area may be applied to meet the minimum requirements for
landscaping in the street yard area, and vice versa. However, the landscaping requirements for vehicular use areas, parking areas and parking lots applies
regardless of whether or not they are located in a street yard area.
(A) A minimum amount of the total area in islands, peninsulas and medians in parking areas in the street yard area of a vehicular use area, parking
area or parking lot shall be ninety (90) square feet for each twelve (12) parking spaces.
(B) The minimum total area in such islands, peninsulas, and medians in the remainder of the lot (i.e. the non-street yard area) shall be sixty (60)
square feet for each twelve (12) parking spaces therein.
(C) The number, size, and shape of islands, peninsulas and medians in both street yards and non-street yards shall be at the discretion of the owner.
However, no parking space shall be located further than fifty (50) feet from a permeable landscaped island, peninsula, or median and a tree. All islands,
peninsulas and medians required in the areas stated above, shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout such parking areas. Distribution should
also accommodate existing trees and other natural features so long as the total area requirement is satisfied.
(D) All areas used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles shall conform to minimum landscape requirements hereinafter provided.
This includes parking lots, parking areas designed and used for parking of automobiles, trailers and other vehicles intended to be sold. Included are
parking areas used or intended to be used for boats or heavy construction equipment, whether such vehicles, boats or equipment are self-propelled or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/349
not. All land upon which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use, hereinafter referred to as “other vehicular uses,” including, but
not limited to, activities of a drive-in nature such as, but not limited to, gasoline service stations, grocery stores, convenience stores, banks, office
buildings, restaurants, etc., shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements hereinafter provided.
(E) All street yard areas shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements.
(8) All required landscaping shall be irrigated by one of the following methods:
(A) An underground sprinkling system permitted by the city;
(B) A hose attachment within 100 feet of all landscaping, provided however, a hose attachment within 200 feet of all landscaping in non-street yards
shall be sufficient; or
(C) Directing drainage from paved areas across landscaped areas, provided that the same is accomplished in a manner not likely to result in erosion
and subject to review by the city engineer.
(9) All landscaping which is in required landscaped areas and which is adjacent to pavement shall be protected with concrete curbs or equivalent barriers
(such as concrete car bumpers, curbing, continuous border plants or hedgerows) when necessary to protect trees.
(10) When an accessway intersects a public right-of-way, or when the subject property abuts the intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way, all
landscaping within the triangular areas described below shall provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between three (3) feet and six (6) feet, provided
however, trees or palms having limbs and foliage extending into the cross-visibility area shall be allowed, provided they are so located so as not to create a
traffic hazard. Landscaping, except required grass or ground cover, shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from the edge of any accessway pavement.
The triangular areas referred to above are:
(A) The areas of property on both sides of an accessway formed by the intersection of each side of the accessway and the public right-of-way line
with two (2) sides of each triangle being ten (10) feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the
two (2) other sides; and
(B) The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way with two (2) sides of the triangular area
being thirty (30) feet in length along the abutting public right-of-way lines, measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line
connecting the ends of the other two (2) lines.
(11) Landowners are encouraged to landscape the areas within the nonpaved right-of-way abutting their land, provided the following items are adhered to:
(A) The city may at any time require such landscaping to be removed and the city shall not be responsible or liable in the event any landscaping in the
right-of-way must be removed or is requested to be removed by the city.
(B) Such landscaping in the right-of-way shall observe all provisions found elsewhere in this code pertaining to traffic and pedestrian safety; and
(C) If any other governmental jurisdiction is trustee of the public right-of-way at the particular location in question, permission from that governmental
jurisdiction must be granted.
(g) Alternative compliance. Notwithstanding all of the foregoing provisions of this section, a landscape plan which is alternative to strict compliance with the various
landscaping requirements of this section may be approved by the zoning administrator if so recommended by the building official. The recommendation shall be based
on his findings that such plan is as good or better than a plan in strict compliance with the various landscaping requirements of this section 15.02.501 [and chapter 13 of
the Code of Ordinances] and meets the provisions of the alternate landscaping and tree preservation sections of this article [and chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances].
(h) Installation and general maintenance.
(1) Landscaping shall be installed according to accepted and proper planting procedures. Irrigation systems shall be installed upon receipt of permit and in
accordance with all plumbing code requirements.
(2) Required landscaping must be maintained in compliance with the American Nursery and Landscape Association, “American Standard for Nursery
Stock” and ANSI Z60.1-2004 and ANSI A300 “Tree Care Standards” guidelines at all times. The property owner is responsible for regular weeding, mowing of
grass, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning, and other maintenance of all plantings as necessary. Any plant that dies shall be replaced with another living plant. A
minimum of ninety (90) days shall be allowed to replace a tree, shrub or plant; however, the time period may be extended due to climatic conditions, upon
request. Replacement plants must be the same size and species as shown on the approved landscape plan or must be equivalent in terms of quality and
size.
(3) Any damage to utility lines resulting from the negligence of the property owner, or his agents, in the installation and maintenance of required
landscaping in a utility easement is the responsibility of the property owner.
(i) Plan review procedures.
(1) Landscaping plan required. When an application is made for a building permit, including a certificate of occupancy, on any land, lot or parcel where the
landscaping requirements of this article are applicable, such building permit application shall be accompanied by a landscaping site plan containing the
information requested below:
(A) A landscaping plan demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this section shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, or his designate,
for approval.
(B) Such plan shall be prepared and submitted in a manner as prescribed by the city. The plan shall clearly delineate and identify existing trees,
shrubs and landscaping, and proposed landscape development to be used to satisfy the requirements of, and include the calculations performed
relative to the required landscaping schedule.
(C) The use of drought-tolerant plant materials is recommended to satisfy the requirements of this section. Appendix B [A], contained within this
article, should be considered as a reference list of plant material suitable for the climate of this area. This list is not exhaustive, and any plant material
not listed therein may be used so long as it satisfies the requirements of this section.
(2) Plan contents.
(A) Two (2) blue or black line copies of the landscape plan are required. The plan must be drawn at a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet or
larger and be on a standard drawing sheet of a size not to exceed 24 x 36 inches. A plan which cannot be drawn in its entirety on a 24 x 36 inch sheet
must be drawn with appropriate match lines on two (2) or more sheets.
(B) The landscaping plan shall include the following information:
(i) The date, scale, north arrow, project name, legal description, street address, name, telephone number of owner of the lot or lots shown on the
landscaping site plan, and the name and telephone number of the person preparing the plan;
(ii) The location of existing (or proposed if applicable) lot boundary lines and dimensions of the tract, zoning classification of the lot and all
adjacent properties;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/349
(iii) The approximate centerline of existing watercourses, the approximate location of significant drainage features; and the location and size of
existing and proposed streets and alleys; existing and proposed utility easements on or adjacent to the lot; and existing and proposed sidewalks
adjacent to the street;
(iv) The location, size, and type (tree, shrub, ground cover, or grass) of proposed landscaping in proposed landscaped areas; and the location
and size of proposed landscaped areas. Description of plant materials shown on the plan (including both common and botanical names),
locations, quantities, container or caliper sizes at installation, heights, spread and spacing. The location, type, and caliper of existing trees for
which tree credits are claimed must also be indicated;
(v) The location and species of all existing trees (whether or not they are to remain or are proposed to be moved), having trunks four inches (4")
or larger in diameter, and the approximate size of their crowns;
(vi) Location, dimensions and size (in square feet) of all existing and proposing [proposed] parking spaces, driveways, and other vehicle use
areas;
(vii) Designation/description of areas of nonliving ground cover which are not intended as mulches;
(viii) Description of how existing, healthy trees proposed to be retained will be protected from damage during construction;
(ix) Description of proposed irrigation methods, as required by subsection 15.02.501(h), to include the location of sprinklers and water outlets;
(x) The certification of a landscape architect, registered to practice in the State of Texas, that the plans satisfy applicable subsections of the
landscaping section, the building code, and meet or exceed appropriate standards for landscape architectural design and construction. In some
cases, the requirement for landscape architectural certification can be waived by the zoning administrator;
(xi) Information necessary for verifying whether the required minimum percent of landscaped area has been met as required by this article's
landscaping requirements; and
(xii) Such other information that may be required by the city that is reasonable and necessary to determine that the plan meets the requirements
of this section.
(3) Approval and inspection.
(A) Upon submission, each landscape plan shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator, or his designate, to determine whether or not it complies
with the requirements of this section. The plan must be approved prior to issuance of any building permit.
(B) The city may deny without further processing, any landscape plan which does not contain the required information. The applicant may be allowed
to amend the plan and resubmit in order to complete processing.
(C) It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator, or his designate, to review landscape plans, in the format as stated above, before the issuance of
any building permit. Furthermore, staff shall be required to perform on-site inspections prior to the issuance of any occupancy permits. Temporary
occupancy permits may be issued prior to compliance with this division, but said temporary permits are not to exceed ninety (90) days, unless under
section (D), below. No permanent occupancy permits shall be issued unless and until the requirements of this code shall have been met.
(D) The zoning administrator may, upon approval of a landscape plan, issue consecutive temporary occupancy permits for periods not to exceed
ninety (90) days, if under article 14.11, division 2 [article 14.11, division 3], of the Leon Valley Code, any stage of the drought management plan has
been declared. Such permits shall not continue, however, past ninety (90) days from the time stage I of that plan is rescinded, unless during that ninety
(90) days a drought stage is again declared.
(4) Compliance. Failure to comply with this section shall prevent the issuance of any building permits and/or permanent occupancy permits.
(5) Exceptions. The requirements of this division shall not apply to the following:
(A) Areas used for parking or other vehicular uses under, on, or within buildings;
(B) Parking areas serving single- and two-family residential uses;
(C) Building and/or occupancy permits for remodeling, as long as front and side exterior walls of the building remain in the same location, to include
lease space finish-outs;
(D) Building and/or occupancy permits for the substantial restoration, within a period of twelve (12) months, of a building which has been damaged by
fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot, act of the public enemy, or accident of any kind; or
(E) Where a valid building permit is issued prior to the effective date of this division, the landscaping requirements in effect at the time of issuance,
including all requirements of an applicable specific use permit, shall apply to such permit.
(6) Fees. Fees may be set for certain landscape site plan review(s) and inspection(s) prior to the city's review of a landscape site plan.
(Ordinance 07-034, sec. 3, adopted 8/8/07; Ordinance 07-040 adopted 9/4/07; Ordinance 07-054, sec. 4, adopted 11/5/07; Ordinance 08-006 adopted 2/5/08; Ordinance
10-013, sec. 1, adopted 4/20/10; Ordinance 10-048, secs. 2, 3, adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.501; Ordinance 2014-01-13-03, sec. 1, adopted 1/13/14)
Secs. 15.02.502–15.02.550 Reserved
Division 10. Traffic Impact Analysis
Sec. 15.02.551 Traffic impact analysis
(a) Traffic and engineering survey. Whenever the city engineer determines there is a necessity for the erection, removal or change of any traffic-control device or
regulation, such determination shall be based upon a traffic and engineering survey conducted upon the following standards:
(1) The public welfare, including safety and traffic factors to insure the safe and expeditious flow of traffic.
(2) The development of the property surrounding the proposed area.
(3) The requirements of vehicular traffic in the proposed area.
(4) The amount of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in the proposed area.
(b) Traffic impact analysis required.
(1) A traffic impact analysis shall be performed by the property owner (or its agent) according to the format established in this section, as follows:
(A) When a use or change to property occurs that generates 100 peak hour trips (PHT) or less, the property owner (or its agent) will be required to
provide a completed city PHT generation form certifying that the activities to be conducted on the property will generate 100 PHT or less. No traffic
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/349
impact analysis will be required for activities generating 100 PHT or less.
(B) When a use or change to property occurs that generates 101 PHT to 500 PHT, the property owner (or its agent) shall perform and submit to the
city a traffic impact analysis under the Level 1 format specified in this section. This traffic impact analysis must be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer, registered to practice in Texas.
(C) When a use or change to property occurs that generates 501 PHT to 1000 PHT, the property owner (or its agent) shall perform and submit to the
city a traffic impact analysis under the Level 2 format specified in this section. This traffic impact analysis must be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer, registered to practice in Texas.
(D) When a use or change to property occurs that generates more than 1000 PHT, the property owner (or its agent) shall perform and submit to the
city a traffic impact analysis under the Level 3 format specified in this section. This traffic impact analysis must be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer, registered to practice in Texas.
(c) Traffic impact analysis format. The information below shall be provided in the following format:
(1) Level 1 traffic impact analysis format. A Level 1 traffic impact analysis, when required, shall consist of:
(A) Traffic analysis map.
(i) Site and study area boundaries, as defined (provide map).
(ii) Existing and proposed site uses.
(B) Peak hour trip generation.
(i) The estimates of peak hour trips generated by the development and the percentage distribution of such trips from each site exit.
(2) Level 2 traffic impact analysis format. A Level 2 traffic impact analysis, when required, shall consist of:
(A) Traffic analysis map.
(i) Site and study area boundaries, as defined (provide map).
(ii) Existing and proposed site uses.
(iii) Existing and proposed land uses on both sides of boundary streets within the study area (provide map).
(B) Trip generation and design hour volumes (provide table).
(i) A trip generation summary table listing each type of land use, the building size assumed, the average trip generation rates used (total daily
traffic and a.m./p.m. peaks), and the resultant total trip generated should be provided.
(C) Trip distribution (provide figure by site exit).
(i) The estimates of percentage distribution of trips by turning movements from the proposed developments.
(D) Conclusions.
(3) Level 3 traffic impact analysis format. A Level 3 traffic impact analysis, when required, shall consist of:
(A) Traffic analysis map.
(i) Land use, site and study area boundaries, as defined (provide map).
(ii) Existing and proposed site uses.
(iii) Existing and proposed land uses on both sides of boundary streets for all parcels within the study area (provide map).
(iv) Existing and proposed roadways and intersections of boundary streets within study area of the subject property, including traffic conditions
(provide map).
(B) Trip generation and design hour volumes (provide table).
(i) A trip generation summary table listing each type of land use, the building size assumed, the average trip generation rates used (total daily
traffic and a.m./p.m. peaks), and the resultant total trip generated should be provided.
(C) Trip distribution (provide figure by site exit).
(i) The estimates of percentage distribution of trips by turning movements from the proposed development.
(D) Trip assignment (provide figure by site entrance and boundary street).
(i) The direction of approach of site attracted traffic via the area's street system.
(E) Existing and projected traffic volumes (provide figure for each item).
(i) The near-term impacts of the proposed development on the street system (as planned according to street presumptions) are intended to
reveal expected impacts of the development when it is ready for occupancy.
a. a.m. peak hour site traffic (including turning movements).
b. p.m. peak hour site traffic (including turning movements).
c. a.m. peak hour total traffic including site generated traffic and projected traffic.
d. p.m. peak hour total traffic including site generated traffic and projected traffic.
e. Any other peak hour necessary for complete analysis.
f. Total daily existing traffic for street system in study area.
g. Total daily existing traffic for street system in study area and new site traffic.
h. Total daily existing traffic for street system in study area plus new site traffic and projected traffic from build-out of study area land uses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/349
(F) Capacity analysis (provided [provide] analysis sheets in appendices).
(i) A capacity analysis should be conducted for all public street intersections within the study area significantly impacted by the proposed
development and for all private property access points to streets adjacent to the proposed developments within the limit of the previously defined
study area.
(G) Conclusions.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.1000; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.551)
Secs. 15.02.552–15.02.600 Reserved
Division 11. Nonspecified Uses
Sec. 15.02.601 Definition
A nonspecified use is a use which, according to the zoning administrator, does not fall into the categorization of zoning districts as listed in “Permitted Use Table” above
and does not conform to the intent of the district description and purpose in which it is intended to be located. (1972 Code, sec. 30.2001; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.601)
Sec. 15.02.602 Effect of provision
The provision for nonspecified use is intended to provide individuals with an administrative procedure:
(1) To propose new use(s) to be included in one (1) or more of the various zoning districts;
(2) To propose that certain use(s) be allowed in a zoning district other than the district(s) in which said use or uses is now allowed; and
(3) To propose the addition or deletion of specific use permit requirements for a particular use in a particular zoning district.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.2002; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.602)
Sec. 15.02.603 Hearings
A nonspecified use may be categorized by the Leon Valley zoning commission, with commission's categorization being approved by city council, after application and
public hearing as set out in the specific use permits sections of this article. (1972 Code, sec. 30.2003; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.603)
Secs. 15.02.604–15.02.660 Reserved
Division 12. Specific Use Permits
Sec. 15.02.661 Purpose and general provisions
(a) Public hearings. The city council may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected, and after recommendation from the Leon Valley zoning
commission containing such requirements and safeguards as are necessary to protect adjoining property, issue specific use permits for the uses specified in section
15.02.381 and section 15.02.382.
(b) Purpose of hearings. The purpose of such hearing by the city council shall be to determine that the granting of the specific use permit will not adversely affect the
character and appropriate use of the area or substantially depreciate the value of adjacent and nearby properties for the use in accordance with the regulations of the
zoning district in which they are located; that it will be in keeping with the spirit and intent of this article; that it will not adversely affect the implementation of the approved
master plan; that it will comply with applicable standards of the district in which it is proposed to be located; and that it will not adversely affect traffic, public health, public
utilities, public safety, and the general welfare of the city.
(c) Applications. All applications for specific use permits shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, along with site plans drawn to scale and showing the general
arrangement of the project, together with the locations of the buildings and proposed uses to be permitted; the means of ingress and egress to public streets; the type of
visual screening including fencing to be installed, if necessary; the types, locations and design of proposed landscaping; and the location and existing ownership of all
existing buildings within 200 feet of the property, along with the existing, surrounding zoning classifications of same. The administrative officer will then set a hearing date
within a reasonable time, comply with the pertinent notice requirements according to state law and as otherwise resolved by the city council, and submit the application
and all supporting documentation to the zoning commission for its review and action, and likewise to city council in its turn.
(d) Conditions. No specific use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner, and grantee of the specific use permit shall accept, agree to be bound by, and
comply with the terms of the specific use permit in writing and in such form as may be approved or provided by the zoning administrator.
(e) Time limit. A building permit shall be applied for, and designated work begun, within one (1) year from the time of the granting of the specific use permit. The city
council may authorize an extension of this time limit upon application by the owner prior to the expiration date of the time limit in effect. The fee for such application shall
be as prescribed by ordinance for specific use permit hearing before the city council.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.3001; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.661)
Sec. 15.02.662 Exceptions
(a) Where the proposed new construction of freestanding buildings, multi-tenant office buildings, shopping centers, trade centers, office/warehouses or industrial parks
abuts any residential zoning district, a specific use permit must be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit.
(b) Land uses listed in the permitted use table as requiring a specific use permit shall be required to obtain a specific use permit prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, except as set out below:
(1) A use which does not significantly alter an existing use by:
(A) Adding to the value of an existing building, or group of buildings operated as a unit and for the same general purpose, by more than fifty (50)
percent.
(B) Adding to the floor space of an existing building, or group of buildings operated as a unit and for the same general purpose, by more than thirty
(30) percent.
(2) The owner(s) of freestanding buildings, multi-tenant office buildings, shopping centers, trade centers, office/warehouses or industrial parks may apply
for a continuous specific use permit when it is anticipated that certain tenant uses listed in section 15.02.381 or section 15.02.382, are going to require
repeated application for specific use permit.
(3) Granting of the continuous specific use permit shall have the effect of exempting that use from the regular requirements of this article, so that use
permits may be allowed throughout the entire freestanding building, multi-tenant office building, shopping center, trade center, office/warehouse or industrial
park without individual specific use permits.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.3002; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.662)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/349
Sec. 15.02.663 Continuous specific use permit
(a) Application for a continuous specific use permit can be made for any use item listed in sections 15.02.381 (permitted use table), and 15.02.382. Each use for which
a continuous specific use permit is sought shall be a separate and distinct application, with separate public hearings held, public notices given, and fees charged.
(b) Denial of a continuous specific use permit does not prevent application for a specific use permit in the same multi-tenant office building, shopping center, trade
center, office/warehouse or industrial park, for the same use.
(c) A continuous specific use permit may be rescinded for the next tenant if the conditions under which the continuous specific use permit was granted are
substantially changed.
(d) Application for a continuous specific use permit shall be made by the owner(s) of the freestanding building, multi-tenant office building, shopping center, trade
center, office/warehouse or industrial park.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.3003; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.663)
Sec. 15.02.664 Specific use permit considered amendment
Every specific use permit granted under the provisions of this article shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to such property. In
granting such permit, the city council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
administrative officer for the use of the building(s) on such property pursuant to said permit; and such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to the
granting of such permit, or the change in zoning of such property, but shall be construed as conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy. (1972
Code, sec. 30.3004; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.664)
Secs. 15.02.665–15.02.720 Reserved
Division 13. Organization and Enforcement
Sec. 15.02.721 General statutes, ordinances and rules applying to the zoning commission
(a) Governance. The zoning commission, hereinafter referred to as “the commission,” shall be governed by all the following statutes, ordinances and rules:
(1) To the extent that they remain in force and effect, as they are amended, or as they may be added to, the commission and its members, alternates and
officers shall be governed by state statutes and local ordinances, including, but not limited to the following:
(A) State statutes applying generally to public boards, members, and officials, including, but not limited to all subsections of V.A.C.S., article 1011 and
the Texas Local Government Code;
(B) Ordinances and rules of the city generally affecting its local boards and officials, including, but not limited to this article; and
(C) Upon taking office, all commission members and alternates shall familiarize themselves with the foregoing, and, while in office, shall maintain
such knowledge, including knowledge of amendments and additions, and shall be strictly governed thereby in the conduct of commission affairs.
(b) Duties of the commission. The duties of the commission are as follows:
(1) To recommend the boundaries of original zoning districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein;
(2) To hold public hearings and prepare a final report for city council on recommendations for changes in zoning district boundaries or regulations in zoning
districts; and
(3) To hold public hearings and prepare a final report for the city council on recommendations for the enforcement of regulations in zoning districts,
including specific use permits and nonspecified uses as required under this article.
(c) Location of office. The official location of the office of the commission is: Leon Valley City Hall, 6400 El Verde Road, Leon Valley, Texas, 78238.
(d) Establishment, composition, appointments.
(1) Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 211.007, the commission is established consisting of seven (7) regular members and three (3)
alternate members.
(2) The commission members and alternates must be citizens and residents of the city who meet the same qualifications that are required to obtain a voter
registration certificate to vote in the city municipal elections.
(3) Appointment of commission members and alternates shall be made by the mayor of the city and passed and approved by the city council. In specifying
alternate members, the appointment shall also specify the order in which the alternates are to serve in the absence of a member.
(4) In the event that any person appointed by the mayor is not approved by a majority of the city council or if a vacancy occurs, the mayor shall make
another appointment within forty-five (45) days, subject to approval by a majority of the city council.
(5) Alternates for the commission do not have status as voting members unless directed by the chairman of the commission to sit as a voting member due
to the absence or nonvoting status of a member. This provision is not intended to restrict in any way the nonvoting participation of alternates, to the extent
allowed by the chairman.
(6) Commissioners shall serve the public at large, however, each commissioner, with the exception of the alternates, shall serve by place. Place one (1)
through place seven (7) are hereby created.
(e) Terms of members.
(1) The term of commission members 2, 4, and 6 and alternate member 2 is two (2) years, beginning on June 1st of every year ending in an even number
(0, 2, 4, 6, 8).
(2) The term of commission members 2, 4, and 6, and alternate member 2 expires on May 31st of every year ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8).
(3) The term of commission members 1, 3, 5 and 7, and alternates 1, and 3, is two (2) years, beginning on June 1st of every year ending in an odd number
(1, 3, 5, 7, 9).
(4) The term of commission members 1, 3, 5 and 7, and alternate members 1 and 3 expires on May 31st of every year ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7,
9).
(5) Any appointment of a commission member or alternate is only for the remainder of a term, regardless of the point in the term at which the appointment
is made.
(f) Regular election of chairman, vice-chairman and second vice-chairman.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/349
(1) As the first item of new business at the regular meeting of the commission in June of all years ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8), the commission
shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and second vice-chairman. If there is no regular meeting, and no special meeting, or if a quorum is lacking at such a
meeting prior to July 1st of any year ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8), city council may appoint a chairman and a vice-chairman to serve until a
meeting occurs at which an election can be held.
(2) The former chairman, vice-chairman or second vice-chairman, in that order, and if reappointed to the commission, may remain in office until their
successor(s) take office at the next regular or special meeting following their appointment; unless a replacement is appointed by the city council.
(g) Succession of vice-chairman to office of chairman; special election. If the chairman resigns his office or is no longer a member of the commission, the vicechairman
shall succeed him in office for the remainder of the term. If the vice-chairman resigns his office, is no longer a member of the commission, or succeeds to the
chairman's office, the second vice-chairman shall succeed him in office for the remainder of the term. If any of the above do not apply, a special election shall be held at
the next meeting of the commission to select a chairman, vice-chairman and/or second vice-chairman to complete the term, provided that if such meeting precedes the
regular election by three (3) months or less, and any duties to be performed by the vice-chairman or second vice-chairman can be performed in a satisfactory manner,
the commission may permit the office of vice-chairman or second vice-chairman to remain vacant for that period.
(h) Duties of chairman, vice-chairman or second vice-chairman; appointment of temporary chairman to preside at meetings.
(1) If present and able, the chairman shall preside at all meetings and hearings. If the chairman is absent or unable to preside, the vice-chairman shall
preside. If the vice-chairman is also absent or unable to preside, the second vice-chairman shall preside.
(2) In accordance with these and other applicable rules, the chairman or the presiding officer, acting as chairman, shall decide all points of procedure or
order, unless otherwise directed by a majority of the members in attendance, on motion duly made and passed. He shall maintain order and decorum, and to
that end may order removal of disorderly or disruptive persons.
(3) The chairman or officer presiding in his absence shall determine the absence of any member and direct the seating of alternate(s) in the order
determined by the appointment of alternates by the mayor and city council.
(4) The chairman may delegate duties as he sees fit to any member or alternate. In the case of the absence or the incapacity of the chairman, the vicechairman
shall perform any or all duties of the chairman, whether or not delegated.
(5) Subject to the rules of this article and further instructions from the commission, the chairman shall direct the official business of the commission, guide
the work of city staff as it relates to the affairs of the commission and exercise general disciplinary power.
(6) The chairman may delegate members of the commission to make personal inspections when necessary for proper consideration of cases, and shall
appoint such committees as may be found necessary.
(7) The chairman shall report to the commission on all official transactions which have not otherwise come to the attention of the commission. The
chairman shall also make or cause to be made, any reports concerning the affairs of the commission required or requested by the city council.
(i) Causes for removal from the commission. Causes for removal of members or alternates of the commission by the city council shall include particular malfeasance,
misfeasance, or nonfeasance generally, and in particular the following:
(1) Failure to maintain reasonable familiarity with state statutes and local ordinances and rules affecting the commission, or failure to be governed thereby,
as required in section 15.02.721(d) [15.02.721(a)]; and/or
(2) Failure to disclose conflict of interest for purposes of disqualification when a member has personal or monetary interest in the matter involved, or will be
directly affected by a decision of the commission.
(j) Resignation, generally and by absence.
(1) When members or alternates of the commission propose to resign, if reasonably feasible, they shall give notice of their intent to the chairman, making
the date of resignation effective in such a manner as to allow time for appointment of replacement.
(2) Failure to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings or three (3) of any seven (7) consecutive meetings without the recorded consent of the
chairman, shall be construed as resignation from the commission by absence. This provision shall apply to both members and alternates.
(k) Vacation of office. When a member or alternate of the commission dies or resigns (including resignation by absence), the chairman shall promptly indicate to the
mayor that a vacancy exists. When a member becomes incapacitated for office permanently, or for what appears to be a protracted period, or moves from the
jurisdiction, or becomes for any other reason no longer qualified for office and fails to resign, the chairman shall cause any necessary investigation to be made. Based
on that investigation, the chairman may declare the office vacant and shall promptly indicate to the mayor that a vacancy exists.
(l) Duties of legal counsel. The city attorney, or his designate, shall provide legal advice to the commission as to matters under their jurisdiction.
(m) Conduct of members of the commission, alternates and city staff.
(1) No member of the commission, alternate or city staff member shall represent applicants on matters on which the commission is to make
recommendations.
(2) Members and alternates of the commission shall be aware of all state statutes and any city ordinances, rules or regulations related to conflicts of
interest and the ethics of public officials generally.
(3) As soon as any commission member, alternate or city staff member of any agency serving the commission becomes aware of any potential conflict of
interest in any case to come before the commission, he shall notify the chairman or acting chairman of the particulars. Where the chairman finds that conflict
clearly exists, he shall disqualify the commission member from acting in the case, shall cause the circumstances of the disqualification to be entered in the
record and make arrangements for such alternate services as are required.
(4) Where the chairman or acting chairman has reasonable doubt as to whether the facts and applicable law indicate a degree of conflict justifying
disqualification or excuse from service, he shall seek advice from the city attorney or his designate. If the city attorney or his designate advises that, under the
circumstances reported and applicable law conflict appears to exist, the chairman shall proceed to disqualify or excuse as provided above. If the city attorney,
or his designate, advises that there is reasonable doubt, the chairman may either disqualify or excuse the person involved, or call for a determination by the
commission at a public meeting.
(5) The record on any such determination by the commission shall be full and complete and shall indicate the reasons supporting the decision.
(6) A member and/or alternate may seek disqualification from voting whenever any applicant, or his agent, has sought to influence the vote of the member
on his request (application), other than in the public hearing.
(7) Members and alternates of the commission may seek information from other members, the zoning administrator, city attorney or other city staff prior to
the public hearing, but no member or alternate shall discuss the case with any other parties thereto prior to the public hearing. Additionally, no member or
alternate shall express any bias, prejudice or individual opinion on judgment of the case prior to its hearing and determination. Violation of this rule shall be
grounds for dismissal from the commission.
(n) Compensation. The compensation and/or reimbursement of expenses of commission members and alternates is to be specified by ordinance. In the absence of
an ordinance specifying compensation and/or reimbursement, there shall be none. The absence of such an ordinance does not preclude payment by the city of certain
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/349
expenses for memberships, subscriptions, educational seminars, travel and similar expenses as might be required for commission members and alternates, as
authorized by the city council.
(o) Meetings.
(1) Regular meetings of the commission shall be held at city hall on the fourth Tuesday of each month, unless designated otherwise by the commission;
provided that such meetings may be held at any other convenient place if directed by the chairman in advance of the meeting or upon a finding that such
other location would serve public convenience or necessity, and subject to the notice provisions as required by law.
(2) Special meetings for any purpose may be held at the call of the chairman of the commission or of any combination of five (4) commission members and
alternate members of the commission. At least seventy-two (72) hours' written notice of the time and place of any special meeting shall be given by the
zoning administrator except where written waivers of notice are filed by all members required to provide a quorum and in attendance at such regular meeting,
but other members shall receive written notice thereof.
(3) If a special meeting is called on a case or cases subject to notice of hearing, the required notice provisions for the hearing shall be met.
(4) Any meeting may be recessed or adjourned from day to day, or to the time of any previously announced regular or special meeting, and such recess or
adjournment to a time and place certain shall not require additional public notice.
(5) If no business is scheduled before the commission, or if it is apparent that a quorum will not be available, any meeting may be canceled by the
chairman by giving notice to all members at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time set for such meeting.
(6) A quorum of the commission shall consist of any combination of members or alternates totaling four (4).
(7) All meetings of the commission involving hearing of evidence, decisions, or recommendations on requests shall be public, with formal notice as required
by law.
(8) Meetings for the conduct of other business of the commission, including activities and reviews as may be assigned by the city council or required by
ordinance, trips for viewing premises, and other similar meetings and activities, shall not require such formal public notice and hearing, but shall be scheduled
at least twelve (12) hours in advance, with the schedule posted at the office of the commission.
(p) Agenda, order of business. The zoning administrator shall prepare an agenda for each commission meeting. The order of business shall be as follows:
(1) Call to order and roll call, with recording of members present and absent and indications as to whether absences are with consent of the chairman;
(2) Action on any previous meeting for which action is required;
(3) Continued hearings, with consideration and determination on cases as heard;
(4) New hearings, with consideration and determination on cases as heard;
(5) Old business;
(6) New business; and
(7) Adjournment.
(q) Motions.
(1) Any motion by a member shall require a second. After a motion has been made and duly seconded, discussion of the motion may be held for a
reasonable time. Discussions by members, or by opponents or proponents of a question before the commission, shall terminate whenever a member shall
call a vote upon the question or whenever the chairman shall so rule.
(2) A motion which is defeated is not a recommendation. If a motion is defeated, another motion must be made, seconded, voted upon and approved by a
majority of the commission present and voting.
(3) If the commission does not make a recommendation, the failure to make a recommendation within seventy-one (71) days of the assignment of a docket
number to a case application shall be considered to be a recommendation of denial.
(4) Motions to recommend approval or denial of any change in a zoning district may, when appropriate, contain statements of commission findings in the
following areas:
(A) Consistency and compatibility with the master plan;
(B) Consistency and compatibility with surrounding zoning districts;
(C) Consistency and compatibility with site and surrounding uses;
(D) Protection of the health, safety and welfare of the general public; and/or
(E) Protection and preservation of the property rights of the owner(s) of all real property affected by the proposed change in zoning district(s).
(5) Motions to recommend approval or denial of any requested nonspecified use permit or specific use permit may, when appropriate, contain statements
of commission findings in the following areas:
(A) Consistency and compatibility with the master plan;
(B) Consistency and compatibility with site zoning;
(C) Consistency and compatibility with surrounding zoning and/or uses;
(D) Protection of the health, safety and welfare of the general public; and/or
(E) Protection and preservation of the property rights of the owner(s) of all real property affected by the proposed specific use permit.
(6) The zoning administrator will administer and obtain a roll call vote from the commission upon the rendering of a motion.
(r) Reporting.
(1) The commission, in making recommendations to city council on any matter upon which a recommendation is required, may make findings and shall
issue a report to the city council.
(2) That report to the city council must include the results of a vote on a motion made and duly seconded, and approved by a majority of the commission
present and voting.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/349
(3) That report can be delivered to the city council by the chairman, member(s) or alternate(s) designated by the chairman, zoning administrator or any
other city staff member designated by the chairman.
(s) Additional duties of the commission. In addition to its advisory zoning powers under established law, the commission shall be charged with the following duties: to
review and update the city's master plan and cause to be submitted to the city council, every four years, no later than October 1st commencing in 1999, a written report
pertaining to the status of the master plan. Such a report should include any recommendations for change in the laws and policies of the city as they relate to the use of
land.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.4001; Ordinance 07-041 adopted 9/4/07; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.721; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code; Ordinance 2018-59 adopted 8/7/18)
State law reference–Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.007.
Sec. 15.02.722 General statutes, ordinances and rules applying to the board of adjustment
(a) Governance. The board of adjustment, hereinafter referred to as “the board,” shall be governed by all the following statutes, ordinances and rules:
(1) To the extent that they remain in force and effect, as they are amended, or as they may be added to, the board and its members, alternates and officers
shall be governed by state statutes and local ordinances, including, but not limited to the following:
(A) State statutes applying generally to public boards, members and officials, including, but not limited to, all subsections of V.A.C.S., article 1011 and
the Texas Local Government Code; and
(B) Ordinances and rules of the city generally affecting its local boards and officials, including, but not limited to this article.
(2) Upon taking office, all board members and alternates shall familiarize themselves with the foregoing, and, while in office, shall maintain such
knowledge, including knowledge of amendments and additions, and shall be strictly governed thereby in the conduct of board affairs.
(b) Duties of the board. The board has three (3) fundamental powers:
(1) To hear appeals from individuals contesting the decision of a zoning enforcement officer;
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to this article; and
(3) To grant variances to the terms of this article's text where unusual conditions make its literal enforcement unjust.
(c) Location of office. The official location of the office of the board is: Leon Valley City Hall, 6400 El Verde Road, Leon Valley, Texas, 78238.
(d) Establishment, composition, appointments.
(1) Pursuant to V.A.C.S., article 1011g and section 211.008 of the Texas Local Government Code, the board is established consisting of five (5) members
and four (4) alternates.
(2) The board members and alternates must be citizens and residents of the city who meet the same qualifications that are required to obtain a voter
registration certificate to vote in the city municipal elections.
(3) Appointment of board members and alternates shall be made by the mayor of the city and passed and approved by the city council. In specifying
alternate members, the appointment shall also specify the order in which the alternates are to serve in the absence of a member.
(4) In the event that any person(s) appointed by the mayor is not approved by a majority of the city council, or if a vacancy occurs, the mayor shall make
another appointment within forty-five (45) days, subject to approval by a majority of the city council.
(5) Alternates for the board do not have status as voting members unless directed by the chairman of the board to sit as a voting member due to the
absence or nonvoting status of a member. This provision is not intended to restrict in any way the nonvoting participation of alternates, to the extent allowed
by the chairman.
(e) Terms of members.
(1) The term for all board members and alternates is two (2) years, beginning on June 1st, of every year ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8).
(2) The term of all board members and alternates expires on May 31st of every year ending in an even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8).
(3) Any appointment of a board member or alternate is only for the remainder of a term, regardless of the point in the term at which the appointment is
made.
(f) Regular election of chairman, vice-chairman and second vice-chairman.
(1) As the first item of new business at the first meeting of the board following mayoral appointment/reappointment, the board shall elect a chairman, vicechairman
and second vice-chairman. If there is no meeting, or if there is not a minimum of four (4) members or alternates present at such a meeting prior to
June 15th in such year, city council may appoint a chairman and vice-chairman to serve until a meeting occurs at which time an election can be held.
(2) The former chairman, vice-chairman or second vice-chairman, in that order, and if reappointed to the board, may remain in office until their successor(s)
take office at the next meeting following their appointment; unless a replacement is appointed by city council.
(g) Succession of vice-chairman to office of chairman; special election. If the chairman resigns his office or is no longer a member of the board, the vice-chairman
shall succeed him in office for the remainder of the term. If the vice-chairman resigns his office, is no longer a member of the board, or succeeds to the chairman's office,
the second vice-chairman shall succeed him in office for the remainder of the term. If any of the above do not apply, a special election shall be held at the next meeting
of the board to select a chairman, vice-chairman and/or second vice-chairman to complete the term, provided that if such meeting precedes the regular election by three
(3) months or less, and any duties to be performed by the vice-chairman or the second vice-chairman can be performed in a satisfactory manner, the board may permit
the office of vice-chairman or second vice-chairman to remain vacant for that period.
(h) Duties of chairman, vice-chairman or second vice-chairman; appointment of temporary chairman to preside at meetings.
(1) If present and able, the chairman shall preside at all meetings and hearings. If the chairman is absent or unable to preside, the vice-chairman shall
preside. If the vice-chairman is also absent or unable to preside, the second vice-chairman shall preside.
(2) In accordance with these and other applicable rules, the chairman or presiding officer, acting as chairman, shall decide all points of procedure or order,
unless otherwise directed by a majority of the members in attendance, on motion duly made and passed. He shall maintain order and decorum, and to that
end may order removal of disorderly or disruptive persons.
(3) The chairman or officer presiding in his absence shall determine the absence of any member and direct the seating of an alternate(s) in the order
determined by the appointment of alternates by the mayor and city council.
(4) If oaths are to be administered to a witness in a particular case, that oath shall be administered by the chairman or officer presiding in his absence. The
necessity of administering an oath to a witness shall be determined by the chairman or the officer presiding in his absence. However, if it is determined an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/349
oath shall be administered to a witness in a particular case, then the same oath shall be administered to all witnesses testifying in that particular case.
(5) The chairman may delegate duties as he sees fit to any member or alternate. In the case of the absence or the incapacity of the chairman, the vicechairman
shall perform any or all duties of the chairman, whether or not delegated.
(6) Subject to the rules of this article and further instructions from the board, the chairman shall direct the official business of the board, guide the work of
city staff as it relates to the affairs of the board and exercise general disciplinary power.
(7) The chairman may delegate members of the board to make personal inspections when necessary for proper consideration of cases, and shall appoint
such committees as may be found necessary.
(8) The chairman shall report to the board on all official transactions which have not otherwise come to the attention of the board. The chairman shall also
make or cause to be made, any reports concerning the affairs of the board required or requested by the city council.
(i) Causes for removal from the board. Causes for removal of members or alternates of the board by the city council shall include particular malfeasance,
misfeasance, or nonfeasance generally, and in particular the following:
(1) Failure to maintain reasonable familiarity with state statutes and local ordinances and rules affecting the board, or failure to be governed thereby, as
required in section 15.02.721 [15.02.722(a)]; and/or
(2) Failure to disclose conflict of interest for purposes of disqualification when a member has personal or monetary interest in the matter involved, or will be
directly affected by a decision of the board.
(j) Resignation, generally and by absence.
(1) When members or alternates of the board propose to resign, if reasonably feasible, they shall give notice of their intent to the chairman, making the
date of resignation effective in such a manner as to allow time for appointment of replacement.
(2) Failure to attend three (3) consecutive meetings or three (3) of any seven (7) consecutive meetings without the recorded consent of the chairman, shall
be construed as resignation from the board by absence. This provision shall apply to both members and alternates of the board.
(k) Vacation of office. When a member or alternate of the board dies or resigns (including resignation by absence), the chairman shall promptly indicate to the mayor
that a vacancy exists. When a member becomes incapacitated for office permanently, or for what appears to be a protracted period, or moves from the jurisdiction, or
becomes for any other reason no longer qualified for office and fails to resign, the chairman shall cause any necessary investigation to be made. Based on that
investigation, the chairman may declare the office vacant and shall promptly indicate to the mayor that a vacancy exists.
(l) Fees and application procedure.
(1) Fees. Shall be as established by ordinance. Fees are to accompany application for public hearing before the board of adjustment.
(2) Application. The applicant may request a public hearing before the board, for either a request for variance, special exception and/or appeal of zoning
administrator's decision to this article.
(A) Completed application(s) must be submitted to the zoning administrator and all appropriate fees must be paid before a public hearing date will be
scheduled with the board chairman.
(m) Board administrator. The zoning administrator shall serve as administrator for the board.
(1) The board administrator, or his deputies or assistants, shall have the following duties and responsibilities in relation to requests to the board:
(A) Attend to all correspondence of the board;
(B) Send out, or cause to be published, all required notices;
(C) Attend all meetings and hearings of the board;
(D) Scrutinize all matters to ensure compliance with this article and these rules;
(E) Compile all required records;
(F) Maintain the necessary schedules, files, and indexes; and
(G) Generally perform or supervise all clerical work of the board.
(2) The board administrator shall maintain a docket book or log which shall be kept posted to date. The docket shall include the case number, name of
applicant, location of premises by street number or legal description, nature of the case and the final disposition of the case. All continuances,
postponements, dates of sending notices, other steps taken and acts done should be noted in the docket.
(3) The board administrator shall maintain a minute book which shall be kept posted to date. In the minute book shall be recorded the proceedings of the
board showing attendance, any disqualifications of members, record of examinations, all other official action and the vote of each member voting on every
question. The minutes of the board shall become official upon majority vote of the board, and shall be a public record, kept in city hall offices.
(4) The board administrator or his authorized deputies or assistants, shall also have the following duties and responsibilities in relation to appeals and
applications to the board:
(A) Receive all appeals and applications and examine the material submitted therewith to assure that it is complete and that required maps, plans,
reports and other materials which are required and are necessary to be submitted are in good order and in sufficient number for processing and
recording; and
(B) See that this material is reviewed by all appropriate city departments and prepare a report and recommendation to be delivered in a timely
manner to the board prior to consideration of the appeal or application.
(n) Duties of legal counsel. The city attorney, or his designate, shall provide legal advice to the board as to matters under their jurisdiction. In cases before the board,
the city attorney, or his designate, may assist the board in interrogating witnesses.
(o) Conduct of members of the board, alternates and city staff.
(1) No member of the board, alternate or city staff member shall represent applicants or appellants on matters on which the board is to make
determinations.
(2) Members and alternates of the board shall be aware of all state statutes and any city ordinances, rules or regulations related to conflicts of interest and
the ethics of public officials generally.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/349
(3) As soon as any board member, alternate or city staff member of any agency serving the board becomes aware of any potential conflict of interest in any
case to come before the board, he shall notify the chairman or acting chairman of the particulars. Where the chairman finds that conflict clearly exists, he
shall disqualify the board member from acting in the case, shall cause the circumstances of the disqualification to be entered in the record and make
arrangements for such alternate services as are required.
(4) Where the chairman or acting chairman has reasonable doubt as to whether the facts and applicable law indicate a degree of conflict justifying
disqualification or excuse from service, he shall seek advice from the city attorney or his designate. If the city attorney or his designate advises that, under the
circumstances reported and applicable law conflict appears to exist, the chairman shall proceed to disqualify or excuse as provided above. If the city attorney
or his designate advises that there is reasonable doubt, the chairman may either disqualify or excuse the person involved, or call for a determination by the
board at a public meeting.
(5) The record on any such determination by the board shall be full and complete and shall indicate the reasons supporting the decision.
(6) A member may seek disqualification from voting whenever any applicant, or his agent, has sought to influence the vote of the member on his appeal or
application, other than in the public hearing.
(7) Members and alternates of the board may seek information from other members, the board administrator, city attorney or other city staff prior to the
public hearing, but no member or alternate shall discuss the case with any other parties thereto prior to the public hearing. Additionally, no member or
alternate shall express any bias, prejudice or individual opinion on proper judgment of the case prior to its hearing and determination. Violation of this rule
shall be grounds for dismissal from the board.
(p) Compensation. The compensation and/or reimbursement of expenses of board members and alternates is to be specified by ordinance. In the absence of an
ordinance specifying compensation and/or reimbursement, there shall be none. The absence of such an ordinance does not preclude payment by the city of certain
expenses for memberships, subscriptions, educational seminars, travel and similar expenses as might be required for board members and alternates, as authorized by
city council.
(q) Meetings.
(1) There is no requirement for regular meetings of the board. All meetings of the board are to be special meetings to be held at the Leon Valley city hall,
unless designated otherwise by the board; provided that such meetings may be held at any other convenient place if directed by the chairman in advance of
the meeting or upon a finding that such other location would serve public convenience or necessity, and subject to the notice provisions as required by law.
(2) Meetings for any purpose may be held at the call of the chairman of the board, or of any combination of at least four (4) members and alternates.
(3) If a meeting is called on a case or cases subject to notice of hearing, the required notice provisions for the hearing shall be met.
(4) Any meeting may be recessed or adjourned from day to day, or to the time of any previously announced meeting, and such recess or adjournment to a
time and place certain shall not require additional public notice.
(5) If no business is scheduled before the board, or if it is apparent that a quorum will not be available, any meeting may be canceled by the chairman by
giving notice to all members at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time set for such meeting.
(6) All meetings of the board involving hearing of evidence and/or decisions on appeals or applications shall be public, with formal notice as required by
law.
(7) Meetings for the conduct of other business of the board, including activities and reviews as may be assigned by the city council or required by
ordinance, trips for viewing premises, and other similar meetings and activities, shall not require such formal public notice and hearing, but shall be scheduled
at least twelve (12) hours in advance, with the schedule posted at the office of the board.
(r) Minimum of four members at hearings. The alternate members of the board shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular members when requested by the
chairman of the board so that all cases heard by the board will always be heard by a minimum of four (4) members.
(s) Special exceptions. The board is hereby empowered to permit the following exceptions provided its action is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
article and does not injure the health, safety, morals, or the welfare of adjacent property owners or residents:
(1) Permit the use of a lot or lots in an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R5, or R-6 district, which lot or lots is adjacent to a commercial or industrial district, even if
separated therefrom by an alley or by a street, for the parking of passenger cars under such safeguards and conditions as may be desirable to protect the
more restricted adjacent and nearby properties, provided no other business use is made of the lot;
(2) Grant a permit for the extension of a use into an adjoining district, where such extension would constitute a nonconforming use and where the lot upon
which the existing use is situated extends into the adjoining district and is in single ownership at the time this article is adopted;
(3) Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied by a nonconforming use provided such reconstruction does not prevent the return of such property to a
nonconforming use; and
(4) Determine, in cases of uncertainty, the classification as to district of a use not specifically described in this article, provided, however, that such use
shall be in keeping with uses specifically named in the district regulations.
(t) Variance empowerment. The board is hereby empowered to grant variances to this article where it is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special
conditions, literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this article is observed and substantial justice is done.
(u) Limitations on special exceptions and variances. Any special exception or variance authorized by the board shall constitute authority to authorize the issuance of a
building permit, special permit or certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, if applied for within 180 days from the date of favorable action on the part of the board,
unless the board authorizes a longer period. If the building permit, special permit or certificate of occupancy shall not have been applied for within said 180-day period,
or such extended period as the board may have authorized, then the grant of the special exception or variance shall terminate. Such termination shall be without
prejudice to a subsequent application to said board in accordance with the rules and regulations regarding applications. No application to the board shall be allowed on
the same piece of property prior to the expiration of six (6) months from a ruling of the board on any application unless other property in the same block or within 500 feet
thereof, within such six-month period has been altered or changed by a ruling of the board, in which case such change of circumstances shall permit the allowance of
such an application but shall in no way have any force in law to compel the board, after a hearing, to grant such subsequent application, but such application shall be
considered on its merits as in all other cases.
(v) Appeals empowerment. The board is hereby empowered to hear appeals from individuals contesting the decision of a zoning enforcement officer. In exercising
their powers, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the
administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(w) Appeal to board.
(1) Any of the following persons may appeal to the board a decision made by the zoning administrator:
(A) A person aggrieved by the decision; or
(B) Any officer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by the decision.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/349
(2) The appellant must file with the board and the official from whom the appeal is taken, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The
appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days of notice of the decision which is to be appealed. On receiving the notice, the official from whom the appeal is
taken shall immediately transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed.
(x) When appeals stays all proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the administrative officer from whom the
appeal is taken certifies to the board after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion,
cause immediate peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record
on application and notice to the administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
(y) Notice of public hearing before the board. Timing and manner of publication of public notice for such hearings shall be in accordance with any requirements set
forth herein and by state statute. In addition, at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing, notice shall be given to parties in interest and to other persons required by
the ordinance to be specifically notified.
(z) Agenda, order of business. The board administrator shall prepare an agenda for each board meeting. The order of business shall be as follows:
(1) Call to order and roll call, with recording of members present and absent and indications as to whether absences are with consent of the chairman;
(2) Action on any previous meeting for which action is required;
(3) Continued hearings, with consideration and determination on cases as heard;
(4) New hearings, with consideration and determination on cases as heard;
(5) Old business;
(6) New business; and
(7) Adjournment.
(aa) Procedures at hearings before the board.
(1) At a public hearing, any person may appear or be represented by authorized agents or attorneys. Such agents or attorneys shall present competent
evidence of the extent of their authorization.
(2) All witnesses to material facts shall testify under oath, to be administered by the chairman.
(3) The order for presenting evidence shall be as follows:
(A) The chairman, or such person(s) as he may direct, shall present and describe the nature of the case and evidence available to the board,
including staff report;
(B) The applicant or appellant shall outline the nature of the request and present supporting evidence;
(C) Objectors may cross-examine;
(D) Board members and alternates may examine witnesses for the applicant's or appellant's side;
(E) Objectors may present evidence;
(F) Applicants may cross-examine;
(G) Board members and alternates may examine witnesses for objector's side;
(H) Rebuttal by applicant; and
(I) Rebuttal by objectors.
(4) The board shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence or limited to consideration of such evidence as would be admissible in a court of law, but it may
exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent or unduly repetitious testimony and/or evidence. The chairman shall rule on all questions relating to the
admissibility of evidence, but may be overruled by a majority of the board members present.
(5) During the hearing, each side shall proceed without interruption by the other. All arguments and pleading shall be addressed to the chairman. There
shall be no question or argument between individuals in the audience.
(6) The chairman, board members and alternates, counsel to the board and/or city staff may direct any question to the applicant, witnesses, or any person
speaking from the audience, to bring out pertinent facts. The chairman, board members and/or alternates may call for pertinent facts from staff, or make
appropriate comments pertinent to the case. No board member should debate or argue with persons in the audience.
(bb) Motions.
(1) Any motion by a member shall require a second. After a motion has been made and duly seconded, discussion of the motion may be held for a
reasonable time. Discussions by members, or by opponents or proponents of a question before the board, shall terminate whenever a member shall call a
vote upon the question or whenever the chairman shall so rule.
(2) If a motion is defeated, another motion must be made, seconded, voted upon and approved by a majority of the board present and voting.
(cc) Findings of the board. The board, in making motions related to special exceptions, variances and appeals, may contain statements of board findings in the
following areas:
(1) A motion to approve a special exception may, when appropriate, state findings:
(A) That the granting of the special exception is not contrary to the general intent of the zoning code and the public interest, and the property rights of
adjoining land owners are substantially preserved; and
(B) That the special exception granted creates no new variances and does not increase existing variances.
(2) A motion to deny a special exception may, when appropriate, state findings:
(A) That the granting of the special exception is contrary to the general intent of the zoning code, public interest, or both, and/or is detrimental to the
rights of adjoining property owners; or
(B) That the granting of the special exception would create a new variance or increase existing variances.
(3) A motion to grant a variance may, when appropriate, state findings:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/349
(A) That there are special circumstances applicable to the property which, if strictly enforced, will deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other
property of the same classification in the same zoning district; and which were not self-imposed; and that this variance will not be a grant of special
privilege to the applicant; and
(B) That it is also found:
(i) That because of physical circumstances such as size, shape or topography, no reasonable use can be made of the property without this
variance;
(ii) That there will be no adverse affect from the granting of the variance;
(iii) Light or air will not be impaired to adjacent property;
(iv) Congestion will not be substantially increased;
(v) Neighborhood property values will not be substantially impaired;
(vi) The amount of the variance is the minimum needed to afford relief; and
(C) That the following conditions, if any, which have been imposed.
(4) A motion to deny a variance may, when appropriate, state findings:
(A) That the granting of the variance would give special privileges to the applicant not enjoyed by other property in the same classification in the
vicinity and zoning district; or
(B) That the special circumstances or conditions are self-imposed or were created by the applicant; or
(C) That it is found:
(i) There are no similar variances nearby; or
(ii) The variance would have an adverse affect; or
(iii) The amount of the variance is substantial; or
(iv) Reasonable use can be made of the property without this variance.
(5) A motion to approve and confirm a decision of an administrative officer, on appeal, may, when appropriate, be based on findings that:
(A) The administrative officer's decision is proper;
(B) His decision was based on one (1) or more points (list points); and
(C) These points should be upheld.
(6) A motion to reverse a decision of an administrative officer, on appeal, may, when appropriate, be based on findings that:
(A) The administrative officer's decision is improper;
(B) His decision was based on one (1) or more points (list points);
(C) Points (list points) should be overruled;
(D) His decision should have been controlled by (list points).
(7) The board administrator will administer and obtain a roll call vote from the board upon the rendering of a motion.
(dd) Decisions of the board.
(1) With due consideration to the length of the agenda, the nature of the case, the complexity of the evidence and the findings required, the chairman may
elect, subject to being overruled by a majority of the members or alternates seated on motion duly passed:
(A) To proceed immediately to determination and decision on conclusion of the hearing in the particular case;
(B) To defer determination and decision until later in the same meeting should it be found advantageous to defer further determination or decision in
the case for good cause stated; or
(C) To defer determination and decision until a specific meeting of the board should it be found advantageous to defer further determination or
decision in the case for good cause stated.
(2) Appeals and applications shall be heard at public meetings within seventy (70) days of date of assignment of docket numbers and decided at the same
meeting, at the next meeting of the board, or at special public meeting, but in any event within thirty-six (36) days of the initial meeting at which the hearing on
the case was first held.
(3) If at least four (4) members or alternates serving as members of the board concur in a finding of error in any decision, order, requirement, or
determination of the administrative officer appealed from, the decision shall be favorable to the appellant. Such decision by the board shall specify the
decision, order, requirement, or determination which should have been made, and the decision of the board shall be binding upon the applicant and
successors in interest.
(4) If at least four (4) members of the board concur that the evidence supports favorable findings on the application for a special exception before it, or that
such findings could be made if conditions and safeguards were established, the decision shall be favorable to the applicant, provided that such conditions and
safeguards as may be required for such favorable findings, as specified in the decision, shall be binding upon the applicant and successors in interest.
(5) If at least four (4) members of the board concur that the evidence supports favorable findings on the appeal for a variance before it, or that such findings
could be made if conditions and safeguards were established, the decision shall be favorable to the applicant, provided that such conditions and safeguards
as may be required for such favorable findings, as specified in the decision, shall be binding upon the appellant and his successors in interest.
(ee) Records of cases of the board. The decision of the board shall be shown in the record of the case. Such record shall show the reason for determination, with a
summary of the evidence introduced and the findings of fact made by the board.
(ff) Recording. Such record shall be entered in the minutes of the board. Following approval, as submitted or as amended, the minutes shall be acknowledged as to
accuracy by the signature of the chairman and the board administrator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/349
(gg) Appeals from the board. Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or
bureau of the city, may present to a court of record a petition for a writ of certiorari, as provided by V.A.C.S., article 1011g, duly verified setting forth that such decision is
illegal in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision of the
board in the office of the city secretary.
(1972 Code, sec. 30.4002; 2008 Code, sec. 14.02.722; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et seq.
APPENDIX A. LANDSCAPE PLANTINGS
TREES - Small: 15-25 feet; Medium: 25-40 feet; Large: 40 feet and higher (60'+)
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Anacacho, Orchid tree Bauhania congesta S-M Semi-evergreen, treeshrub
Anaqua, Sandpaper
Tree
Ehretia anacua M-L Evergreen broadleaf; white
flower clusters
Arizona Cypress Cupressus arizonica M-L Evergreen conifer; gray
green foliage
Ashe Juniper Juniperus ashei S-M Evergreen conifer; green
foliage, females fruit
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum L Deciduous conifer; fine
textured foliage
Bur Oak Quercus macrocarpa L Deciduous; large acorns
and leaves
California Fan Palm Washingtonia filifera L Fan-leaved, full sun
Carolina Buckthorn Rhamnus caroliniana S-M Semi-evergreen; sunshade,
glossy leaves
Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia M-L Deciduous; more narrow
canopy
Chinquapin Oak Quercus muhlenbergii M-L Deciduous; round-topped
tree; bold foliage
Condalia, Brazil Tree Bluewood Condalia
Condalia hookeri
S-M Evergreen; delicate foliage;
drought tolerant
Crabapple, Texas Mollis texana S-M Deciduous, full to partial
sun
Crepe Myrtle Lagerstroemia sp. M Deciduous, blooms,
attractive bark, full sun
Deodar Cedar Cedrus deodara L Evergreen; spreading
pyramidal shape
Desert Willow Chilopsis linearis S Deciduous; pink flowers;
very drought tolerant
Ebony, Texas Pithecellobium
flexicaule
S Evergreen; sun; white
flowers
Escarpment Black
Cherry
Prunus serotina var.
eximia
M-L Deciduous; sun to shade;
fall foliage
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/349
Eve's Necklace Sophora affinis M-L Deciduous; sun-shade;
white to pink flowers
Goldenball Lead Tree Leucaena retusa S-M Deciduous; delicate
foliage; fragrant flowers
Hackberry Celtis spp. M-L Deciduous; prolific; wildlife
favorite
Huisache Acacia farnesiana M Deciduous; delicate
foliage; fragrant flowers
Kidneywood Eysenhardtia
polystachya
S Deciduous; delicate treeshrub;
fragrant flowers
Lacy Oak Quercus laceyi M Deciduous; sun-shade; hill
country native
Live Oak Quercus virginiana M-L Evergreen-like; good
shade tree
Loquat Eriobotrya japonica S Evergreen, lrg. tropical-like
leaves
Mesquite Prosopis glandulosa S-M Deciduous; lacy spreading
form
Mexican Buckeye Ungnadia speciosa S Deciduous; pink-red spring
flowers
Pecan Carya illinoensis L-XL Deciduous; lots of space;
root impact
Persimmon, Texas Diospyros texana S-M Deciduous; sun-shade,
smooth bark
Plum, Mexican Prunus mexicana S Deciduous; sun to shade;
white flowers, fruit
Possum Haw Ilex decidua S-M Deciduous; sun-shade;
female has red fruit
Red Oak, Shumard Quercus shumardii L Deciduous; fall color, good
shade tree
Red Oak, Texas Quercus texana M Deciduous; fall color, good
shade tree
Redbud, TX, OK, MX Cercis canadensis var.
texana
S-M Deciduous; sun-shade
Retama Paloverde Parkinsonia texana S-M Deciduous; fast growing,
yellow flowers
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum rufidulum S Deciduous; fall color, white
flower clusters
Silk-tassle Garrya ovata S Evergreen; sun-shade
Spiny Hackberry Celtis pallida S Evergreen; greenish white
flowers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/349
Sycamore, Mexican Platanus mexicana L-XL Deciduous; large leaves,
good shade tree
Sycamore, Texas Platanus glabrata L-XL Deciduous; large leaves,
good shade tree
Texas Ash, Green Ash Fraxinus sp. M-L Deciduous; fast growing
Texas Mountain Laurel Sophora secundiflora S Evergreen, shade to full
sun; fragrant flowers
Texas Pistache Pistacia texana S Semi-evergreen; full sun to
part-shade; red fruit
Texas Sabal Palm Sabal texana M Sun, slow growing, cold
hardy palm
Texas Smoke Tree Cotinus obovatus M Deciduous, mid-spring
purple to pink
Vitex, Chaste, False
Hemp Lavender
Vitex agnus-castus S-M Deciduous; purple, pink, or
white flower spikes
Wafer Ash, Hop Tree Ptelea trifoliata S Semi-evergreen; sunshade;
light green foliage
Western Soapberry Sapindus drummondii M-L Deciduous; full-part sun;
shade tree
Wild Olive Cordia boisserieri S-M Semi-evergreen; white
flowers, hardy to -14°F
Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria S-M Evergreen; sun-shade;
female has red fruit
SHRUBS - Large (not taller than twenty-five (25) feet at maturity)
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Bay Laurel nobilis 6'-12' Evergreen, sun-part sun,
fragrant leaves
Buckeye Aesculus pavia 6'-12' Deciduous (in dry
weather), shade,
yellow/red
California Fan Palm Washingtonia filifera 40' Fan-leaved, full sun
Evergreen Sumac Rhus virens 4'-15' Evergreen, sun-shade, red
fruit
Flameleaf Sumac Rhus lanceolota 5'-15' Sun-partial shade;
deciduous; fall color
Golden Ball Lead Tree Leucaena retusa 12'-15' Deciduous, part shade to
full sun, 1" globes
Lavender Tree Vitex agnus-castus 20' Sun, lavender blue flowers
Mexican Buckeye Ungnadia speciosa 8'-12' Deciduous, part shade to
full sun, bloom early
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/349
Oleander Nerium oleander 4'-20' Sun, white, yellow, pink,
salmon, red
Possumhaw Holly Ilex decidua 15' Deciduous, red or orange
fruit ripens
Rose of Sharon Hibiscus syriacus 15' Sun, partial shade, white,
pink, lavender
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum rufidulum 2'-15' Deciduous, leaves turn
red, purple, orange
Texas Persimmon Diospyros texana 10'-15' Deciduous, full sun, part
shade, black fruit
Texas Pistache Pistacia texana 6'-12' Semi-evergreen, sun
Windmill Palm Trachycarpus fortunei 10' Sun, partial shade, slow
growing, cold tolerant
SHRUBS - Medium (not taller than ten (10) feet at maturity)
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Agarita Mahonia trifoliata 5'-9' Holly-like evergreen
foliage; red berries
Burford Holly Ilex cornuta 6' Sun, partial shade,
evergreen
Cenizo, Texas Sage Leucophyllum sp. 5'-9' Dusty gray evergreen
foliage; sun, purple-pink
Chinese Horned Holly Ilex cornuta 5' Sun, red berry
Elbow Bush Forestiera pubescens 3'-6' Deciduous; sun-shade,
small white flowers
Eleagnus Eleagnus fruitlandi 6'-8' Sun, partial shade,
evergreen, grey-green
Forsythia Forsythia intermedia 5'-7' Deciduous, sun, partial
sun, brilliant yellow
Fragrant Sumac Rhus aromatica 3'-6' Deciduous; part shade, fall
color
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora 5'-9' Bronze evergreen foliage;
white or pink
Gold Star Esperanza Tecoma stans 4' Sun, overblooming tropical
shrub, golden
Green Pittosporum Pittosporum tobira 8' Sun, partial shade, flossy
foliage, white flowers
Hogplum Colubrina texensis 4'-6' Sun, partial shade,
fragrant blooms
Indian Hawthorne Raphiolepis indica 2'-10' Sun, partial shade, pink,
rose, white flowers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/349
Italian Jasmine Jasminum humile 4'-6' Small dark glossy green
leaves, yellow flowers
Juniper Juniperus sp. 5'-10' Tough evergreen; many
varieties; part shade
Mutablis/Butterfly Rose
Old Blush
Rosa chinensis x
(Mutablis)
3'-5' Sun, large single petal
flowers change color
Nandina Heavenly
Bamboo
Nandina domestica 6' Sun-partial shade, red,
orange, purple, berries
Pomegranate Punica granatum 5'-10' Sun, upright shrub; orange
blooms; dwarf
Primrose Jasmine Jasminum mesnyi 5'-8' Evergreen, sun-shade,
sprawling, yellow
Southern Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera 3'-8' Evergreen, sun-shade,
compact variety
Variegated Pittosporum Pittosporum tobira 10' Sun, partial shade, cluster
of fragrant white
White Brush Aloysia gratissima 4'-8' Delicate; fragrant white
flower, hedge
Winter Honeysuckle Lonicera fragrantissima 8'-10' Sun-partial shade,
fragrant, white flowers
SHRUBS - Small (not taller than five (5) feet at maturity)
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Agave Century Plant Agave americana 3'-5' Sun, rosette, spine-tipped
leaves
American Beautyberry Callicarpa americana 3-4' Deciduous, fruit in fall and
winter, purple
Barbados Cherry Malpighia glabra 2'-4' Evergreen, pink flowers,
red fruit, sun-shade
Barberry Berberis thunbergii
atropurpure
3'-5' Evergreen; sun-part shade,
color foliage
Bridal Wreath Spirea Spirea cantoniensis 2'-6' Sun-partial shade, white,
pink, red flowers
China Rose Chinensis sp. 2'-4' Sun, partial shade,
multicolor pink, white
Dwarf Palmetto Sabal minor 3'-5' Shady, evergreen, white
bloom clusters
Flame Acanthus Anisacanthus wrightii 3'-4' Deciduous, summer to
frost orange
Flowering Quince Chaenomeles japonica 3'-6' Deciduous, sun/part sun,
variety of pink, white
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora 6' Sun/part sun, evergreen,
white flowers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/349
Grayleaf Cotoneaster Cotoneaster
glaucophylla
3'-5' Sprawling evergreen; dusty
gray foliage
Juniper Juniperus sp. 2'-5' Evergreen shrubs; many
varieties available
Mexican Butterfly Weed Asclepias tuberosa 3' Broad clusters of orange
flowers
Mexican Oregano Poliomentha longiflora 2'-3' Evergreen, sun, pink
flowers
Red Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora 3'-4' Sun, rosette, narrow
leaves
Rock Rose Pavonia lasiopetala 2'-4' Deciduous; sub-shrub, pink
or purple flowers
Rosemary, Upright Rosmarinus officinalis 3'-5' Evergreen, sun-part shade;
blue flowers
Turk's Cap Malvaviscus
drummondii
4'-5' Sun or part sun, flowers
with bright red petals
White Boneset Eupatorium havense 1'-2' Deciduous, sun, partial
shade, pale pink
Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora 3'-4' Sun, rosette, narrow
leaves, white flowers
ANNUALS
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Mexican Sunflower Tithonia rotundifolia 3'-4' Sun, vivid scarlet orange
flowers
Moss Rose Portulaca grandiflora 1' Sun, red, pink, white,
yellow, orange flowers
Pentas Pentas lanceolata 1'-2' Part shade, full sun; pink,
violet, red flowers
Periwinkle Vinca minor 1' Shade, lavender blue
flowers
Purslane Portulaca oleracea 1' Sun, pink, lavender, white,
yellow
Zinnia Zinnia hybrida
‘Profusion'
1'-2' Sun, red, orange, pink,
yellow, white flowers
VINES
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Autumn Clematis Clematis sp. n/a Evergreen; fragrant white
fall; sun, part shade
Carolina Jessamine Gelsemium
sempervirens
n/a Evergreen; yellow spring;
sun, part shade
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/349
Confederate Jasmine Trachelospermum
jasminoides
n/a Evergreen; fragrant white
spring; sun
Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens n/a Almost evergreen; red
blooms
Coral Vine, Queen's
Wreath
Antigonon leptopus n/a Pink flowers in late
summer and fall; sun
Fig Ivy Ficus pumila (repens) n/a Evergreen; clings to walls;
sun, part shade
Improved Trumpet Vine Campsis radicans n/a Sun, partial sun, large
orange flowers
Lady Banks Rose Rosa banksiae n/a Sun, miniature yellow
double blooms
Mermaid Rose Rosa x Bractaeta n/a Sun, fragrant white
flowers, vigorous climber
Rosa x Fortuniana Rosa x Fortuniana n/a Sun, fragrant white
flowers, vigorous climber
Scarlet Clematis Clematis texana n/a Sun-partial shade, summer
blooms; red, pink
Silverlace Vine Polygonum ambertii n/a Fluffy masses of white;
sun, part shade
Virginia Creeper Parthenocissus
quinquefolia
n/a Deciduous, sun, partial
shade, fall color
GROUND COVER
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Asiatic Jasmine Trachelospermum
asiaticum
n/a Evergreen;
green/variegated foliage
Blue Shade Ruellia sp. n/a Deciduous, sun-part
shade, blue flowers
Confederate Jasmine Trachelospermum
jasminoides
n/a Evergreen; fragrant, white
spring flowers
English Ivy Hedera helix n/a Shade, climbs walls and
fences 15'-20'
Frogfruit Phyla incisa n/a Semi-evergreen, creeper,
sun-part sun
‘Katie' Ruellia Ruellia spp. n/a Evergreen, sun-shade,
rosette with purple/pink
Lantana purple, gold Lantana sp. n/a Deciduous, sun, purple,
white or yellow flowers
Liriope Liriope muscari 1'-2' Partial shade, green grasslike
foliage, flowers
Monkey Grass Ophiopogon japonicus n/a Shade, leaves are dark
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/349
green and grassy
Pigeonberry Rivina humilis n/a Semi-evergreen shrub
Rosemary, prostrate Rosmarinus officinalis n/a Evergreen sub-shrub, sun
to part sun, flowers
Santolina Santolina sp. n/a Species with green or
silver foliage; sun
Texas Columbine Aquilegia spp. 1'-2' Partial shade, blue gray
plant w/large flowers
Trailing Juniper Juniperus sp. n/a Not suitable for wet, humid
areas; sun
Verbena Verbena spp. n/a Sun, partial shade, pink,
white, red flowers
Vinca Vinca major n/a Sun, partial shade, rose,
pink, white flowers
GRASSES, TURF
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Bermuda Grass Cynodon dactylon n/a Excellent drought
tolerance; poor shade
Buffalograss Buchloe dactyloides 4"-6" Excellent drought tolerance
Prairie mix n/a 8"-12" Mixture of Texas native
bunch, wildflowers
Zoysia Zoysia sp. 2" Sun, limited shade,
drought tolerant
PERENNIALS
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Autumn Sage Salvia greggii 2'-3' White, red, pink, spring to
fall flowers; sun
Baby Sun Coreopsis grandiflora 1'-2' Partial sun, spring/summer
golden yellow
Bearded Iris Iris xiphioides 1'-2' Sun-partial sun, purple,
lavender, blue, red
Blackfoot Daisy Melampodium
leucanthum
1' Slight shade, low
spreading, white flowers
Blue Plumbago Plumbago auriculata 3' Sun, partial shade, blue,
summer to fall flowers
Bouncing Bet Sapinaria officinallis 1' Sun, partial shade, pink
flowers late spring
Butterfly Gaura Gaura lindheimeri 2'-3' Sun, partial shade, fragrant
white flowers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/349
Butterfly Weed Asclepias spp. 3' Semi-hardy perennial,
orange flowers
Cigar Plant Cuphea micropetala 3'-4' Red, yellow; summer to fall
flowers; sun
Daylily Hemerocallis sp. 1'-4' Sun-partial shade, yellow,
orange, red, purple
Fall Aster Aster spp. 2'-3' Semi-evergreen, sun-part
sun, blue or white
Firebush Hamelia patens 3'-5' Reddish orange; summer
to fall flowers; sun
Garden Canna Canna x Generalis 1'-3' Sun, partial sun, red,
orange, yellow, pink
Gayfeather Liatris sp. 2'-3' Sun, partial sun, floral
spikes, orchid-pink/white
Goldstrum (Blackeye
Susan)
Rudbeckia fulgida 1'-4' Golden-yellow daisy-like
flowers, brown bloom
Hinckley's Columbine Aquilegia hinckleyana 18" Yellow; spring flowers;
shade
Indian Blanket Gaillardia sp. 1' Sun, partial sun, red,
orange
Indigo Spires Sage Salvia spp. 2'-3' Semi-evergreen, sun, dark
blue flowers
Lantana Lantana sp. 1'-6' Many colors; spring to fall
flowers; sun
Louisiana Iris Iris spp. 1'-3' Sun, partial shade, large
yellow, white and red
Maximillian Sunflowers Helianthus maximilliani 4'-6' Sun, partial shade, yellow
flowers
Mealy Cup Sage Salvia farinacea 3' Sun, partial shade; blue,
white, purple flowers
Mexican Milkweed A. curassavica 1'-3' Sun, partial shade, twotoned
red flowers
Mexican Oregano Poliomentha longiflora 1'-3' Evergreen; pink; summer
flowers; sun
Mexican Petunia Ruellia sp. 1'-3' Evergreen; tolerates
shade; purple flowers
Mexican Sage Salvia leucantha 3'-4' Semi-evergreen; blue;
flowers; sun
Mist Flower Boneset Eupatorium spp. 2'-4' Hardy perennial, white to
blue flowers
Muhly Grass Muehlenbergia
lindheimeri
1'-3' Sun, partial shade,
feathery deep pink (fall)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/349
Pavonia, Rockrose Pavonia lasiopetala 2'-3' Sun, partial shade, pink
flowers
Perennial Verbena Verbena sp. 6"-1' Many colors; spring to fall
flowers; sun
Pigeonberry Rivina humilis 1'-2' Semi-evergreen shrub
Purple Cone Flower Echinacea purpurea 2' Sun, hardy perennial,
rosetta pink or white
Rain Lily Zephyranthes sp. 1' Sun, partial shade, yellow,
white, pink
Rock Rose Pavonia lasiopetala 2'-4' Deciduous; sub-shrub, pink
or purple flowers
Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis 1'-4' Sun, part shade; blue
flowers
Shrimp Plant Justicia spp. 1'-2' Hardy perennial, sun-part
sun; orange, red
Skullcap Scutellaria frutescens 1' Evergreen sub-shrub; pink
or purple flowers
Standing Cypress Ipomopsis rubra 2'-4' Sun, partial shade, red,
yellow spires
Sweet Violet Viola odorata 1' Sun, partial shade, purple,
deep blue violets
Texas Betony Stachys coccinea 1'-2' Evergreen, gray-green; red
tubular flowers
Texas Gold Columbine Aguilegia spp. 1'-3' Sun, partial shade, large,
yellow flowers
Tropical Sage Salvia coccinea 2'-3' Evergreen, red, pink
blooms; part shade/sun
Turk's Cap Malvaviscus
drummondii
1'-4' Shade; red flowers
White Rain Lily Zephyranthes candida 1' Ephemeral; sun, part
shade; white
Yarrow Achillea spp. 1'-3' Sun-partial shade, yellow,
white, red, pink
Zexmenia Wedelia hispida 1'-2' Sun-partial shade, orangeyellow
daisies
PALMS
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
California Fan Palm Washingtonia filifera 15'-60' Tree-like palm; sun.
Hybrids with robusta
Butia or Jelly Palm Butia capitata 10'-15' Feather palm with bluegreen
leaves; sun
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/349
Canary Island Date
Palm
Phoenix canariensis 40' Beautiful feather palm;
damaged cold winters
Dwarf Palmetto Sabal minor 3'-7' Trunkless, bushy palm;
sun, part shade
European Fan Palm Chamaerops humilis 6'-12' Tough, clumping fan palm
with spiny petioles
Mazari Palm Nannorrhops ritchiana 6'-25' Slow growing fan palm
with blue-green leaves
Mexican Blue Palm Brahea armata 12'-25' Fan palm with blue-green
leaves; sun
Needle Palm Rhapidophyllum hystrix 5'-6' Clumping shrub palm
foliage, sun/part shade
Silver Saw Palmetto Sorenoa repens 3'-6' Clumping low palm in both
blue and green
Texas Palmetto Sabal texana 10'-25' Tall, native Texas palm;
sun
Windmill Palm Trachycarpus fortunei 10'-35' Tree-like; sun; not a
canopy; good foundation
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES
Common Name Scientific Name Size Characteristics
Big Bluestem Andropogon gerardii 3'-8' Sun, partial shade, shape
flowering spikelets
Eastern Gamagrass Tripsacum dactyloides 2'-3' Dense, part shade/sun,
dormant in winter
Fountain Grass Pennisetum ruppelii 3'-5' Sun, densely clumped
growth form
Inland Seaoats Chasmanthium
latifolium
2'-3' Shade, dappled shade,
part shade
Little Bluestem Schixachyrium
scoparium
3' Sun, partial shade
Muhly Grass Muehlenbergia
lindheimeri
3' Evergreen, part shade, full
sun
Pampas Grass Cordaderia selloana 7' Coarse, full sun, makes
good border
Purple Fountain Grass Pennisetum setaceum 5' Delicate color accent; full
sun
Sideoats Grama Bouteloua curtipendula 2'-3' Dappled shade, part
shade, full sun
Switchgrass Panicum virgatum 3' Sun, partial shade, stands
out in tall grass
(1972 Code, ch. 30, app. A; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. A)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/349
APPENDIX B. STREET YARD AREA DIAGRAMS
DIAGRAM #1
DIAGRAM #2
DIAGRAM #3
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/349
DIAGRAM #4
(1972 Code, ch. 30, app. B; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. B)
APPENDIX C. SUSTAINABILITY, GATEWAY, AND COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL OVERLAY DISTRICT STANDARDS*
These standards and procedures are in addition to the current standards and procedures as written in article 15.02 of this chapter. Where there is a conflict, these
standards and procedures shall govern.
I. OVERLAY DISTRICTS - GENERAL
A. Definitions.
Access drive, major. Any privately owned on-site drive or lane intended to access the primary entrance to land parcels and parking areas, and which accommodates
autos or pedestrians. Such major access drive will likely intersect a major roadway at a median break, subject to the director's approval. This is not a public street, but
often serves as a shared access drive.
Big box. A building with a single-tenant that comprises more than 50,000 sf.
Commercial and industrial overlay (CIO). An overlay of existing zoning which modifies the base zoning as defined in this ordinance.
Director. Director of community development or designee such as the zoning administrator.
Facade, primary. Exterior walls of buildings and parking structures which are clearly visible from a public street, open space or active storefront.
Facade, secondary. Exterior walls of buildings and parking structures which are not clearly visible from a public street, open space or active storefront.
Gateway overlay (GO). An overlay of existing zoning which modifies the base zoning as defined in this ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/349
Improvement. Any interior or exterior improvement or renovation to an existing structure that requires a permit from the city.
Landmark buildings. Buildings which are located on axis with a terminating street or at the intersection of streets. Such buildings shall incorporate architectural features
which address height and articulation that emphasize the importance of such a location.
Live-work. A fee-simple dwelling unit that contains, to a limited extent, a separate retail or office component on the ground floor. It is in a form similar to a townhouse or
store with residential quarters above or behind the nonresidential use.
Loft. A flexible residential space which may be partially used for an artist or design studio, and which is characterized by higher than normal ceilings, open floor plans
and often, exposed duct work.
Mixed use building. A vertical mixed use building that includes a mix of retail and office and/or residential uses such as lofts, live-work units, apartments and
condominiums, but contains nonresidential use on the ground floor.
Regulating plan. A plan that is required as part of a multi-phased development which ensures that access and amenities are provided in a consistent and comprehensive
manner.
Site plan. A detailed set of plans including such things as building footprints, parking, landscaping, building elevations and exterior building materials.
Stoop. A structure that is located approximately at the level of the first floor of the structure and intended to provide access to a residential unit.
Streetscape. The urban element that establishes the major part of the public realm. The streetscape is composed of thoroughfares (travel lanes for vehicles and
bicycles, parking lanes for cars, and sidewalks or paths for pedestrians) as well as the visible private frontages (building facades and elevations, porches, yards, fences,
awnings, etc.), and the amenities of the public frontages (street trees and plantings, benches, streetlights, etc.).
Sustainability overlay (SO). An overlay of existing zoning which modifies the base zoning as defined in this ordinance.
Townhouse. An attached dwelling unit located on a platted lot which shares at least one common or abutting wall with another such unit. Townhouses are grouped
together in clusters of 3 to 6 units and shall have rear entry garages.
Urban tree. A tree species specifically selected for its ability to withstand harsh urban conditions, its upright branching habit, and its non-invasive root system. All
required urban trees shall be:
i. At least 3-inch caliper
ii. Single trunk
iii. “Limbed up” to 6 feet
Urban trees shall utilize plants from the city's approved plant list. Tree wells for urban trees shall be a minimum of 20 square feet in size with a minimum 4 feet in width.
B. Administration/procedures.
1. Intent. It is the intent of this code to offset the high level of detailed standards in this code with an expeditious approval of projects which meet its general goals and
intent, and:
a. To ensure adequate linkages and connections within and between project areas, and
b. To ensure consistency and quality of design to enhance the livability and image of the city.
2. Review process. The director shall have staff administrative jurisdiction over any processes authorized under this code. The director shall be expeditious in
reviewing and advancing the permitting process by undertaking any action consistent with this code, state law, and the city charter to facilitate the permitting process.
3. Site plan.
a. Prior to applying for a building permit, a site plan must be approved by the director, demonstrating that the proposal meets the goals, intent and general
standards contained in these design standards.
b. A site plan application must include the following information and documents that demonstrate compliance with the city's Code of Ordinances:
i. Completed application with proposed uses
ii. Detailed site plan showing proposed streets, buildings, parking areas, access easements and other pertinent site features
iii. Landscape plan
iv. Building elevations
v. Lighting plan
vi. Preliminary civil plans
vii. Review fee
c. An application for a site plan shall be processed in accordance with the city's procedures for determining whether an application is complete. Following a
determination of completeness, the director shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application for a site plan and shall notify the applicant of the
decision.
d. Denial or conditional approval of a site plan by the director may be initially appealed to the zoning commission and, following the recommendation of the
commission, to the city council. The appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the director's action on the application for approval of a site plan.
e. The director in making an initial decision on a site plan application, the zoning commission in making recommendations to the city council, or the city
council in deciding the application for site plan approval, shall determine whether the plan is consistent with the regulating plan for the property (if there is
one), and meets the goals, intent and standards of the city's Code of Ordinances.
4. Regulating plan.
a. Intent. The intent of a regulating plan is to ensure that access both within and to adjacent parcels of land will function properly and be ensured. It is also
intended to ensure a comprehensive provision of amenities as the overall project develops out.
b. Regulating plans shall be required of multi-phased projects of 5 acres or more or which involve subdivision into smaller parcels.
5. Amendments.
a. Amendments to an approved site plan may be accomplished in the same manner as approval of the original site plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/349
b. An amendment to an approved site plan must be made prior to the time for lapse of approval provided below. In the event an amended plan is approved,
the approving authority amending the plan shall specify the time for lapse of such approval, consistent with below.
6. Lapse of approval. If a building permit has not been obtained within one (1) year following approval of a site plan approval, such plan shall lapse unless the property
owner requests an extension prior to the expiration of the one-year period. The request for extension shall be considered by the zoning commission. The authority may
grant an extension of the time for expiration of the plan for a period not to exceed one (1) year from the original expiration date of the application approval.
Every request for extension shall include a statement of the reasons why the expiration date should be extended. The approving authority may grant a request for
extension upon demonstration that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have resulted in the applicant's inability to perform the tasks necessary to prevent
the site plan from expiring before the lapse date.
C. Specific use permit process.
1. Intent. The intent of the specific use permit process is to establish guidelines to review certain uses in the overlay districts that have external impacts and on
surrounding areas. These standards and procedures shall be in addition to the procedures outlined in article 15.02, division 12 of the zoning ordinance.
2. No specific use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner, and grantee of the specific use permit shall accept, agree to be bound by, and comply with the
terms of the specific use permit in writing and in such form as may be approved or provided by the zoning administrator (see article 15.02, division 12).
3. In addition to any condition identified by the city council that the applicant, owner, and grantee must comply with, the zoning commission and city council shall
consider the following criteria in determining the validity of the specific use permit in the overlay standards:
a. The application is complete and information contained within the application is sufficient and correct enough to allow adequate review and final action.
b. The application illustrates conformance with the vision of Leon Valley and purpose and intent of these overlay district standards.
c. Structures should orient to public streets.
d. The extent that connectivity among proposed and existing rights-of-way is demonstrated.
e. The extent to which uses, such as freestanding pad sites, are clustered at or around focal points within a development and relate to other components of
the overall development. Such focal points may include, but are not limited to retention systems, greenways, dedicated hike/bike facilities, plazas, parks or
other features that create a gathering place.
f. The application illustrates compliance with the requirements and guidelines of these overlay district standards.
g. The application exhibits compatibility of the design with surrounding properties and development patterns.
h. The application exhibits compatibility and coordination between the character of the streetscape and the planned surrounding built environment.
i. The application exhibits no substantial negative impacts on the historic, cultural or architectural nature of the site or surrounding area, or successfully
mitigates such impacts.
j. In addition to screening along streetscape zones and screening of parking areas, as well as screening requirements stated in article 3.05 of the zoning
ordinance [article 3.05 of the Code of Ordinances], certain activities associated with any business or use requiring an SUP, as identified by the zoning
commission or city council, must be screened from view from adjacent public streets, rights-of-way or major private access drives. Development features to
be screened may include but are not limited to automotive repair, installation, or services, vehicle storage, vacuum areas, car wash and drying areas, storage,
and other activity(ies) considered to have external impacts on the surrounding area by the zoning commission or the city council. This does not include
parking areas, which will follow the standards in section I-D [I.E] of these overlay district standards. Specific screening requirements include one or a
combination of the following:
i. Dense and continuous landscaping to a minimum height of four (4) feet, along with ornamental or shade trees spaced no further than fifteen (15)
feet apart to provide partial vertical screening; (or),
ii. A combination of a wall and landscaping. The screening wall must be located adjacent to the activity area, shall be constructed of masonry material
and be between a minimum height of three (3) feet and a maximum of four (4) feet above the grade of the activity area. Adjacent landscaping shall
consist of grasses and shrubs that are capable of reaching a height of three (3) feet within 2 years of planting. Vertical trees shall be included every
fifteen (15) feet adjacent to the wall;
iii. Utilization of the primary building to screen outdoor activities. To the extent possible, the primary building should be oriented toward the street, and
outdoor business activities shall be placed behind the building. This option shall not replace the landscaping requirements of section I-D [I.E] of these
overlay district standards.
D. Structural nonconformity.
1. Intent. It is the intent to allow nonconforming structures to be expanded and to bring properties into conformity in proportion to the amount of work being done.
2. All new developments and improvements to existing buildings must comply with these overlay district standards.
3. Where improvements equal less than 51%, streetscape, screening of parking, and building color requirements of these overlay district standards (including
standards of this section as well as standards of the applicable overlay district) shall be brought into conformity.
a. At no time, however, shall an individual, business, or corporation be required to expend more than ten percent (10%) of the overall renovation
construction costs to comply with the streetscape, screening of parking, or building color requirements of these overlay district standards.
4. Where improvements equal 51% or more of the value of existing improvements or 51% or more of the building area, then all zoning requirements for setback,
height, building materials, color, landscaping, parking and signs shall be brought into conformity with current regulations. The 51% requirement shall be cumulative over
any 5-year period.
5. Any expansion of a building must be contiguous and meet current zoning requirements for setback, height, building materials, color, landscaping and parking.
E. Landscaping.
The following supplements and modifies existing landscape standards that apply to the Sustainability and Gateway Overlay Districts:
1. Streetscape and landscape.
a. Intent. It is the intent to both require and encourage streetscape and landscaping that reinforces the desired character for Leon Valley. It is also the intent
to create comfortable pedestrian environments by shading sidewalks, parking areas and drive lanes.
In addition, it is the intent of this section to:
i. Recognize the particular characteristics, qualities and beauty of Leon Valley
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/349
ii. Provide the city with a unique and identifiable streetscape corridor
iii. Contribute to pedestrian safety and comfort
iv. Reduce the negative effects of solar heat gain in paved and hard surface areas
v. Reduce glare, erosion, noise and sedimentation caused by expanses of impervious, non-vegetated surfaces.
b. Streetscape standards.
i. A large canopy tree is required along all public street rights-of-way for each 30 linear feet.
a) For properties improving existing buildings with improvements that are less than 51% of the value of the existing improvement, only those
streets on which the improved building fronts shall be improved with street trees.
b) For all new developments, or redevelopments with improvements equal to 51% or more of the value of the existing improvement or 51% or
more of the building area, then streetscaping requirements along all streets are required, regardless of building location.
ii. In retail developments of 5,000 sf or more, an urban tree is required for each 25' with a minimum ten (10) foot wide sidewalk along active
storefronts and mixed use building fronts.
iii. An urban tree is required along major access drives for each 30 linear feet within the development where reasonable, subject to review and
approval by the director.
iv. All benches, bollards, lampposts, trash receptacles, patio furniture, bicycle racks and other streetscape elements shall be constructed of a chip and
flake resistant metal and generally black or dark gray-green in color.
c. Landscape standards.
i. Parking landscape requirements.
a) A minimum of ten percent of the gross vehicular use area (parking and drive lanes) shall be devoted to living landscaping which includes
grasses, ground cover, plants, shrubs and trees.
b) There shall be a minimum of one shade tree planted for each 400 square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscape area.
c) Planting islands shall not be spaced greater then every 12 spaces unless approved in the landscape plan in order to preserve existing trees
and natural features or due to unique site conditions.
d) Hardscape enhancements, where required, should utilize stone accents where appropriate.
e) One small ornamental tree or large shrub is required for every 5 large canopy trees.
f) An urban tree is required along internal pedestrian connections for each 25 linear feet.
ii. Screening of parking. Where on-site parking is located adjacent to a street, roadway or public open space, a minimum ten-foot (10') landscape
buffer is required between the property lines and any parking, paving, or internal driveways. Driveway openings are permitted in the landscape buffer
area. The area of the landscaped buffer may be included in the total required landscape area for the lot.
a) Location. The landscaped buffer requirement shall apply to all sides of the lot adjacent to a public street, open space, or right-of-way.
b) Screen. The screening shall be between a minimum height of three (3) feet and a maximum of four (4) feet above the grade of the parking lot
and located adjacent to the parking lot. Screening shall be opaque and consist of shrubs and/or berms.
c) Materials. Shrubs or grasses shall be capable of reaching a height of three (3) feet within 2 years of planting, and shall generally be planted
no more than thirty-six (36) inches on center (depending on the species). Earth berms shall not be steeper than 3:1 except where one side is a
stacked or stepped masonry wall. Screening walls shall be masonry.
iii. Landscape point system.
a) Landscape plans must include a minimum number of amenity items listed below in order to obtain approval. Landscape points are
determined by the size of the pre-subdivided lot being developed.
Site Size Minimum Number of Items
Required
3 acres or less 6
Greater than 3 acres 8
b) The following is a list of landscape elements, each representing one point, subject to review and approval by the director:
1. Enhanced entranceway paving (using stone or architectural concrete pavers, or colored-stamped concrete).
2. Enhanced hardscape (stamped crosswalks, decorative stone or architectural concrete paver walkways, meandering sidewalks, etc.).
3. Enhanced landscaping (within development and at the entranceways of the development).
4. Enhanced site canopy (planting perimeter trees one per 30 feet and locating a parking island every 10 spaces).
5. Enhanced streetscape elements (i.e. decorative lampposts, benches, receptacles, bike racks, decorative bollards, etc.).
6. Landscaped open space provision greater than what is required (20 to 30% over requirement).
7. Buffer berms (providing three (3) foot high berms along the street frontage) for properties fronting on Bandera.
8. Public art (obelisks, sculptures, statues, clock towers, water fountains, etc.): Small: 1; Large: 2.
9. Use of shaded and decorative outdoor seating areas (benches, outdoor dining, etc.).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/349
10. Use of masonry planters with irrigation (minimum 4 feet in width).
11. Foundation plantings along 75% of the building's primary facade (for non-retail frontages) a minimum of 5 feet in width.
12. Decorative entrance including a landscaped median entry which is a minimum 8 (eight) feet in width and 60 (sixty) feet long.
13. Other (a developer may propose a non-listed landscape element if it meets the spirit and intent of the ordinance, subject to review and
approval by the director).
c) The developer may use any combination of the aforementioned landscape elements to obtain the necessary number of points required for the
development. Different lots and landscapes will lend themselves to different types of designs. These regulations attempt to encourage creativity,
diversity, and water conservation in landscaping.
d) Elements, both in terms of quantity and quality, should be in scale with the development, as determined by the director. Excessive
compliance with an element can be awarded extra points, as determined by the director.
iv. Perimeter landscape requirement adjacent to residential. Perimeter landscape areas shall contain at least one large canopy tree for each 30 feet
when adjacent to residential zoned properties or residential uses.
v. Required landscaping. All required landscaping shall utilize plants from the city's approved plant list and be irrigated as required by the city. All
required plantings shall be maintained in a healthy condition, and replaced if not.
vi. Townhouse frontages shall be required to landscape a minimum of six (6) feet between the edge of sidewalk and the primary building facade,
excluding access to sidewalks, stairs, stoops, porches and patios. This area shall be landscaped with ground cover, low shrubs, and a large canopy tree
or ornamental tree.
2. Open space and landscaping for mixed-use buildings. On mixed use building developments where residential is included, a green, square or plaza shall be
provided and approved as part of the site plan.
a. A minimum area equal to 15% of a mixed use building's footprint shall be provided as open space. This may be counted as part of the required
landscape area.
b. At least one large canopy tree shall be provided for each 1,600 sf of area in open space. Four hundred square feet of shade structure may replace the
requirement for a shade tree.
F. Performance standards.
1. Lighting intent. It is the intent of this section to provide a level and consistency of lighting that supports pedestrian activity and promotes safety.
2. Standards.
a. Lighting levels within project areas should not exceed 20 footcandles (fc) in any one spot and should generally maintain the following:
i. Urban residential 3 fc avg 10 fc max 1 fc min
ii. Retail 6 fc avg 15 fc max 1 fc min
iii. Parking areas 1.5 fc avg 10 fc max 0.5 fc min
G. Signs.
1. Intent. These standards are primarily for new projects and reflect the reduced need for large extensive signage that has resulted in the past from buildings that were
constructed towards the rear of the site with large setbacks from the street.
The intent of this section is to establish architectural controls, limit clutter and regulate commercial and locational signage. It is also intended to help enliven retail and
restaurant mixed-use areas.
While it is the intent to allow for ongoing regular maintenance of existing nonconforming signs based on existing sign ordinance regulations for nonconforming signs
(section 3.04.007), generally, sign improvements should not significantly prolong the life of a nonconforming sign.
2. Proposed additions and changes to current standards.
a. Freestanding signs.
i. All freestanding business or development identification signs must be monument signs, except adjacent to Loop 410 and the flyover.
b. Monument signs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/349
i. A maximum of 7 feet in height and a total structure size of 98 sf.
ii. The maximum sign face area shall be 60 sf.
iii. Signs shall have a minimum one-foot masonry base measured from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign.
iv. Signs shall have a minimum 6-inch border on each side and the top.
v. Building materials and colors utilized for construction of monument bases, side borders, caps, and sign frames shall be constructed of the same
materials found on the main building on the lot, unless otherwise approved by the city council.
c. Pole signs.
i. Pole signs shall only be permitted on properties immediately adjacent to, and fronting, Loop 410 and the flyover.
ii. Maximum height and sign area shall be as follows:
Height Sign Area
Single 45 ft. 300
Dual 45 ft. 375
Multiple 50 ft.* 500
*An additional 10 feet of overall height may be added if the elevation of the adjacent roadway grade is determined to cause particular visibility
problems.
iii. One freestanding sign shall be permitted on each street frontage, as follows:
a) Less than 250 feet of frontage: One (1) sign.
b) 250 feet or more of frontage: One (1) sign per 200 feet of frontage when approved by a master sign plan.
iv. No off-site advertising shall be allowed.
v. Landscape buffer. Unless an alternate method of providing traffic and pedestrian safety is approved through the master sign plan, each
freestanding sign shall be placed within a landscaped area extending a minimum four (4) feet from the sign in each direction. Such measurements shall
begin at the sign base or at the edge of any overhang within 20 feet of the ground, whichever requires the greater barrier. Xeriscaping is encouraged.
d. Wall signs.
i. A maximum of 1.5 square feet of wall sign shall be allowed for each one (1) linear foot of primary building face.
ii. A minimum 10-foot distance shall be provided between wall signs (excluding building identification sign or directory sign).
e. Projecting and hanging signs, including graphic or icon signs, mounted perpendicularly to the wall.
i. A maximum of one per occupancy per building face.
ii. A maximum area of 6 square feet per face; and a maximum of three feet in width.
iii. Distance from the sidewalk to the lower edge of the sign shall be 7.5 feet or greater.
iv. Minimum fifteen-foot distance between signs.
v. The height of the top edge of the signboard shall not exceed the wall from which the sign projects, if attached to a single-story building; or the
height of the sill or bottom of any second-story window, if attached to a multi-story building.
f. Window signs.
i. The sign shall not exceed 10 percent of the cumulative window area.
ii. Neon signs are allowed behind windows in retail areas, but shall count toward the total window sign area.
g. Awning signs.
i. 1 per occupancy per building face.
ii. Minimum 8 feet above sidewalk level for pedestrian clearance.
iii. Ten square feet maximum sign area.
iv. If acting as an auxiliary business sign, it shall be located on the valance only, and the height of the lettering shall not exceed 4 inches.
v. If acting as the main business sign, it shall not be in addition to a wall-mounted sign.
vi. Awning signs shall be flush with the surface of the awning, and shall not project beyond any edge of the awning.
h. Restaurants and cafes.
i. A wall-mounted display featuring the actual menu as used at the dining table, to be contained within a shallow wood or metal case, and clearly
visible through a glass front.
ii. The display case shall be attached to the building wall, next to the main entrance, at a height of approximately five feet.
iii. The display case shall not exceed a total area of five square feet, and may be lighted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/349
i. Building directory signs.
i. One per building entrance.
ii. The sign shall be located next to the building entrance.
iii. The sign shall project out from the wall to which it is attached no more than 6 inches.
iv. Maximum size shall be eight square feet.
j. Prohibited signs.
i. Roof signs.
ii. Pole signs not located adjacent to Loop 410 and the flyover.
iii. Animated, moving, flashing, blinking, reflecting, revolving, or any similar signs, except time/temperature devices and barbershops.
iv. Electronic reader board signs, except time/temperature devices.
k. Sign variance procedures. Sign variance requests must follow the regulations specified in the Code of Ordinances, chapter 3 “Building Regulations,”
article 3.04, “Signs,” section 3.04.008, “Variances and appeals.”
3. Building colors.
a. Buildings which are painted bright and distinctive colors shall be interpreted as signage and prohibited.
b. The planning director may refer any interpretation of color to the city council for final determination.
(Ordinance 10-049 adopted 11/16/10; Ordinance 10-020 adopted 5/18/10; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. C, sec. I)
II. STANDARDS FOR SUSTAINABILITY OVERLAY
A. Intent.
The intent of these standards is to
1. Create an identity for Leon Valley to distinguish it from surrounding communities
2. Stabilize and strengthen property values over the long term
3. Attract new residents and businesses that will invest and reinvest in properties
4. Increase the quality of development
5. Strengthen and clarify existing zoning ordinance provisions for nonresidential design standards.
6. Make the community more sustainable for future generations through
a. Providing for Integrated mixed use.
b. Embodying LEED-ND (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design - Neighborhood Development) principles, and
c. Assuring pedestrian and bicycle friendliness.
B. Land use.
1. Intent. It is intended that allowed uses will encourage pedestrian-oriented mixed use projects that are well integrated with retail and residential activities.
2. Residential uses in the form of townhouses are allowed up to 50% of the site area and shall abide by the townhouse district standards and the standards in this
ordinance. However, at least 50% of the retail must be constructed prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy for the residential component.
3. Residential uses above nonresidential uses at-grade shall be permitted by right and defined as a mixed use building. Lobbies to upper stories may be located at
grade level.
4. General standards. Approval of a specific use permit, landscaping requirements, sign standards, performance standards, and requirements for nonconforming
structures shall follow the procedures established by the zoning ordinance as well as procedures and standards outlined in section I, Overlay Standards - General of
these overlay district standards.
C. Building height and site area regulations.
1. Intent. The intent of the height and area regulations is to convey a stronger sense of community by bringing buildings closer to the street.
2. Building height.
a. Buildings shall not exceed 50 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less, unless it qualifies as a landmark building, in which case the landmark feature may be
up to 25% greater than the remainder of the building height as approved by the director.
b. However, buildings on properties abutting Bandera and Grissom may be constructed up to 4 stories or 60 feet.
c. Portions of any buildings within 100 feet of a single-family zoned residential lot may not exceed 45 feet in height or 2.5 stories.
3. Minimum lot size. One acre unless otherwise approved through the site plan.
4. Front yard. Minimum front yard shall be 6 feet and a maximum setback of 100 feet (which would allow for one full bay of parking).
5. Rear yard. Minimum 6 feet, or 30 feet when abutting residentially zoned land.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/349
D. Building orientation.
1. Intent. It is intended that buildings have direct orientation to the street.
2. Facades shall generally be built parallel to the street or major access drive frontage, except at street intersections, where a facade containing a primary building
entrance may be curved or angled toward an intersection.
E. Cross-access drives.
1. Intent. It is the intent that access ways will facilitate the movement of pedestrians and autos in an attractive environment, and that blocks ensure cross-access to
adjacent non-single-family zoned sites.
2. Cross-access. All nonresidential lots must provide cross-access to adjoining nonresidential lots.
F. Automobile parking.
1. Intent. The following is the intent of the city's parking policies and these design standards for the Sustainability Overlay District:
a. Minimize paved surfaces which increase runoff, ambient temperature and construction costs.
b. Support the creation of shared parking in order to enable visitors to park once at a convenient location and to access a variety of nonresidential
enterprises in a pedestrian and bicycle-friendly environment.
c. Manage parking so that it is convenient and efficient, and supports an active and vibrant retail environment.
d. Ensure ease of access to parking.
e. Provide flexibility for changes in land uses which have different parking requirements within the district.
f. Provide flexibility for the redevelopment of small sites.
g. Avoid diffused, inefficient single-purpose reserved parking.
h. Avoid adverse parking impacts on residential neighborhoods.
2. Parking requirements.
a. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with this subsection.
b. Off-street parking spaces for the applicable use classification shall meet the city's current standards.
c. Where parking exceeds the minimum spaces required by more than 10% or more than 1 full bay of parking is located between a building and a public
street, landscaping of parking areas shall be increased to the following standards between the building and the public street:
i. A minimum of twelve percent of the gross vehicular use area shall be devoted to living landscaping which includes grasses, ground cover, plants,
shrubs and trees.
ii. There shall be a minimum of one shade tree planted for each 300 square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscape area.
iii. Planting islands shall not be spaced greater then every 10 spaces unless approved in the landscape plan in order to preserve existing trees and
natural features or due to unique site conditions.
d. Parking reduction. Provided there is a shared access and joint use agreement with an adjacent property, parking may be reduced by up to 15% of the
total requirement.
G. Bicycle parking.
1. Goals. Bicycle parking is required in order to encourage the use of bicycles by providing safe and convenient places to park bicycles.
2. Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided based on at least one (1) bike rack for each development or one (1) bike rack for each 25 car parking spaces
required, whichever is greater, unless otherwise approved by the director. Bicycle racks shall accommodate a minimum of two bicycles per rack. No more than 10 bicycle
racks shall be required per development.
3. Bicycle parking standards.
a. Location.
i. Required bicycle parking should be located within 50 feet of an entrance to the building.
ii. Bicycle parking may be provided within a building, but the location must be easily accessible to bicycles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/349
H. Supplementary architectural regulations.
1. Intent. The intent of this subsection is to create buildings which reflect the desired Leon Valley character of being a sustainable and attractive city as stated above. It
is also intended that nonresidential buildings are constructed in a manner that allows flexibility to accommodate a range of uses over time in order to avoid the need to
demolish and rebuild for successive uses. The size, disposition and design of buildings play an important role in achieving that goal. This includes encouraging the
following:
a. Landmark elements such as enhanced open spaces and building features.
b. Buildings which directly contribute to the attractiveness, safety and function of the street and public areas.
c. Buildings which are constructed in a manner, and with materials, that are highly durable and will continue to endure and be attractive over a long time,
especially adjacent to public and pedestrian areas.
It is intended by this section, to encourage a variety of building and design solutions in response to the standards and regulations outlined herein.
2. Building standards - Nonresidential and mixed use.
a. Building form.
i. All buildings shall be designed and constructed in tri-partite architecture so that they have a distinct base, middle and top.
Examples of Single Story Tri-Partite
ii. Buildings which are located on axis with a terminating street or access drive or at the intersection of streets and/or major access drives shall be
considered a landmark building. Such buildings shall be designed with landmark features which take advantage of that location, such as an accentuated
entry and a unique building articulation which is offset from the front wall planes and goes above the main building eave or parapet line.
iii. Building articulation. One- and two-story facades visible from a public street, drive or open space shall meet the following minimum standards for
articulation. Articulation for buildings 3 or more stories in height shall be required for the primary entries and the building's main corners.
Horizontal articulation. No building wall shall extend for a distance equal to 3 times the wall's height without having an offset equal to
25% of the wall's height, and that new plane shall extend for a distance equal to at least 25% of the maximum length of the first plane.
Vertical articulation. No horizontal wall shall extend for a distance greater than 3 times the height of the wall without changing height by
a minimum of 25% of the wall's height. Pitched roofs shall count toward achieving vertical articulation, provided they are 65 degrees or
less from horizontal.
Building Articulation Examples
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/349
3. Architectural features.
a. Where clearly visible from a public street, open space or major access drive:
i. Roofs. For buildings with hip, gable or mansard roofs, allowed materials include metal standing seam, slate, clay or concrete tile (barrel or Roman
shape).
ii. Windows, except for retail at-grade, shall be vertical in proportion and have at least a 3-inch reveal. Vertically proportioned windows which are
joined together by a mullion shall be considered as meeting this standard.
b. Architectural point system. All structures shall be designed to incorporate no less than four of the architectural elements from the list below. Buildings
over 50,000 square feet must include a minimum of five of the referenced architectural elements.
i. Canopies, awnings, porticos with colonnade, or arcades for at least 70% of the front facade;
ii. Raised pilasters or quoined corners;
iii. Vertical elements (landmark feature as defined in this code);
iv. Windows and doors framed with stone, cast stone, limestone, or other decorative masonry headers and sills;
v. Outdoor patios and/or courtyards (landscaped and furnished);
vi. Decorative ornamentation integrated into the building facade, such as corbels, medallions (non-signage), functioning clocks, niches, wrought iron,
balconettes or horizontal and rhythm patterned brickwork; or other architectural features approved by the director.
vii. Rainwater harvesting system for on-site use.
c. Exterior facade materials.
i. Allowed exterior materials. Allowed exterior surface materials are categorized into three groups:
Group A. Brick, stone and exterior grade stucco applied in a three-step process. At least 10% of any primary facade shall contain brick
or stone.
Group B. Stucco, architectural concrete block with integrated color, factory primed cementitious fiberboard (in the form of lap siding or
board and batten), colored or stamped tilt-wall, EIFS (above 14 feet from grade only). Cementitious fiberboard is limited to 20% of any
facade.
Group C - Accent. Metal, EIFS, wood.
ii. Prohibited exterior materials. Prohibited exterior surface materials include metal building panels, cinderblock and aggregate finished surfaces.
iii. Primary facades. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings which are clearly visible from a public street, open space, or active
storefront:
a) Primary facades, excluding windows, doors, and other openings, shall be constructed of at least 80% Group A materials and up to 20%
Group B materials. However, accent materials from Group C may be allowed in limited application for architectural features.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/349
iv. Secondary facades. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings which are not clearly visible from a public street, open space or active
storefront, or are constructed on a property line as one of a series of in-line buildings where the wall will become part of a common wall:
a) Walls, excluding windows, doors, and other openings, shall be constructed of a minimum of 20% Group A materials and up to 80% Group B
materials. However, the color of the walls shall match the primary facades.
b) Wrapping the primary facade treatment. Secondary facades which are adjacent to the primary facade shall contain the primary facade
treatment for at least 10% of its area. This may occur as a simple continuation of the primary facade treatment, or elements such as cornices,
bases and vertical elements. In all cases, however, wall surface materials shall wrap the corner, except when located on a common property line.
v. At least two materials shall be used on all exterior facades.
vi. Windows and glazing shall be limited to a minimum of 30% and maximum of seventy percent (70%) of each building elevation facing a street,
major access drive or side yard greater than 10 feet. This does not apply to big boxes or industrial buildings. (See [subsection] 6.b below for special
requirements for retail at-grade.)
vii. Color.
a) The dominant color of all buildings shall be muted shades of color. Black shall not be used except as an accent color.
There are no restrictions on accent colors which comprise less than 1.0% of the building face, except that bright and florescent colors
are prohibited.
b) Roof colors shall be a muted shade of cool gray, warm gray, brown or red.
c) The planning director may refer the interpretation of appropriate colors to city council.
4. Townhouse district standards.
a. All townhouse developments within the overlay are subject to site plan review and approval by director. The site plan shall show the typical layout of the
townhouse lot and an overall layout of the development.
b. All townhouse developments shall provide rear entry off-street parking with a minimum 2-car garage. Alleys servicing these developments shall be a
minimum 20 feet in width.
c. Open space.
i. 10% of the total townhouse development shall be dedicated as usable open space. This area shall be platted as common area; open space must
be usable and serve as an amenity for residents.
ii. Open space shall contain at least 1 large canopy tree and 1 small ornamental tree for each 5,000 square feet of required open space. The location
of open space should endeavor to preserve existing trees.
d. The maximum height of townhouses shall be at least 2 stories but may not exceed three stories or 50' whichever is less.
e. Streets adjacent to townhouses shall have a minimum 62-foot right-of-way or public access driveway. All townhouses shall be platted on individual lots
and require public street frontage, but cannot have double street frontage.
f. Parallel parking shall be provided along the curb in the right-of-way.
g. The front building setback shall be a minimum of 6 feet and a maximum of 15 feet.
h. Three zones between back of curb and the building line:
i. Streetscape zone (1) - a minimum 4-foot wide area adjacent to the back-of-curb for urban trees, street furniture plus a 1-foot dismount strip. An
urban tree in a tree well shall be provided for each 25 linear feet in the streetscape zone. For each 2 urban trees, a bike rack, trash receptacle, bench,
pedestrian streetlights, or other approved street furniture is required.
ii. Sidewalk zone (2) - a minimum 6-foot wide clear sidewalk;
iii. Landscape zone (3) - a minimum 6-foot landscape/patio area adjacent to the building. In order to differentiate the different zones (public v. private)
of the sidewalk and the townhouse, a 3' high wrought iron, masonry, or cast stone fence may be constructed. Balcony and patio railings and fences shall
be largely transparent and constructed of tempered glass, wrought iron or metal. Masonry columns may be used on patios provided that they are used
as accents. Wood fences and railings and chain-link fencing are prohibited for balconies and patios.
i. All buildings which have residential unit floor plates within 6 feet of grade shall include a primary front door entrance into the unit which may be accessed
from the sidewalk.
j. The front door entry shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet above the sidewalk elevation and include a minimum 24 sf stoop. If pre-empted by
topographic conditions, the entry may be lowered in elevation, subject to approval of the director. However, up to 50% of units [may be] built at grade for ADA
accessibility from the sidewalk provided there is a metal fence (in the form of metal tubing or wrought iron) separating the private area from the public
sidewalk area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/349
k. A 20' rear building setback shall be applied from the alley right-of-way which includes a 5-foot fence setback with an urban tree for each property.
l. The minimum side yard is 5' between groups of 3 to 6 townhouses; side yard at corner shall be the same as for a front yard, and requires all 3 zones.
m. The minimum lot width is 25'. Lot depth is a minimum of 100'.
n. The maximum block length should not exceed 400 feet.
o. A 10' wide rear landscape buffer shall be provided and shall contain one (1) tree for each 30 linear feet.
p. Units must also include windows which provide residents a view of the street or public access easement and sidewalk area.
5. Residential at-grade. In developments that contain residential at-grade, the front door entry shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet above the sidewalk elevation
and include a minimum 24 sf stoop. If pre-empted by topographic conditions, the entry may be lowered in elevation, subject to approval of the director. However, up to
50% of units [may be] built at grade for ADA accessibility from the sidewalk provided there is a metal fence (in the form of metal tubing or wrought iron) separating the
private area from the public sidewalk area. (See diagram in townhouse standards above.)
6. Retail and mixed use building standards.
a. The ground floor entry must be located at the approximate elevation of the adjacent sidewalk and should be inset by at least 4 feet.
b. Retail uses adjacent to the sidewalk at-grade shall:
i. Be constructed to meet fire code separation from any other uses constructed above;
ii. Have a minimum clear height of 14 feet between finished floor and the bottom of the structure above. Mezzanines within the retail space shall be
allowed per building code;
iii. Have an awning or canopy which extends at least 6 feet over the sidewalk for at least 75% of the frontage on any portion of a building. Such
awning or canopy shall maintain a minimum 7.5-foot clearance over the sidewalk; and
iv. Have highly transparent glass windows for at least 60%, but no greater than 80%, of the ground floor facade. The ground floor shall be excluded
from the minimum and maximum window requirement above.
c. Two zones between back of curb and the building line:
i. Streetscape zone (1) - a minimum 4-foot wide area adjacent to the back-of-curb for urban trees, street furniture plus a 1-foot dismount strip. An
urban tree in a tree well shall be provided for each 25 linear feet in the streetscape zone. For each 3 urban trees along a sidewalk, a bike rack, trash
receptacle, bench, lighted bollard, or other approved street furniture should be provided.
ii. Sidewalk zone (2) - a minimum 10' wide sidewalk. The sidewalk zone may be encroached by a 3' high fenced patio area for dining, as long as a
minimum 6-foot width is maintained for a pedestrian way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/349
d. Build-to line. At least 70% of the front building face shall be constructed within a minimum of 15 feet from the back of curb and a maximum of 20 feet
when adjacent to a major access drive. The remainder of the building frontage may be set back further to allow such things as outdoor dining, plazas, entry
courts and pass-throughs to parking. For developments where there is parking between the building and property line, the build-to line shall be 100 feet from
the back-of-curb.
Build-To Diagrams
(Ordinance 10-049 adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. C, sec. II)
III. STANDARDS FOR GATEWAY OVERLAY
A. Intent.
The intent of these standards is to
1. Create an identity for Leon Valley to distinguish it from surrounding communities
2. Stabilize and strengthen property values over the long term
3. Attract new residents and businesses that will invest and reinvest in properties
4. Increase the quality of development
5. Strengthen and clarify existing zoning ordinance provisions for nonresidential design standards.
6. Make the community more sustainable for future generations through
a. Providing for integrated mixed use,
b. Embodying LEED-ND (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design - Neighborhood Development) principles, and
c. Assuring pedestrian and bicycle friendliness.
B. Land use.
1. Intent. It is intended that allowed uses will encourage pedestrian-oriented mixed use projects that are well integrated with retail and residential activities.
2. Residential uses in the form of townhouses are allowed on up to 50% of the site area and shall abide by the townhouse district standards and the standards in this
ordinance. However, at least 50% of the retail must be constructed prior to obtaining a certificate of occupancy for the residential component.
3. Residential uses above nonresidential uses at-grade shall be permitted by right and defined as a mixed use building. Lobbies to upper stories may be located at
grade level.
4. General standards. Approval of a specific use permit, landscaping requirements, sign standards, performance standards, and requirements for nonconforming
structures shall follow the procedures established by the zoning ordinance as well as procedures and standards outlined in section I, Overlay Standards - General of
these overlay district standards.
C. Building height and site area regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/349
1. Intent. The intent of the height and area regulations is to convey a stronger sense of community by bringing buildings closer to the street.
2. Building height.
a. Buildings shall not exceed 50 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less, unless it qualifies as a landmark building, in which case the landmark feature may be
up to 25% greater than the remainder of the building height as approved by the director.
b. However, buildings on properties abutting Bandera may be constructed up to 4 stories or 60 feet.
c. Portions of any buildings within 100 feet of a single-family zoned residential lot may not exceed 45 feet in height or 2.5 stories.
3. Minimum lot size. One acre unless otherwise approved through the site plan.
4. Front yard. Minimum front yard shall be 6 feet and a maximum setback of 100 feet (which would allow for one full bay of parking).
5. Rear yard. Minimum 6 feet, or 30 feet when abutting residentially zoned land.
D. Building orientation.
1. Intent. It is intended that buildings have direct orientation to the street.
2. Facades shall generally be built parallel to the street or major access drive frontage, except at street intersections, where a facade containing a primary building
entrance may be curved or angled toward an intersection.
E. Cross-access drives.
1. Intent. It is the intent that access ways will facilitate the movement of pedestrians and autos in an attractive environment, and that blocks ensure cross-access to
adjacent non-single-family zoned sites.
2. Cross-access. All nonresidential lots must provide cross-access to adjoining nonresidential lots.
F. Automobile parking.
1. Intent. The following is the intent of the city's parking policies and these design standards for the Gateway Overlay District:
a. Minimize paved surfaces which increase runoff, ambient temperature and construction costs.
b. Support the creation of shared parking in order to enable visitors to park once at a convenient location and to access a variety of nonresidential
enterprises in a pedestrian and bicycle-friendly environment.
c. Manage parking so that it is convenient and efficient, and supports an active and vibrant retail environment.
d. Ensure ease of access to parking.
e. Provide flexibility for changes in land uses which have different parking requirements within the district.
f. Provide flexibility for the redevelopment of small sites.
g. Avoid diffused, inefficient single-purpose reserved parking.
h. Avoid adverse parking impacts on residential neighborhoods.
2. Parking requirements.
a. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with this subsection.
b. Off-street parking spaces for the applicable use classification shall meet the city's current standards.
c. Where parking exceeds the minimum spaces required by more than 10%, or more than 1 full bay of parking is located between a building and a public
street, landscaping of parking areas shall be increased to the following standards between the building and the public street:
i. A minimum of twelve percent of the gross vehicular use area shall be devoted to living landscaping which includes grasses, ground cover, plants,
shrubs and trees.
ii. There shall be a minimum of one shade tree planted for each 300 square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscape area.
iii. Planting islands shall not be spaced greater then every 10 spaces unless approved in the landscape plan in order to preserve existing trees and
natural features or due to unique site conditions.
d. Parking reduction. Provided there is a shared access and joint use agreement with an adjacent property, parking may be reduced by up to 15% of the
total requirement.
G. Bicycle parking.
1. Goals. Bicycle parking is required in order to encourage the use of bicycles by providing safe and convenient places to park bicycles.
2. Bicycle parking. Bicycle parking shall be provided based on at least one (1) bike rack for each development or one (1) bike rack for each 25 car parking spaces
required, whichever is greater, unless otherwise approved by the director. Bicycle racks shall accommodate a minimum of two bicycles per rack. No more than 10 bicycle
racks shall be required per development.
3. Bicycle parking standards.
a. Location.
i. Required bicycle parking should be located within 50 feet of an entrance to the building.
ii. Bicycle parking may be provided within a building, but the location must be easily accessible to bicycles.
H. Supplementary architectural regulations.
1. Intent. The intent of this subsection is to create buildings which reflect the desired Leon Valley character of being a sustainable and attractive city as stated above. It
is also intended that nonresidential buildings are constructed in a manner that allows flexibility to accommodate a range of uses over time in order to avoid the need to
demolish and rebuild for successive uses. The size, disposition and design of buildings play an important role in achieving that goal. This includes encouraging the
following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/349
a. Landmark elements such as enhanced open spaces and building features.
b. Buildings which directly contribute to the attractiveness, safety and function of the street and public areas.
c. Buildings which are constructed in a manner, and with materials, that are highly durable and will continue to endure and be attractive over a long time,
especially adjacent to public and pedestrian areas.
It is intended by this section, to encourage a variety of building and design solutions in response to the standards and regulations outlined herein.
2. Building standards - Nonresidential and mixed use.
a. Building form.
i. All buildings shall be designed and constructed in tri-partite architecture so that they have a distinct base, middle and top.
Examples of Single Story Tri-Partite
ii. Buildings which are located on axis with a terminating street or access drive or at the intersection of streets and/or major access drives shall be
considered a landmark building. Such buildings shall be designed with landmark features which take advantage of that location, such as an accentuated
entry and a unique building articulation which is offset from the front wall planes and goes above the main building eave or parapet line.
iii. Building articulation. One- and two-story facades visible from a public street, drive or open space shall meet the following minimum standards for
articulation. Articulation for buildings 3 or more stories in height shall be required for the primary entries and the building's main corners.
Horizontal articulation. No building wall shall extend for a distance equal to 3 times the wall's height without having an offset equal to
25% of the wall's height, and that new plane shall extend for a distance equal to at least 25% of the maximum length of the first plane.
Vertical articulation. No horizontal wall shall extend for a distance greater than 3 times the height of the wall without changing height by
a minimum of 25% of the wall's height. Pitched roofs shall count toward achieving vertical articulation, provided they are 65 degrees or
less from horizontal.
Building Articulation Examples
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/349
3. Architectural features.
a. Where clearly visible from a public street, open space or major access drive:
i. Roofs. For buildings with hip, gable or mansard roofs, allowed materials include metal standing seam, slate, clay or concrete tile (barrel or Roman
shape).
ii. Windows, except for retail at-grade, shall be vertical in proportion and have at least a 3-inch reveal. Vertically proportioned windows which are
joined together by a mullion shall be considered as meeting this standard.
b. Architectural point system. All structures shall be designed to incorporate no less than four of the architectural elements from the list below. Buildings
over 50,000 square feet must include a minimum of five of the referenced architectural elements.
i. Canopies, awnings, porticos with colonnade, or arcades for at least 70% of the front facade;
ii. Raised pilasters or quoined corners;
iii. Vertical elements (landmark feature as defined in this code);
iv. Windows and doors framed with stone, cast stone, limestone, or other decorative masonry headers and sills;
v. Outdoor patios and/or courtyards (landscaped and furnished);
vi. Decorative ornamentation integrated into the building facade, such as corbels, medallions (non-signage), functioning clocks, niches, wrought iron,
balconettes or horizontal and rhythm patterned brickwork; or other architectural features approved by the director.
vii. Rainwater harvesting system for on-site use.
c. Exterior facade materials.
i. Allowed exterior materials. Allowed exterior surface materials are categorized into three groups:
Group A. Brick, stone and exterior grade stucco applied in a three-step process. At least 10% of any primary facade shall contain brick
or stone.
Group B. Stucco, architectural concrete block with integrated color, factory primed cementitious fiberboard (in the form of lap siding or
board and batten), colored or stamped tilt-wall, EIFS (above 14 feet from grade only). Cementitious fiberboard is limited to 20% of any
facade.
Group C - Accent. Metal, EIFS, wood.
ii. Prohibited exterior materials. Prohibited exterior surface materials include metal building panels, cinderblock and aggregate finished surfaces.
iii. Primary facades. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings which are clearly visible from a public street, open space, or active
storefront:
a) Primary facades, excluding windows, doors, and other openings, shall be constructed of at least 80% Group A materials and up to 20%
Group B materials. However, accent materials from Group C may be allowed in limited application for architectural features.
iv. Secondary facades. The following shall apply to all exterior walls of buildings which are not clearly visible from a public street, open space or active
storefront, or are constructed on a property line as one of a series of in-line buildings where the wall will become part of a common wall:
a) Walls, excluding windows, doors, and other openings, shall be constructed of a minimum of 20% Group A materials and up to 80% Group B
materials. However, the color of the walls shall match the primary facades.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/349
B) Wrapping the primary facade treatment. Secondary facades which are adjacent to the primary facade shall contain the primary facade
treatment for at least 10% of its area. This may occur as a simple continuation of the primary facade treatment, or elements such as cornices,
bases and vertical elements. In all cases, however, wall surface materials shall wrap the corner, except when located on a common property line.
v. At least two materials shall be used on all exterior facades.
vi. Windows and glazing shall be limited to a minimum of 30% and maximum of seventy percent (70%) of each building elevation facing a street,
major Access Drive or side yard greater than 10 feet. This does not apply to big boxes or industrial buildings. (See [subsection] 6.b below for special
requirements for retail at-grade.)
vii. Color.
a) The dominant color of all buildings shall be muted shades of color. Black shall not be used except as an accent color.
There are no restrictions on accent colors which comprise less than 1.0% of the building face, except that bright and florescent colors
are prohibited.
b) Roof colors shall be a muted shade of cool gray, warm gray, brown or red.
c) The planning director may refer the interpretation of appropriate colors to city council.
4. Townhouse district standards.
a. All townhouse developments within the overlay are subject to site plan review and approval by director. The site plan shall show the typical layout of the
townhouse lot and an overall layout of the development.
b. All townhouse developments shall provide rear entry off-street parking with a minimum 2-car garage. Alleys servicing these developments shall be a
minimum 20 feet in width.
c. Open space.
i. 10% of the total townhouse development shall be dedicated as usable open space. This area shall be platted as common area; open space must
be usable and serve as an amenity for residents.
ii. Open space shall contain at least 1 large canopy tree and 1 small ornamental tree for each 5,000 square feet of required open space. The location
of open space should endeavor to preserve existing trees.
d. The maximum height of townhouses shall be at least 2 stories but may not exceed three stories or 50' whichever is less.
e. Streets adjacent to townhouses shall have a minimum 62-foot right-of-way or public access driveway. All townhouses shall be platted on individual lots
and require public street frontage, but cannot have double street frontage.
f. Parallel parking shall be provided along the curb in the right-of-way.
g. The front building setback shall be a minimum of 6 feet and a maximum of 15 feet.
h. Three zones between back of curb and the building line:
i. Streetscape zone (1) - a minimum 4-foot wide area adjacent to the back-of-curb for urban trees, street furniture plus a 1-foot dismount strip. An
urban tree in a tree well shall be provided for each 25 linear feet in the streetscape zone. For each 2 urban trees, a bike rack, trash receptacle, bench,
pedestrian streetlights, or other approved street furniture is required.
ii. Sidewalk zone (2) - a minimum 6-foot wide clear sidewalk;
iii. Landscape zone (3) - a minimum 6-foot landscape/patio area adjacent to the building. In order to differentiate the different zones (public v. private)
of the sidewalk and the townhouse, a 3' high wrought iron, masonry, or cast stone fence may be constructed. Balcony and patio railings and fences shall
be largely transparent and constructed of tempered glass, wrought iron or metal. Masonry columns may be used on patios provided that they are used
as accents. Wood fences and railings and chain-link fencing are prohibited for balconies and patios.
i. All buildings which have residential unit floor plates within 6 feet of grade shall include a primary front door entrance into the unit which may be accessed
from the sidewalk.
j. The front door entry shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet above the sidewalk elevation and include a minimum 24 sf stoop. If pre-empted by
topographic conditions, the entry may be lowered in elevation, subject to approval of the director. However, up to 50% of units [may be] built at grade for ADA
accessibility from the sidewalk provided there is a metal fence (in the form of metal tubing or wrought iron) separating the private area from the public
sidewalk area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/349
k. A 20' rear building setback shall be applied from the alley right-of-way which includes a 5-foot fence setback with an urban tree for each property.
l. The minimum side yard is 5' between groups of 3 to 6 townhouses; side yard at corner shall be the same as for a front yard, and requires all 3 zones.
m. The minimum lot width is 25'. Lot depth is a minimum of 100'.
n. The maximum block length should not exceed 400 feet.
o. A 10' wide rear landscape buffer shall be provided and shall contain one (1) tree for each 30 linear feet.
p. Units must also include windows which provide residents a view of the street or public access easement and sidewalk area.
5. Residential at-grade. In developments that contain residential at-grade, the front door entry shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet above the sidewalk elevation
and include a minimum 24 sf stoop. If pre-empted by topographic conditions, the entry may be lowered in elevation, subject to approval of the director. However, up to
50% of units [may be] built at grade for ADA accessibility from the sidewalk provided there is a metal fence (in the form of metal tubing or wrought iron) separating the
private area from the public sidewalk area. (See diagram in townhouse standards above.)
6. Retail and mixed use building standards.
a. The ground floor entry must be located at the approximate elevation of the adjacent sidewalk and should be inset by at least 4 feet.
b. Retail uses adjacent to the sidewalk at-grade shall:
i. Be constructed to meet fire code separation from any other uses constructed above;
ii. Have a minimum clear height of 14 feet between finished floor and the bottom of the structure above. Mezzanines within the retail space shall be
allowed per building code;
iii. Have an awning or canopy which extends at least 6 feet over the sidewalk for at least 75% of the frontage on any portion of a building. Such
awning or canopy shall maintain a minimum 7.5-foot clearance over the sidewalk; and
iv. Have highly transparent glass windows for at least 60%, but no greater than 80%, of the ground floor facade. The ground floor shall be excluded
from the minimum and maximum window requirement above.
c. Two zones between back of curb and the building line:
i. Streetscape zone (1) - a minimum 4-foot wide area adjacent to the back-of-curb for urban trees, street furniture plus a 1-foot dismount strip. An
urban tree in a tree well shall be provided for each 25 linear feet in the streetscape zone. For each 3 urban trees along a sidewalk, a bike rack, trash
receptacle, bench, lighted bollard, or other approved street furniture should be provided.
ii. Sidewalk zone (2) - a minimum 10' wide sidewalk. The sidewalk zone may be encroached by a 3' high fenced patio area for dining, as long as a
minimum 6-foot width is maintained for a pedestrian way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/349
d. Build-to line. At least 70% of the front building face shall be constructed within a minimum of 15 feet from the back of curb and a maximum of 20 feet
when adjacent to a major access drive. The remainder of the building frontage may be set back further to allow such things as outdoor dining, plazas, entry
courts and pass-throughs to parking. For developments where there is parking between the building and property line, the build-to line shall be 100 feet from
the back-of-curb.
Build-To Diagrams
(Ordinance 10-049 adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. C, sec. III)
IV. STANDARDS FOR COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL OVERLAY
A. Land use.
1. General standards. Approval of a specific use permit, landscaping requirements, sign standards, performance standards, and requirements for nonconforming
structures shall follow the procedures established by the zoning ordinance as well as procedures and standards outlined in section I, Overlay Standards - General of
these overlay district standards.
B. Building standards.
1. Building form.
a. The primary entries to buildings and the main corners of the building are required to be articulated. Each primary entry to an office area of the building
shall be articulated both horizontally and vertically by at least 6 feet or 20% of the adjacent wall length, whichever is greater. (See nonresidential building
articulation example diagram in Sustainability Overlay District standards.) Pitched roofs shall count toward achieving vertical articulation provided they are 65
degrees or less from horizontal. Building corners shall also be articulated as approved by the director.
2. Exterior facade materials.
a. Primary exterior facades which are clearly visible from a public street shall be constructed with a minimum ten percent (10%) Group A materials and up
to 90% Group B materials. Group C materials may be used for accents.
The Group A materials noted above shall be applied to corners, entries, and other areas in order to mitigate monotony and increase aesthetics. A
minimum of two different materials shall be used.
b. Secondary exterior facades not facing a public street may be constructed with up to 100% (one hundred percent) Group B materials.
3. Color.
a. The dominant color of all buildings shall be muted shades of color. Black and stark white shall not be used except as an accent color.
There are no restrictions on accent colors which comprise less than 1.0% of the building face, except that bright or florescent colors are prohibited.
b. Roof colors shall be a muted shade of cool gray, warm gray, brown or red.
4. Auxiliary design standards. Structures shall incorporate at least two of the following auxiliary design elements:
a. Raised pilasters or quoined corners;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/349
b. Vertical elements (landmark feature as defined in this code);
c. Windows and doors framed with stone, cast stone, limestone, or other decorative masonry headers and sills;
d. Decorative ornamentation integrated into the building facade, such as corbels, medallions (non-signage), functioning clocks, niches, wrought iron,
balconettes or horizontal and rhythm patterned brickwork; or other architectural features approved by the director.
e. Rainwater harvesting system for on-site use.
(Ordinance 10-049 adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. C, sec. IV)
EXHIBIT 1. LAND USE CHART (REVISED TO INCORPORATE GATEWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT)
[This chart is included in section 15.02.381 of this chapter. This was not printed in this exhibit, at the discretion of the editor.]
EXHIBIT 2. OVERLAY BOUNDARIES
(Ordinance 12-023 adopted 9/4/12; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. C, exh. 2)
EXHIBIT 2A. SUSTAINABILITY OVERLAY
(Ordinance 12-023 adopted 9/4/12; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. C, exh. 2A)
EXHIBIT 2B. GATEWAY OVERLAY
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/349
(Ordinance 10-049 adopted 11/16/10; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. C, exh. 2B)
EXHIBIT 2C COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL OVERLAY
(Ordinance 12-023 adopted 9/4/12; 2008 Code, ch. 14, app. C, exh. 2C)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. A1.001 Purpose
The schedule of fees as herein established has been designed to provide a comprehensive index of fees and charges for licenses, permits, inspections, certificates,
appeals, services and other official actions. (1972 Code, sec. 32.101; 2008 Code, sec. A1.001)
Sec. A1.002 Scope
The schedule of fees shall apply; provided, however, this fee schedule shall not be deemed exclusive. (1972 Code, sec. 32.102; 2008 Code, sec. A1.002)
Sec. A1.003 Compliance
The schedule of fees as herein established shall be prescribed as deemed necessary to execute the provisions of this fee schedule. (1972 Code, sec. 32.103; 2008
Code, sec. A1.003)
ARTICLE A2.000 ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
Sec. A2.001 Copy charges
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/349
(a) Duplication charges: Duplication charges for providing copies of public information shall be the rules established by the State Attorney General as established in
the Texas Administrative Code, Title 1 (Administration), Part 3 (Office of the Attorney General), Chapter 70, Rule §70.3 (Cost of Copies of Public Information), unless a
specific exception is granted by the attorney general or otherwise specified below:
(1) Copy charge for standard paper copy. The charge for standard paper copies reproduced by means of an office machine copier or a computer printer is
$0.10 per page or part of a page. Each side that has recorded information is considered a page. A request for 50 or more copies may incur labor and
overhead charges as allowed under state law.
(2) Copy charge for nonstandard copy. The charges in this subsection are to cover the materials onto which information is copied and do not reflect any
additional charges, including labor, that may be associated with a particular request. A request for 50 or more copies may incur labor and overhead charges
as allowed under state law. The charges for nonstandard copies are:
(A) Diskette: $1.00;
(B) Magnetic tape: Actual cost;
(C) Rewritable or non-rewritable CD: $1.00;
(D) Data cartridge: Actual cost;
(E) Tape cartridge: Actual cost;
(F) Digital video disk (DVD): $3.00;
(G) JAZ drive: Actual cost;
(H) Other electronic media: Actual cost;
(I) VHS video cassette: $2.50;
(J) Audio cassette: $1.00;
(K) Body worn camera recording: $10.00;
(L) Oversize paper copy (e.g.: 11 inches by 17 inches, greenbar, not including maps and photographs using specialty paper;
(M) Specialty paper (e.g.: Mylar blueprint, blueline, map, photographic): Actual cost.
(3) Labor charge. May be charged for locating, compiling, and reproducing and shall be prorated at the rate of $15.00 per hour. The labor charge includes
the actual time to locate, compile, manipulate data, and reproduce the requested information.
(A) A labor charge shall not be billed in connection with complying with requests that are for 50 or fewer pages of paper records, unless the
documents to be copied are located in:
(i) Two or more separate buildings that are not physically connected to each other; or
(ii) A remote storage facility.
(B) A labor charge shall not be recovered for any time spent by an attorney, legal assistant, or any other person who reviews the requested
information:
(i) To determine whether the governmental body will raise any exceptions to disclosure of the requested information under the Texas
Government Code, Subchapter C, Chapter 552; or
(ii) To research or prepare a request for a ruling by the Attorney General's office pursuant to Section 552.301 of the Texas Government Code.
(C) An overhead charge shall not be made for requests for copies of 50 or fewer pages of standard paper records unless the request also qualifies for
a labor charge pursuant to Texas Government Code, Section 552.261(a)(1) or (2).
(D) The overhead charge shall be computed at 20% of the charge made to cover any labor costs associated with a particular request. Example: if one
hour of labor is used for a particular request, the formula would be as follows: Labor charge for locating, compiling, and reproducing, $15.00 x .20 =
$3.00; or Programming labor charge, $28.50 x .20 = $5.70. If a request requires one hour of labor charge for locating, compiling, and reproducing
information ($15.00 per hour); and one hour of programming labor charge ($28.50 per hour), the combined overhead would be: $15.00 + $28.50 =
$43.50 x .20 = $8.70.
(4) Postage and shipping charges. Governmental bodies may add any related postal or shipping expenses which are necessary to transmit the reproduced
information to the requesting party.
(5) Police department report copies.
(A) Accident report copy charge: Shall be in accordance with the Texas Transportation Code Section 550.065(c)(4) and Section 552.262(a) of the
Government Code: $6.00.
(B) Certified accident reports: $2.00 plus actual copy cost.
(6) Fire department incident and EMS reports. As per other copy charges listed in this subsection and as allowed under the Texas Administrative Code.
(b) City map copy charge: Actual cost of reproduction.
(c) Master plan copy charge: Actual cost of reproduction.
(d) Zoning code copy charge: $16.50.
(e) Zoning confirmation letter copy charge: Cost of copy plus labor charge based upon labor charge as allowed by the state attorney general and as established in the
Texas Administrative Code, Title 1 (Administration), Part 3 (Office of the Attorney General), Chapter 70 (Cost of Copies of Public Information), unless a specific exception
is granted by the Attorney General.
(f) Subdivision code copy charge: $10.60.
(g) Judicial records: Copies of information collected, assembled, or maintained by or for the judiciary are governed by rules adopted by the Supreme Court of the state
or by other applicable federal and state laws and rules. The cost of copies of judicial records shall be in accordance with Rule 12 (Public Access to Judicial Records).
(h) Certified court record copy: $5.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/349
(Ordinance 06-054 adopted 11/21/06; 2008 Code, sec. A2.001; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. A2.002 Returned check charge
Returned check charge, per check: $25.00. (Ordinance 06-054 adopted 11/21/06; 2008 Code, sec. A2.002)
Sec. A2.003 Municipal park administrative fees
(a) All fees must be paid at the time of filing a reservation.
(b) All city park facilities are available for use at no charge on a first-come first-served basis; however, certain park facilities may be rented for exclusive use, based on
the following fee schedule.
(c) Violation of any park policy, acts of vandalism, or damage to park facilities may result in the loss of any deposit and/or charges being filed in municipal court for
such vandalism or damage.
(d) Pavilion rental fees are as follows:
(1) Rental times: Sunrise to 2:00 pm and/or 3:00 pm to sunset.
(2) Full day rentals are permissible if available; applicant shall pay single deposit and dual rental and barbecue pit fees, if applicable.
(3) The barbecue pit may be rented only when the large pavilion is rented. Deposits are refundable if facilities are left in satisfactory condition following use
and pit keys are returned as per the contract.
(4) Fee structure - large pavilion:
Type LV Resident Non-LV Resident
Deposit $50.00 $75.00
Rental fee $100.00 $150.00
Add BBQ pit $25.00 $25.00
(5) Fee structure - small pavilion:
Type LV Resident Non-LV Resident
Deposit $25.00 $25.00
Rental Fee $20.00 $35.00
(e) Fees for rental of athletic fields, tennis courts, basketball courts, and volleyball pits:
(1) Multiple hourly field/pit/court rentals per applicant may be applied on one application at initial reservation filing.
(2) Reservations must be for a one-hour minimum with a four-hour maximum. The maximum and minimum times may be waived for league and
tournament plays at the discretion of the city manager or their designee.
Location LV Resident Non LV Resident
Softball Field $10.00/hour $15.00/hour
LG Soccer Field $15.00/hour $20.00/hour
SM Soccer Field $10.00/hour $15.00/hour
Practice Soccer Field $10.00/hour $15.00/hour
Tennis Court (RR) $10.00/hour $15.00/hour
Tennis Court (FO) $10.00/hour $15.00/hour
Volleyball Pit $10.00/hour $15.00/hour
Basketball Court $10.00/hour $15.00/hour
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/349
(f) Nonrefundable fees for large group clean-up will be as follows in conjunction with any park facility rental:
Attendance Fees
50–100 persons $50.00
101–150 persons $100.00
151–200 persons $150.00
201+ persons $250.00
(g) Swimming pool fees. Swimming pool fees will be set by the city's contracted swimming pool management company.
(Ordinance 10-004 adopted 1/5/10; 2008 Code, sec. A2.003; Ordinance 2017-10 adopted 4/18/17; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 3/6/18; Ordinance 2018-31, sec. 2,
adopted 4/3/18)
Sec. A2.004 Community center rental fees
(a) Rental rates:
Users Weekdays
(Monday–Thursday)
(4 hours)
Weekends
(Friday–Sunday)
(6 hours)
Each
Add'l
Hour
Nonresident Resident* Nonresident Resident*
Commercial:
1000 sf $105.00 $75.00 $120.00 $90.00 $15.00
2000 sf $140.00 $110.00 $180.00 $150.00 $20.00
4000 sf $230.00 $200.00 $305.00 $275.00 $25.00
Kitchen $50.00 $50.00 $50.00 $50.00 $0.00
Private:
1000 sf $90.00 $60.00 $105.00 $75.00 $15.00
2000 sf $115.00 $90.00 $150.00 $120.00 $25.00
4000 sf $180.00 $150.00 $230.00 $200.00 $30.00
Kitchen $50.00 $50.00 $50.00 $50.00 $0.00
Civic:
1000 sf $15.00 $10.00 $25.00 $20.00 $0.00
2000 sf $20.00 $15.00 $30.00 $25.00 $0.00
4000 sf $25.00 $20.00 $45.00 $40.00 $0.00
Kitchen $15.00 $15.00 $15.00 $15.00 $0.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/349
Official:
All $10.00 $10.00 $15.00 $15.00 $0.00
Kitchen $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
*In order to qualify for a residential rate, the applicant must live in the City and must provide proof of residency at the time the application is submitted for approval.
(b) Deposit to reserve center: $200.00.
(c) Cleaning fee: $200.00 per cleaning. The cleaning fee is waived for all city official uses.
(d) Community center penalty fees:
(1) Late event date change. If the renter requests an event date change more than thirty (30) days before the event, there is no extra cost. If the renter
requests a change of date between 15 to 29 days before the event, there is a $100.00 charge. If the renter requests an event date change 1 to 14 days
before the event, there is a $150.00 charge. This late event date change policy allows renters to reschedule without losing their deposit and repeating the
booking and registration process.
(2) Late exit fee. A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged to renters that fail to exit the facility at the time agreed in the lease agreement.
There has been a problem of renters leaving later than their scheduled time.
(3) Emergency key pickup. A penalty fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged to renters that require an emergency key pickup, when the
renter needs for staff to come and open the conference center during nonbusiness hours without having made a special request and having it prearranged.
(4) Event cancellation. The lessee can recover fifty percent (50%) of the initial security/damage deposit if the event is cancelled no later than ninety (90)
days prior to the commencement date. If a letter of cancellation is not postmarked or submitted to staff before this date, the lessee will forfeit one hundred
percent (100%) of the security/damage deposit.
(1972 Code, sec. 32.1500(L); Ordinance 02-001, sec. 1, adopted 1/15/02; Ordinance 12-031 adopted 10/16/12; 2008 Code, sec. A2.004)
Sec. A2.005 Conference center rental fees
(a) Rental, cleaning and security services fees chart.
3,000 sq. ft. 1,000 sq. ft.
Cleaning $145.00/cleaning $145.00/cleaning
Deposit $500.00 $250.00
Security $22.00/hr. $22.00/hr.
Full day (10 hours) rental fee $650.00 $350.00
Half day (5 hours) rental fee $400.00 $250.00
Additional hour $80.00 $60.00
*Hourly rate initial hour $200.00 $100.00
*Hourly rate:
(1) Initial hour: If a customer rents the conference center on an hourly basis, he/she must pay the initial hour fee for the first hour rented.
(2) Each additional hour is priced at the additional hour fee rate listed in the chart above.
(3) Hourly rentals cannot be booked earlier than 60 days before the event.
(4) Customers must rent two (2) hours minimum.
(Ordinance 02-001, sec. 1, adopted 1/15/02; Ordinance 12-031 adopted 10/16/12; 2008 Code, sec. A2.005)
Sec. A2.006 Library fees
(a) Copies/prints, maximum of twenty (20) total per day.
(1) Black and white: $0.10 per sheet.
(2) Color: $0.50 per sheet.
(b) Fax.
(1) Local and toll free: $0.10 total (covers confirmation page).
(2) Long distance: $0.60 total (covers confirmation page and LD call).
(3) Receive fax: $0.10 per sheet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/349
(c) Scanning: $0.10 per sheet.
(d) Notary services: No cost.
(e) Library card fees.
(1) City residents, property owners and business owners. Library cards are free to all residents, property owners, and business owners who own a
business within the city. Proof of residency or ownership is required.
(2) Out-of-town residents. Persons living outside the city limits may receive a library card by:
(A) Presenting a valid form of identification & proof of residence.
(B) Paying a fee of $20.00 per year for the household.
(C) Paying a fee of $10.00 per year for a senior citizen household (60 and up).
(f) Replacement membership card. Library cardholders are encouraged to keep their library card secure. Should a library card become lost or stolen, it is the
responsibility of the cardholder to notify the library immediately. There is a charge for replacement cards of $1.00 for the replacement.
(g) Fines and fees for materials.
(1) Overdue fines on adult materials: $0.05 per day, per item, with a maximum fine of $2.00 per overdue item.
(2) Overdue fines on children's materials: $0.05 per day, per item, with a maximum fine of $1.00 per overdue item.
(h) Lost or damaged materials. Library patrons are responsible for all library materials checked out to their account and will be held liable for any losses or damage to
library materials while checked out to them. The library will not charge for normal wear of library materials.
(1) If the materials are lost, the patron will be charged the cost to replace the materials.
(2) If materials are damaged so as to be judged by the library as being unsuitable for the collection, the patron must pay the cost of the item. The damaged
item then becomes the property of the individual.
(3) A $2.00 processing fee will be charged for each library material damaged beyond repair or lost by the patron. This $2.00 processing [fee] is not
refundable should the item be returned at a later date.
(i) Loss of borrowing privileges. Patrons with lost or damaged materials or with fines that exceed $5.00 may not check out materials until records are cleared.
(Ordinance adopting 2017 Code; Ordinance 2017-76 adopted 12/19/17)
Sec. A2.007 Parades
Parade permit fee: $50.00. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1103; 2008 Code, sec. A2.008)
Sec. A2.008 Block parties
Nonrefundable permit application fee to defray costs and expenses: $50.00. (Ordinance 08-012, sec. 1 (26.1602), adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. A2.009)
Sec. A2.009 Graffiti removal
Administrative expense to abate graffiti nuisance: $150.00. (Ordinance 08-011 adopted 2/19/08; 2008 Code, sec. A2.010)
Sec. A2.010 Use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications facilities
(a) Nonrefundable application fee: $850.00.
(b) Administrative fee, upon acceptance of a public right-of-way use agreement (PRWUA) granted by city: $5,000.00, against which the $850.00 application fee will be
credited.
(c) Small cell nodes: The city will collect $500.00 for the first five small cell network nodes, and then $250.00 for each node thereafter; a fee of $1,000.00 for each
node support pole, and an annual fee of $250.00 per network node installed. The rate to collocate a network node on a service pole in the public right-of-way shall be
$20.00 per pole per year.
(1972 Code, ch. 35, sec. 4; 2008 Code, sec. A2.011; Ordinance 2017-64, sec. II, adopted 10/2/17)
Sec. A2.011 Memorial naming/renaming application and consideration fee
(a) Application and consideration: $1,000.00.
(b) Costs associated with the manufacturing and placement of the signs is the responsibility of the requestor.
(Ordinance 2013-10-14-03, sec. 2, adopted 10/14/13)
Sec. A2.012 Newsletter advertisement fees
(a) 1/8 page: $100.00.
(b) 1/4 page: $185.00.
(Ordinance 14-007 adopted 6/9/14)
Sec. A2.013 Police department property room handling fee
(a) Police department property room handling fee for the retrieval of lost, abandoned and personal property and evidence from a crime that has been adjudicated and
that is stored in the Leon Valley Police Department Property Room: $25.00 per item.
(b) Method of payment: Exact cash, cashier's check, money order, or credit card at a 3% fee.
(Ordinance 2017-22 adopted 5/16/17)
ARTICLE A3.000 MUNICIPAL COURT FEES*
Sec. A3.001 Miscellaneous fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/349
(a) Administrative fee: $10.00.
(b) Warrant of arrest fee: $35.00.
(c) Court cost fee (to be collected in accordance with state law): Administrative fees for applicable state tax or court costs related to fines are set forth under separate
ordinance.
(1972 Code, sec. 32.1500(J); 2008 Code, sec. A3.001)
Sec. A3.002 Building security fund fee
(a) Any defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court of the city shall pay a security cost fee of three dollars ($3.00) in addition to such other
costs of court that may be presently or hereafter imposed as court costs upon conviction for such misdemeanor offenses.
(b) A person is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on a person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication or deferred disposition; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the city municipal treasurer, or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly
delegated to a municipal treasurer, for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund.
(d) Funds derived from the municipal court building security fund fees may be used only to finance security personnel or to finance items when used for the purpose of
providing security services for the municipal court of the city as appropriate, including, but not limited to:
(1) The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
(2) Hand-held metal detectors;
(3) Walk-through metal detectors;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated weapons inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices;
(10) The purchase or repair of bulletproof glass; and
(11) Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel.
(Ordinance 06-018 adopted 7/18/06; 2008 Code, sec. A3.002)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. A3.003 Technology fund fee
(a) Any defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the City of Leon Valley Municipal Court shall pay a technology fee of four dollars ($4.00) as a cost of court in
addition to such other costs of court that may be presently or hereafter imposed as court costs upon conviction for such misdemeanor offenses. Any person is
considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on a person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication or deferred disposition; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(b) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the municipal treasurer, or to any other official who discharges the duties commonly
delegated to a municipal treasurer, for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court technology fund.
(c) Funds derived from the technology fees may be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the City Municipal Court of Record,
including, but not limited to:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; and
(8) Docket management systems.
(d) The Municipal Court Technology Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 06-019 adopted 7/18/06; 2008 Code, sec. A3.003)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
ARTICLE A4.000 ANIMAL CONTROL FEES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/349
Sec. A4.001 Impoundment, boarding and rabies control fees
(a) Impoundment:
(1) First impoundment: $30.00.
(2) Second impoundment: $60.00.
(b) Boarding, per day:
(1) Cats: $10.00 per day.
(2) Dogs: $12.00 per day.
(3) Large animals: $17.00 per day.
(c) Other charges:
(1) Euthanasia: Actual cost.
(2) Rabies testing (head): Actual cost.
(3) Rabies observation: Actual cost.
(4) Rabies vaccination: Actual cost.
(Ordinance 06-062, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/06; 2008 Code, art. A4.000(a)–(c))
Sec. A4.002 Pet license
City pet license:
(1) Spayed/neutered animals: $5.00.
(2) Unaltered animals: $15.00.
(Ordinance 06-062, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/06; 2008 Code, art. A4.000(d))
Sec. A4.003 Kennel, pet shop or grooming shop license
Kennel, pet shop, grooming shop, annual license fee: $50.00. (Ordinance 06-062, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/06; 2008 Code, art. A4.000(e))
Sec. A4.004 Registration of dangerous dog
Dangerous dogs:
(1) Registration fee: $50.00.
(2) New registration at new address: $25.00.
(Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, art. A4.000(f))
Sec. A4.005 Registration of dangerous wild animal
Application, issuance, and renewal of a certificate of registration for a dangerous wild animal: $50.00 per animal, not to exceed $500.00 for each person registering
animals, regardless of the number of animals owned by the person. (Ordinance adopting 2008 Code; 2008 Code, sec. 2.06.031)
ARTICLE A5.000 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. A5.001 License and permit fees
Alcoholic beverage license or permit fees shall be as prescribed by state law. (1972 Code, sec. 32.104; 2008 Code, sec. A5.001)
ARTICLE A6.000 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
Sec. A6.001 License fees
(a) Food establishment license:
(1) Minimum fee for establishment in which 1 or 2 persons are employed, operated by not more than 2 persons: $125.00.
(2) Operated by more than 2 and not more than 6 persons: $175.00.
(3) Operated by more than 6 and not more than 10 persons: $350.00.
(4) Operated by more than 10 and not more than 15 persons: $550.00.
(5) Operated by more than 15 persons: $800.00.
(6) Initial operating license: $125.00*.
* There shall be an administrative fee of $125.00 for first-year food establishments for training of personnel in proper food handling and storage techniques. This fee may
be waived when sufficient knowledge is demonstrated to the health and sanitation officer and no further training is required by the city.
(b) Temporary food license for special events: $30.00 per day per stand for temporary food service establishments with an $80.00 maximum per stand per event, per
person, for not over 14 days. (Not renewable.)
(Ordinance 11-019 adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A6.001; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
ARTICLE A7.000 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS
Sec. A7.001 Permit fee
Permit fee (single individual): $100.00. (1972 Code, sec. 32.1000; 2008 Code, sec. A7.001; Ordinance 2013-11-18-01 adopted 11/18/13)
Sec. A7.002 Registration fee for persons engaged in interstate commerce
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/349
Registration of persons engaged in interstate commerce: $2.00. (1972 Code, sec. 22.112; 2008 Code, sec. A7.002)
ARTICLE A8.000 BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION RELATED FEES
Sec. A8.001 Contractor registration fee
(a) All contractors, both general and subcontracted, which are providing professional services to addresses located within the city limits, both residential or and/or
commercial, are subject to an annual contractor registration fee of $100.00. This includes but is not limited to general building contractors, heating and air conditioning
(mechanical), bulk water, irrigation, gas, sewer trench, swimming pools, sidewalks/driveway/curbcuts, fences, foundation, roof, water well, sign and any nonfranchise
utility construction contractors.
(b) See section A8.021 for tree trimming contractor registration fees.
(Ordinance 12-028 adopted 9/18/12; 2008 Code, sec. A8.023; Ordinance 16-016 adopted 4/5/16; Ordinance 2017-69, sec. 3, adopted 11/21/17)
Sec. A8.002 Building permit
(a) Site plan:
(1) Site plan application fee: $250.00.
(2) Site plan appeal fee: $250.00.
(b) Building permit fee:
Total Valuation Fee
$1.00–$500.00 $60.00
$501.00–$2,000.00 $60.00 for the first $500.00 plus $2.00 for each additional
$100.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $2,000.00
$2,001.00–$25,000.00 $90.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $9.00 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $25,000.00
$25,001.00–$50,000.00 $400.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $50,000.00
$50,001.00–$100,000.00 $600.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $6.00 for each additional
$1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including $100,000.00
$100,001.00–$500,000.00 $800.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.00 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
$500,000.00
$500,001.00–$1,000,000.00 $3,000.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.00 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and including
$1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 and above $4,500.00 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $2.00 for each
additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof
(Ordinance 05-022 adopted 8/29/05; 2008 Code, sec. A8.001; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.003 Plan review fee assessment
(a) 35% of the commercial building permit fee, with a $100.00 minimum.
(b) 25% of all residential building permit fees, with a $75.00 minimum.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 2, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.022; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.004 Certificate of occupancy
(a) Permit fee: $125.00.
(b) Reinspection: $65.00.
(Ordinance 05-022 adopted 8/29/05; 2008 Code, sec. A8.004(a); Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.005 Bulk water permit
(a) Permit fee: $65.00.
(b) Deposit: $1,000.00.
(c) Water fee: $3.70 per 1,000 gallons.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.004(b); Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16; Ordinance 2018-74, sec. 1, adopted 9/18/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/349
Sec. A8.006 Curb cut permit
(a) Permit fee: $65.00.
(b) Reinspection: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.005; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.007 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section A8.007 pertaining to electrical contractor license fees and deriving from the 1972 Code, sec. 32.501 and the 2008 Code, sec. A8.006, was deleted in its
entirety by Ordinance 2017-69, sec. 4, adopted 11/21/17.
Sec. A8.008 Building permit (electrical)
Building permit (electrical) fees:
(1) Base fee (includes inspection): $100.00.
(A) Residential: $100.00.
(B) Commercial: $200.00.
(2) Reinspection fee: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.007; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code; Ordinance 2017-69, sec. 5,
adopted 11/21/17)
Sec. A8.009 Fence permit
(a) Fence permit fee: $65.00.
(b) Reinspection: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.008; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.010 Fence variance application
Fence variance application fee: $200.00. (1972 Code, sec. 32.601; 2008 Code, sec. A8.009; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.011 Floodplain development permit
(a) Floodplain development permit fee homestead exemption: $200.00.
(b) Floodplain development permit fee non-homestead case: $1,500.00.
(1972 Code, sec. 32.302A; 2008 Code, sec. A8.003; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.012 Heating, ventilation and air conditioning permit
Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning permits:
(1) Base fee and reinspection fees:
(A) Base fee (includes inspection):
(i) Residential: $100.00.
(ii) Commercial: $200.00.
(B) Reinspection fee: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.010; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. A8.013 Manufactured home park fees
(a) Manufactured home park permit fee based on valuation of on-site infrastructure at the rate of the current building code fee table, and not less than $1,000.00.
(b) Manufactured home park annual license and transfer of license fee: $50.00 plus $2.00 per space.
(c) Manufactured home park space application fee: $65.00.
(Ordinance 99-021, sec. 1, adopted 4/20/99; 2008 Code, sec. A8.011; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.014 Plumbing, gas, and sewer and trench fees
(a) Plumbing fees:
(1) Base fee (includes inspection):
Residential: $100.00.
Commercial: $200.00.
(2) Reinspection fee: $65.00.
(b) Gas permit fees:
(1) Base fee (includes inspection):
Residential: $100.00.
Commercial: $200.00.
(2) Reinspection fee: $65.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/349
(c) Sewer and trench permit fees:
(1) Base fee (includes inspection):
Residential: $100.00.
Commercial: $200.00.
(2) Reinspection fee: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.012; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16; Ordinance 2017-25 adopted 6/20/17)
Sec. A8.015 Residential rental registration and inspection fees
(a) Registration and initial inspection fee: $65.00.
(b) Follow-up inspection: $65.00.
(c) 3rd inspection: $90.00.
(d) 4th inspection: $120.00.
(e) 5th inspection or subsequent inspections: $150.00.
(Ordinance 09-032 adopted 7/7/09; 2008 Code, sec. A8.019; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.016 Residential temporary portable storage unit permit
Permit fee: $60.00. (Ordinance 09-051, sec. 2, adopted 10/5/09; 2008 Code, sec. A8.020; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.017 Roofing permit
(a) Roofing permit fee: $65.00.
(b) Reinspection: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.002; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.018 Sidewalk permit
(a) Base fee: $65.00.
(b) Reinspection: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.013; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.019 Signs
(a) Temporary sign permit: $25.00 per sign.
(b) Temporary sign deposit: $50.00 per sign.
(c) Permanent sign permit without electric hook-up: $100.00 per sign.
(d) Permanent sign permit with electric hook-up: $150.00 per sign.
(e) Sign variance request: $200.00 per request.
(f) Annual billboard sign permit: $150.00 per year.
(g) Temporary weekend signs: $30.00 per permit and $1.00 per sign, per calendar year.
(h) Charge for removal and impoundment of signs in the right-of-way: $25.00 per sign.
(i) Master sign plan: $100.00.
(j) Sign reinspection fees, not including temporary signs: $65.00.
(Ordinance 03-008, sec. 1, adopted 4/1/03; Ordinance 06-034 adopted 9/5/06; Ordinance 06-041 adopted 10/3/06; 2008 Code, sec. A8.014; Ordinance 16-025 adopted
7/19/16; Ordinance 2017-25 adopted 6/20/17)
Sec. A8.020 Swimming pool permit
(a) Base fee: Refer to building permit fee.
(b) Reinspection: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.015; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.021 Tree cutting/pruning contractor fees
Annual registration fee: $60.00. (Ordinance 10-013, sec. 2, adopted 4/20/10; 2008 Code, sec. A8.021; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.022 Tree removal permit for new construction
(a) Residential: $60.00.
(b) Commercial: $120.00.
(Ordinance 08-028 adopted 6/17/08; 2008 Code, sec. A8.018)
Sec. A8.023 Water well permit and reinspection fee
(a) Permit fee: $65.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/349
(b) Reinspection: $65.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.004(c); Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.024 Engineer
The fee to be paid to the city for the permits required by article 14.03 of the Code of Ordinances shall be as follows (except persons, firms or corporations who are under
contract with the city to furnish its inhabitants water). All engineering fees incurred by the city plus the following:
(a) Permit for the drilling, construction, or deepening of a new well: $60.00.
(b) Permit to repair or correct a defective well: $60.00.
(c) Permit to abandon and/or plug a well: $60.00.
(Ordinance 11-020, sec. 1, adopted 8/16/11; 2008 Code, sec. A8.016; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. A8.025 Wired unmanned telecommunication box installation fees
(a) Wired unmanned telecommunication box application fee: $60.00.
(b) Wired unmanned telecommunication box reinspection fee: $65.00.
(Ordinance 01-019 adopted 6/5/01; 2008 Code, sec. A8.017; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. A8.026 Contractor penalty fee
Penalty fee (working without a permit):
(1) 1st offense: $300.00.
(2) 2nd offense: $500.00.
(3) 3rd offense: $1,000.00.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 6/20/17)
ARTICLE A9.000 FIRE DEPARTMENT AND FIRE PROTECTION FEES
Sec. A9.001 Fire protection system construction permits
(a) Automatic fire extinguishing system:
(1) New sprinkler system:
1 - 10 heads: $125.00.
11 - 25 heads: $150.00.
26 - 200 heads: $200.00.
201+: $200.00 + $0.75 per head.
$2,000.00 maximum sprinkler head charge.
Additional floor charge: $40.00 for each floor above and below the first floor.
(2) Sprinkler modification with heads:
1 - 9 heads: $12.50 per head.
10 - 25 heads: $125.00.
26 - 200 heads: $150.00.
201+: $150.00 + $0.75 per head.
$2,000.00 maximum sprinkler head charge.
Additional floor charge: $40.00 for each floor above and below the first floor.
(3) Sprinkler modification without heads: $100.00.
(4) Paint/spray booth: $250.00.
(5) Vent/hood suppression system: $150.00.
(6) Alternative fire protection system: $250.00.
(b) Compressed gases: $300.00.
(c) Fire alarm and detection system and related equipment:
(1) New fire alarm system:
1 - 10 devices: $125.00.
11 - 25 devices: $150.00.
26 - 200 devices: $200.00.
201+: $200.00 + $0.75 per device.
$2,000.00 maximum device charge.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/349
Additional floor charge: $40.00 for each floor above and below the first floor.
(2) Fire alarm modification:
1 - 9 devices: $12.50 per device.
10 - 25 devices: $125.00.
26 - 200 devices: $150.00.
201+: $200.00 + $0.75 per device.
$2,000.00 maximum device charge.
Additional floor charge: $40.00 for each floor above and below the first floor.
(3) Smoke control systems: $175.00.
(d) Fire pumps and related equipment: $200.00.
(e) Flammable and combustible liquids: $200.00.
(f) Hazardous materials: $200.00.
(g) Industrial ovens: $200.00.
(h) LP gas: $200.00.
(i) Private fire hydrants: $100.00.
(j) Spraying or dipping: $200.00.
(k) Standpipe systems: $200.00 for the first, $125.00 for each additional system.
(l) Underground fire system: $200.00.
(Ordinance 05-001, sec. 32.2300, adopted 1/4/05; 2008 Code, sec. A9.001)
Sec. A9.002 Hazardous operations permits
(a) Aerosol products: $200.00.
(b) Battery systems: $150.00.
(c) Cellulose nitrate film: $200.00.
(d) Combustible dust-producing operations: $200.00.
(e) Combustible fibers: $150.00.
(f) Compressed gases: $200.00.
(g) Cryogenic fluids: $200.00.
(h) Dry cleaning plants: $150.00.
(i) Flammable and combustible liquids: $200.00.
(j) Fumigation and thermal insecticide fogging: $150.00.
(k) Hazardous materials: $300.00.
(l) HPM facilities: $300.00.
(m) High-piled storage: $100.00.
(n) Hot work operation: $100.00.
(o) Industrial ovens: $100.00.
(p) Liquid or gas fueled vehicles in Group A occupancies: $100.00.
(q) Magnesium: $200.00.
(r) Open flames and torches: $100.00.
(s) Open flames and candles: $50.00.
(t) Organic coating: $200.00.
(u) Motor fuel dispensing facilities: $150.00.
(v) Spraying or dipping: $200.00.
(Ordinance 05-001, sec. 32.2400, adopted 1/4/05; 2008 Code, sec. A9.002)
Sec. A9.003 Miscellaneous fire department fees
(a) System retesting fee: $75.00.
(b) Rescheduling fee: $30.00.
(c) Working without a permit fee: Double permit fee.
(d) Reinspection fee: $30.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/349
(e) After hours fee: $50.00 per hour, 2-hour minimum.
(f) False alarm fee:
(1) 1 to 5 activations within 365-day period: No charge.
(2) Each activation more than five in 365-day period: $50.00.
(g) Water crossing rescue fee: A fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00) shall be assessed to any person that a fire department unit of the city rescues or attempts to
rescue at a low-water crossing or flooded roadway where the person has become trapped while attempting to drive or walk across the low-water crossing or flooded
roadway. If the vehicle that was used to attempt to cross the low-water crossing or flooded roadway contained more than one person, the fee shall be applied to each
person in the vehicle.
(h) Public fireworks display permit application fee: $50.00.
(i) Fire inspector fee: $40.00 per hour.
(Ordinance 05-001, sec. 32.2500, adopted 1/4/05; Ordinance 05-023 adopted 8/29/05; 2008 Code, sec. A9.003; Ordinance 14-006 adopted 5/12/14)
ARTICLE A10.000 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES FEES
(a) Payment for transport to an area hospital:
(1) Basic life support: $900.00.
(2) Advanced life support 1 response: $950.00.
(3) Advanced life support 2 response: $950.00.
(b) Surcharge for transport of nonresidents: $100.00.
(c) Payment for aid rendered only:
(1) City resident: $150.00.
(2) Nonresident: $200.00.
(d) Payment for ALS or BLS mileage (per loaded transport mile):
(1) City resident: $18.00.
(2) Nonresident: $18.00.
(e) Payment for additional medics:
(1) Extra attendant (priority 1 patient or CPR): $120.00.
(2) Extra attendant (weight 300+ lb. patient): $100.00.
(3) Extra attendant (stairs): $100.00.
(f) Payment for supplies:
(1) Advanced life support (ALS) disposables: $375.00.
(2) Basic life support (BLS) disposables: $250.00.
(3) Oxygen: $125.00.
(g) Definitions:
Aid rendered only. The patient received assessment and/or treatment for an illness or injury and the patient refuses transport to a hospital. “Aid rendered only” is
synonymous with “treatment - no transport.” If ALS supplies, IV supplies or medications are used during treatment, these are charged to the patient in addition to the aid
rendered only charge. A patient assessment requires measurement and documentation of at least two vital signs (pulse, respiration, blood pressure, etc.).
ALS 1 emergency transport. Transportation by ground ambulance vehicle, medically necessary supplies and services and either an advanced life support (ALS)
assessment by ALS personnel or the provision of at least one ALS intervention. EMT-intermediate scope includes (but not limited to):
(1) Administration of IV fluids (except blood or blood products).
(2) Peripheral venous puncture.
(3) Blood drawing.
(4) Monitoring IV solutions during transport that contain potassium.
(5) Administration of approved medications, IV, sub Q, sublingual, nebulizer, inhalation, IM.
ALS 2 emergency transport. Transportation either by ground ambulance vehicle, medically necessary supplies and services, and the administration of at least three
medications by intravenous push/bolus or by continuous infusion excluding crystalloids (hypotonic, isotonic and hypertonic solutions) such as dextrose, normal saline or
Ringer's lactate; or transportation, medically necessary supplies and services, and the provision of at least one of the following ALS procedures:
(1) Manual defibrillation/cardioversion.
(2) Endotracheal intubation.
(3) Central venous line.
(4) Cardiac pacing.
(5) Chest compression.
(6) Surgical airway.
(7) Intraosseous line.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/349
Note: Aspirin and oxygen do not qualify as an ALS 2 level transport. However, three separate administrations of the same acceptable medication during a single
transport does qualify for payment at the ALS 2 level of service.
ALS routine disposable supplies. Include (but are not limited to) EKG paper, EKG electrodes (excluding defibrillation pads), NG tubes, syringes (excluding medications
and pre-filled syringes, vials or ampules), blood glucose test strips, disposable pressure infusers, lancets, filter needles and similar items.
BLS emergency transport. Transportation by ground ambulance vehicle, and medically necessary supplies and services at the basic life support care level (emergency
medical technician-basic).
Loaded transport mile. The total miles traveled from the place where the patient is loaded on board the ambulance to the hospital.
(Ordinance 08-041 adopted 8/19/08; 2008 Code, art. A10.000; Ordinance 2018-41 adopted 5/15/18)
ARTICLE A11.000 WATER AND SEWER FEES
Sec. A11.001 Generally
(a) Monthly water rates and charges, all customers residential or nonresidential: The rates set forth below are hereby established and shall be charged for water
provided for monthly billings effective with the October 2018 billing period and through October 2019, and after publication as required by law:
(1) Monthly meter charge:
Meter Size FY 18-19
Residential 5/8" $11.76
Commercial 5/8" $12.30
Residential 3/4" $13.39
Commercial 3/4" $15.08
1" $19.06
1-1/2" $30.72
2" $45.28
3" $129.41
4" $164.71
8" $616.73
(2) Monthly volumetric rate (per thousand gallons):
(A) Commercial:
FY 18-19
0–500,000 $3.95
Above 500,000 $3.95
(B) Residential:
FY 18-19
0–3,000 $3.56
3,001–6,000 $5.06
6,001–10,000 $6.56
10,001–17,000 $8.06
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/349
Above 17,001 $9.56
(C) Irrigation:
FY 18-19
0–3,000 $3.56
3,001–6,000 $5.06
6,001–10,000 $6.56
10,001–17,000 $8.06
Above 17,001 $9.56
(b) Water service fees.
(1) Impact fees: See article A16.000 (impact fees).
(2) Tapping fee:
(A) By public works; or
(B) By public works or owner (site specific).
(c) Monthly residential and nonresidential sewer service rates. The rates set forth below are hereby established and shall be charged for monthly sewer service
provided effective with the March 2018 billing period and through March 2020, after publication as required by law:
(1) Monthly sewer service rates, residential and nonresidential:
FY 18-19 FY 19-20
Minimum bill $15.08 $15.08
Residential (gallons included in minimum bill) 1,000 1,000
Nonresidential (gallons included in minimum bill) 1,000 0
Volumetric rate $6.06 $6.24
(d) Methods for adjusting monthly residential sewer charges.
(1) Final billings: As to all final billings, either the “winter average” monthly sanitary sewer service charge, or the “interim average” monthly sanitary sewer
service charge, or the “unmetered residential charge,” whichever is in effect at the termination of service for residential customers, will be the basis for final
charge at a pro-rated amount of the total charges in excess of the monthly minimum divided by 30 days for each day connected to the system, plus the
minimum monthly charge.
(2) New customers who have not established a monthly sanitary service charge within the service area during the preceding six months:
(A) New customers that move into the service area who have not established a winter average shall be charged the system sewer system average.
(B) New customers that move into the service area after the first day of a billing period and before the last day of the billing period will be billed for the
system winter average volume at a pro-rated amount of the total charges in excess of the monthly minimum divided by 30 days for each day connected
to the system, plus the minimum monthly charge.
(e) Public entity. Use residential rates applied to 70% of water meter volume.
(f) Excess volume charge.
(1) All residential customers shall be charged the following surcharge for all metered water consumption when the excess volume charge is in effect. This
surcharge shall be in addition to subsection (a) of this section.
EXCESS VOLUME CHARGE
Step in Gallons Surcharge per 1,000 Gallons
First 7,481 gallons $0.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/349
Next 9,725 gallons $0.17
All in excess of 17,205 gallons $0.51
(2) The excess volume charge rate shall be in effect during periods specified by city council action.
(g) Edwards Aquifer Authority fee: All customers shall be charged the following additional fee based on the meter consumption per month: $0.62/1,000 gallons.
(h) Water supply fee: All customers shall be charged the following additional fee based on their meter consumption per month: $0.50/1,000.
(i) Connection to privately funded line: As per refund contract #__________.
(j) Service deposit (refundable): Residential and commercial:
Meter Size Deposit Amount
Residential 5/8" $70.00
Commercial 5/8" $70.00
Residential 3/4" $70.00
Commercial 3/4" $70.00
1" $100.00
1-1/2" $170.00
2" $500.00
3" $770.00
4" $1,010.00
8" $1,520.00
10" $2,420.00
(k) Other. (___________).
(l) Sewer service impact fees:
(1) Fee for sewer trench permit: $45.00.
(2) Impact fees: See article A16.000 (impact fees).
(3) Tapping fee: Determined by public works.
(4) Connection fee: $125.00/connection all sizes.
(5) S.A. Ord. 56261 - collection by Leon Valley: $866.00/residential lot or as determined by SAWS.
(6) Connection to privately funded line: As per refund contract #__________.
(7) Other. (___________).
(m) Connection/disconnection fee: $30.00.
(n) Late fee: 10%.
(o) Returned check fee: $25.00.
(p) Meter plug, removal, and re-installment fee: $75.00.
(q) Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) public health service fee: $0.20 per month for each city water connection.
(r) The city adopts the rules and regulations as stated in the Texas Administrative Code, title 16, part II, chapter 24, Substantive Rule Applicable to Water and Sewer
Service Providers.
(Ordinance 13-008 adopted 2/19/13; 2008 Code, sec. A11.001; Ordinance 14-016 adopted 8/18/14; Ordinance 15-035 adopted 12/15/15; Ordinance 16-013 adopted
4/5/16; Ordinance 2018-74, sec. 2, adopted 9/18/18)
Sec. A11.002 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/349
Editor's note–Former section A11.02 pertaining to the permit fee for discharging waste through sewer manhole or other opening and deriving from Ordinance 523 adopted 7/17/73 and
the 2008 Code, sec. A11.002, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 2018-74, sec. 3, adopted 9/18/18.
Sec. A11.003 Utility construction permit
Permit fee for non-franchise holders: Not less than $100.00. (Ordinance 97-037, sec. 1, adopted 11/4/97; 2008 Code, sec. A11.003)
ARTICLE A12.000 SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
(a) Plat administration and filing fee schedule.
(1) Plat administration:
(A) All submittals: $200.00.
(2) Plat processing fee:
(A) Residential: $300.00 + $5.00 per lot.
(B) Commercial: $550.00 + $50.00 per acre.
(C) Amending plat: $200.00.
(D) Variance fee: $150.00.
(3) Plats requiring consultant plan review:
(A) Residential: $1,000.00.
(B) Commercial: Deposit.
(4) Council hearing/consideration fees:
(A) Vacate and replat “public hearing”: $200.00.
(B) Plat - council consideration: $100.00.
(5) County filing fee (per sheet/mylar): Actual cost per county.
(b) Water service fees.
(1) Impact fees: See article A16.000.
(2) Tapping fee:
(A) By public works; or
(B) By owner (site specific).
(3) Tapping material cost.
(4) Connection to privately funded line: As per refund fund contract #______.
(5) Service deposit (refundable): 10% of impact fees.
(6) Other: (______________).
(c) Sewer service fees.
(1) Sewer and trench permit: See section A8.014.
(2) Impact fee: See article A16.000.
(3) Tapping fee: Determined by public works and based on estimated cost of material, labor, and/or equipment.
(4) Connection fee: $75.00 per connection, all sizes.
(5) S.A. Ord. 56261 - Collection by Leon Valley for lots platted after contract with the City of San Antonio:
(A) $240.00/per residential lot; or
(B) $1,200/per acre and fraction thereof.
(6) Connection to privately funded line: As per refund contract #______.
(7) Other: (____________).
(1972 Code, sec. 32.1400; 2008 Code, art. A12.000; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
ARTICLE A13.000 ZONING ADMINISTRATIVE FEES
(a) Zoning change requests.
Site Acreage ZLUC Filing Fee CC Filing Fee Total
1.0 acres or less $350.00 $350.00 $700.00
1.01 - 10 acres $600.00 $600.00 $1,200.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/349
10.01 - 25 acres $750.00 $750.00 $1,500.00
25 acres or more $900.00 $900.00 $1,800.00
(b) Specific use request.
Type of Application ZC Filing Fee CC Filing Fee Total
Without construction $250.00 $250.00 $500.00
With construction $300.00 $300.00 $600.00
(c) Nonspecified use request: $200.00 per public hearing.
(d) Board of adjustment request: $250.00 per public hearing.
(e) Request for council variance: $75.00 per request.
(1972 Code, sec. 32.1800; 2008 Code, art. A13.000; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
ARTICLE A14.000 PRO RATA FEES
(a) Method for determining pro rata costs. The costs associated with construction of specific area water distribution and wastewater collection extensions are
attributable to those property owners who will directly benefit from such extensions and not to general users of the systems. The pro rata connection costs shall be
actual project costs divided by possible connections under current subdivision regulations.
(b) Assessment of pro rata costs for connection to specific extensions to the water distribution and wastewater collection systems.
(1) Countess Adria sewer extension. Pro rata fees shall be $6177.83 for connection to the 8" sewer main, constructed by the city in Castle Estates Unit 1,
as shown in exhibit I attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
(2) Althea extension. Pro rata fees shall be $850.00 per connection to the 8" sewer main constructed by the city in S.R. Hodges Subdivision as shown in
exhibit II attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
(3) Monte Robles fire protection line, 1990 extension. Pro rata fees shall be $1,600.00 per connection to the 8" water main constructed by the city in Monte
Robles Park subdivision as depicted in exhibit III attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
(4) Montes Robles fire protection line, 1991 extension. Pro rata fees shall be $1,535.92 for connection to the 8" water main constructed by the city in Monte
Robles Park subdivision as depicted in exhibit 1 attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
(5) Cammie Way extension. Pro rata fees shall be $246.88 for connection to the 8" sewer main constructed by the city in Castle Estates Unit II subdivision
as depicted in exhibit 2 attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
(6) Monte Robles Park fire protection line, 1995 extension. Pro rata fees shall be $1000.000 per connection to the eight-inch water main constructed by the
city in Monte Robles Park subdivision, as depicted in exhibit I attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
(c) Collection of pro rata fees.
(1) The collection of the pro rata fees as shown in subsection (b) above shall be collected at the time of application for a building permit or at the time of
application for utility connection, whichever occurs first, unless an agreement between the property owner and the city has been executed providing for a
different time of payment.
(2) The pro rata fees for connection to the water distribution system or the wastewater collection system extensions enumerated above and depicted in
exhibits I, II, III are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the
issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy, specifically impact fees.
(1972 Code, sec. 32.2100; 2008 Code, art. A14.000)
Editor's note–The exhibits referred to in this section are not printed herein.
ARTICLE A15.000 CITY ENGINEER PROJECT REVIEW FEES
(a) Engineer deposit: Per project.
(1) Residential deposits: $1,000.00.
(2) Commercial deposits: $1,500.00.
(b) Collection of fees. The collection of fees as shown above shall be collected at the time of initial submittal of the project and will be deposited into the deferred
revenue account activated by the accounting department prior to city engineer review.
(c) Engineering rate is actual cost, plus five (5%) percent.
(d) Refund of fees.
(1) All city engineer fees collected for review of submitted plans will be debited from the applicant's initial deposit. Upon completion of the review of the
project, and payment of all accounts owed, funds remaining will be refunded to the applicant within thirty (30) days of engineer's final billing statement.
(2) If plan review(s) costs should exceed the applicant's deposit, no further review(s) will transpire until an additional minimum deposit of $1,000.00 has
been deposited with the city. This cost recovery method will continue until the proposed project review is completed.
(Ordinance 99-031, sec. 1, adopted 8/3/99; 2008 Code, art. A15.000; Ordinance 16-025 adopted 7/19/16)
ARTICLE A16.000 IMPACT FEES*
Sec. A16.001 General provisions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/349
This article shall be known and cited as the city impact fees. (Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.01), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.001)
Sec. A16.002 Purpose
This article is intended to assure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring each such development to pay its pro rata
share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development. (Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.02), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec.
A16.002)
Sec. A16.003 Authority
This article is adopted pursuant to the Local Government Code, chapter 395 (Vernon 1990 Supp.) (SB 336). The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit
the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized under state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in
substitution for or in conjunction with this article. (Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.03), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.003)
Sec. A16.004 Definitions
Advisory committee. The city's zoning commission, originally appointed by M&C #204.
Area-related facility. A capital improvement (to include water supply acquisitions) or facility expansion which is designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan
and which is not a site-related facility. Area-related facility may include a capital improvement which located off-site, or within or on the perimeter of the development site.
Assessment. The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this article.
Capital improvement. Either a water facility, water supply acquisitions or a wastewater facility with a life expectancy of three or more years, to be owned and operated by
or on behalf of the city.
City. The City of Leon Valley.
Credit. The amount of the reduction of an impact fee due, determined under this article or pursuant to administrative guidelines, that is equal to the value of area-related
facilities provided by a property owner pursuant to the city's subdivision or zoning regulations or requirements.
Duplex-residential. Has the meaning given the term in the city's zoning regulations.
Facility expansion. Either a water facility expansion or a sewer facility expansion.
Final plat approval. The point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval and the plat has been released for recording in the Bexar County deed
and plat records.
Impact fee. Either a fee for water facilities, water supply acquisitions or a fee for wastewater facilities imposed on new development by the city pursuant to this article in
order to generate revenue to fund or recoup the costs of capital improvements or facility development. Impact fees do not include a requirement for the dedication of
rights-of-way or easements for such facilities, or a requirement for the construction of such improvements, imposed pursuant to the city's zoning or subdivision
regulations. Impact fees also do not include payment of any fees imposed pursuant to article A11.000 or article A12.000 of this fee schedule, which were not repealed
hereunder, or payment of pro rata charges imposed pursuant to Ordinances 1210, 1221, and 1230 adopted by the city on December 16, 1986, March 17, 1987, and May
5, 1987, respectively, nor shall it include any pro rata charges imposed by the city under any other ordinance, be it heretofore or hereafter imposed.
Impact fee capital improvements plan. Either a water capital improvements plan, a water supply plan or a wastewater capital improvements plan adopted or revised
pursuant to this article.
Irrigation water meter. A water meter for the purpose of irrigation only, with no flows returning to the wastewater system.
Land use assumptions. The projections of population and growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the city, as may be
amended from time to time, upon which the capital improvements plans are based.
Land use equivalency table. A table converting water meters required by various land uses to numbers of service units, as may be amended from time to time.
New development. A project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or
any use or extension of the use of land, any of which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements (including water supply acquisitions) or
facility expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval of a plat pursuant to the city's
subdivision regulations, the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the city's water or wastewater system, and which has not been exempted from these
regulations by provisions herein or attached hereto. Installation of a larger water meter will constitute new development.
Plat. Has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. Plat includes replat.
Platting. Has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. Platting includes replatting.
Property owner. Has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. Property owner includes the developer for the new development.
Recoupment. The imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the city for capital improvements which the city has previously oversized to serve new development.
Service area. Either a water benefit area or wastewater benefit area within the city and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, within which impact fees for capital
improvements or facility expansions will be collected for new development occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will be expended for those types
of improvements or expansions identified in the type of capital improvements plan applicable to the service area.
Service unit. Either the average number of gallons of water consumed during an average day of the winter months by a new development, that is equal to that used by a
single-family dwelling unit at such time, or one equivalent meter unit, which is the standardized measure of consumption of wastewater or water facilities equal to that
consumed by a single-family dwelling unit utilizing a 5/8" or 3/4" water meter, as indicated in the land use equivalency table attached to Ordinance 08-002 as exhibit C
and incorporated by reference herein, as may be amended from time to time, included in the impact fee capital improvements plan.
Single-family residential. Has the meaning given the term in the city's zoning regulations.
Site-related facility. An improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate
provision of water or wastewater facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the impact fees capital improvements plan and for which the
property owner is solely responsible under subdivision or other applicable regulations. Site-related facility includes that portion of an off-site water or wastewater main,
equivalent to a standard size water or wastewater main, which is necessary to connect any new development with the city's water or wastewater system, the cost of
which has not been included in the city's impact fee capital improvements plan.
Utility connection. Authorization to install a water meter for connecting a new development to the city's water system or physical connection to the city's wastewater
system.
Wastewater capital improvements plan. The adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater expansions
and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed
in whole or in part through the imposition of wastewater facilities fees pursuant to this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/349
Wastewater facility. A wastewater interceptor or main, lift station or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's collection system for
wastewater. Wastewater facility includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. Wastewater facility excludes that portion of wastewater line or
main which is constructed by a developer, the costs of which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities. Wastewater facility excludes a siterelated
facility.
Wastewater facility expansion. The expansion of the capacity of any existing wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include
the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing sewer facility to serve existing development.
Water demand. The amount of water required to service a development.
Water facility. A water interceptor or main, pump station, well, storage tank, or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's water
storage or distribution system. Water facility includes land, easements, or structures associated with such facilities. Water facility excludes that portion of a water line or
main which is constructed by a developer, the costs of which are reimbursed from charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities. Water facility excludes on-site and
approach main related facilities, except oversized components.
Water facility expansion. The expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair,
maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water improvement to serve existing development.
Water improvements plan. The adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities, water supply demands or water expansions and
their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in
whole or in part through the imposition of water facilities impact fees pursuant to this article.
Water meter. A device owned by the city for measuring the flow of water to a development, whether for residential, commercial, industrial or irrigation purposes.
Water supply. The water acquired to provide service to a development.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.04), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.004; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. A16.005 Applicability
The provisions of this article apply to all new development within the corporate boundaries of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction which lies within the service area
for each category of capital improvement. The provisions of this article apply uniformly within each service area. (Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.05), adopted 1/15/08; 2008
Code, sec. A16.005)
Sec. A16.006 Impact fee as condition of development approval
No final plat for new development shall be approved within the service area without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this article. No final plat shall be approved,
nor shall a building permit be issued or utility connection be made for new development, until the property owner has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated
herein. (Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.06), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.006)
Sec. A16.007 Impact fees per service unit
(a) The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area shall be computed by dividing the total costs of capital improvements in the service area identified
in the impact fee capital improvements plan for that category of capital improvements by the total number of service units anticipated within the service area, based upon
the land use assumptions for that service area. Maximum impact fees per service unit for each service area shall be established by category of capital improvements
and shall be as set forth in schedule I, included in exhibit C as attached to Ordinance 08-002 and made a part of this article by reference, and shall hereinafter be
referred to as schedule I.
(b) The impact fee per service unit which is to be paid by each new development within a service area shall be that established in schedule II, included in exhibit C as
attached to Ordinance 08-002 and made a part of this article by reference, as may be amended from time to time, and shall be an amount less than or equal to the
maximum impact fee per service unit established in subsection (a), and shall hereinafter be referred to as schedule II.
(c) Impact fee schedules I and II may be amended from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in section A16.016.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.07), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.007)
Sec. A16.008 Service unit determination
(a) The number of service units for a new development shall be determined by using the land use equivalency table, as included in exhibit C to Ordinance 08-002 and
incorporated herein by reference.
(b) In determining the number of service units, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Each new freestanding building requires a new water meter, except as provided in subsection (2).
(2) Where a site is redeveloped (clearance and reconstruction), no new service units will be attributed to such redevelopment, provided that the water
meter is of the same size as the development previously occupying the site. If meter size is increased, the number of new service units will be based upon the
increase in capacity of the meter.
(3) Existing buildings or land uses may be expanded using existing meter service. No service units will be attributed to such development if the water meter
size remains the same. If the meter size is increased, the number of service units will be based upon the increase in capacity of the meter.
(4) In determining the number of service units for wastewater impact fees, no service units will be attributed to irrigation meters.
(5) If a new development does not require a water meter for water or wastewater service, no service units will be attributable to the development.
(6) If a new development does not require a water meter for water service, but does generate the need for wastewater service, the service units attributable
to the new development will be determined on an individual basis, in accordance with preexisting wastewater treatment contracts.
(7) All newly platted areas will be provided with water and wastewater services in accordance with the requirements of the city's subdivision regulations.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.08), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.008)
Sec. A16.009 Assessment
(a) Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as follows:
(1) For a development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations following the effective date of 1/15/91, Ordinance 1368,
assessment shall be at the time that a meter is set, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth in schedule
I.
(2) For new development which has received final plat approval prior to the effective date of 1/15/91, Ordinance 1368, and for which no replatting is
necessary prior to issuance of a building permit, assessment shall be prior to or at the time that a water meter is set, and shall be the amount of the maximum
impact fee per service unit set forth in schedule I.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/349
(b) Following initial assessment of the impact fee for a new development pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit for that
development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new development application or application
to increase meter size, in which case the impact fee will be reassessed at the schedule I rate then in effect.
(c) Following the lapse or expiration of approval of a new development, a new assessment shall be performed at the time a new application for such development is
filed.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.09), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.009)
Sec. A16.010 Computation and collection
(a) For developments platted after the effective date of 1/15/91, Ordinance 1368, the impact fees due shall be collected as a condition of final plat approval, unless an
agreement between the developer and the city has been executed providing for a different time of payment.
(b) For all other new development, the impact fees due shall be collected at the time of application for a building permit or at the time of application for utility
connection, whichever occurs first, unless an agreement between the developer and the city has been executed providing for a different time of payment. If the building
permit for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees due shall be computed using schedule II then in
effect, and previous payments of impact fees shall be credited against the new fees due.
(c) At the time of application for final plat approval, or at the time of application for a building permit or the utility connection, the city shall compute the impact fees due
for the new development in the following manner:
(1) The amount of each impact fee due shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units generated by the new development by the impact
fee due per service unit for the service area using schedule II. The number of service units shall be determined according to section A16.008.
(2) The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by any allowable credits for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in
section A16.011.
(d) The amount of each impact fee due for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by multiplying the maximum impact fee per service unit under
schedule I by the number of service units generated by the development.
(e) Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new service units
shall be determined by using schedule II then in effect and such additional fee shall be collected either prior to or at the time of issuance of a new building permit, or prior
to or at the time of enlargement of the connection to the city's water or wastewater system.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.10), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.010)
Sec. A16.011 Credits
(a) A property owner who constructs an area related facility or acquires water to serve the area and dedicates said water to the city pursuant to an improvements
agreement approved by the city following the effective date of this article may reduce impact fees due for the property for that category of capital improvement by the
value of such improvement, as determined in subsection (c). The credit shall be associated with the plat of the property that is to be served by the capital improvement
constructed. Capital improvements include water supply acquisitions.
(b) The improvements agreement required by subsection (a) may provide for participation by the city in the costs of the capital improvement to be constructed by the
property owner, as provided in the city's subdivision regulations. The amount of any credit shall be reduced by the amount of the city's participation.
(c) The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes
authorized in section A16.012. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of
this article; provided, however, that funds shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years from the date impact fees are deposited into
the account.
(d) The city shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source and disbursement of all fees collected in or expended within each
service area. The records of the account into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The city
may establish a fee for copying services.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.11), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.011)
Sec. A16.012 Use of proceeds
(a) The impact fees collected for each service area pursuant to this article may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital improvements or facility
expansion identified in the applicable capital improvements plan for the service area, including but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and
engineering fees, and land acquisition costs (including expert witness fees). Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs
on bonds, notes or other obligation issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facility expansion.
(b) Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses:
(1) Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified in the applicable capital improvements plan;
(2) Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansion;
(3) Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development in order to meet stricter safety,
efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
(4) Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; provided, however, that impact
fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital
improvements generated by new development;
(5) Administrative and operating costs of the city; or
(6) Lease of water rights.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.13), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.012)
Sec. A16.013 Appeals
(a) The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following administrative decisions to the zoning commission, subject to right to appeal to the
city council:
(1) The applicability of an impact fee to the development;
(2) The amount of the impact fee due;
(3) The denial of or the amount of a credit;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/349
(4) The application of a credit against an impact fee due; or
(5) The amount of a refund due, if any.
(b) The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the credit was not calculated according to the applicable
schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for determining credits.
(c) The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the city within thirty days following the decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a payment or other
security satisfactory to the city in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is
pending.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.14), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.013; Ordinance adopting 2017 Code)
Sec. A16.014 Refunds
(a) Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to this article which has not been expended within the service area within 10 years from the
date of payment shall be refunded to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to
such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in article 1.03, title 79,
Revised Statutes (article 5069-1.03, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) [V.T.C.A., Finance Code, section 302.002], or its successor statute. An impact fee shall be considered
expended on a first-in, first-out basis.
(b) An impact fee collected pursuant to this article shall also be considered expended if the total expenditures for capital improvements or facility expansion authorized
in section A16.012 within the service area within ten years following the date of payment exceed the total fees collected within the service area for such improvements or
expansions during such period.
(c) If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) and (b), the city shall divide the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected
by the total number of service units assumed within the service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be
calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated
upon that amount.
(d) Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the capital improvements plan for the service area, the city shall recalculate the
maximum impact fee per service unit using the actual costs for the improvements or expansions. If the maximum impact fee per service unit based on actual cost is less
than the impact fee per service unit paid, the city shall refund the difference, if such difference exceeds the impact fee paid by more than 10%. If the difference is less
than 10%, no refund shall be due. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying such difference by the number of service units for the development
for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
(e) If a tract of land for which an impact fee has been paid is replatted, resulting in a reduction in the number of service units, and the new impact fee to be collected is
less than that paid, the city shall refund the difference, provided that water meters to serve the development have not been installed.
(f) No refunds or credits against impact fees due shall be given for decreasing the number or size of water meters serving a development, except as provided in
subsection (e).
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.15), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.014)
Sec. A16.015 Rebates
If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, no utility connection for that category of capital improvements has been
made to the development, and a modified or new application has not been filed within six months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written application, rebate the
amount of the impact fee to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid. If no application for rebate pursuant to this section has been filed within
this period, no rebate shall become due. (Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.16), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.015)
Sec. A16.016 Updates to capital improvements plan and revision of fees
(a) The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at least every three years, commencing from the date of adoption of such plans,
and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in accordance with the procedures set forth in Texas Local Government Code, chapter 395, or in any successor
statute.
(b) The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital improvements plans and other factors such as market conditions more frequently than provided
in subsection (a) to determine whether the land use assumptions and capital improvements plans should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly, or
whether schedule I or II should be changed.
(c) If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a), the city council determines that no change to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan
or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such update by following the procedures in Texas Local Government Code, section 395.0575.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.17), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.016)
Sec. A16.017 Use of other financing mechanisms
(a) The city may finance capital improvements or facility expansions designated in the capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation
of public utility districts or other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by
law, in addition to the use of impact fees.
(b) Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other
tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property.
(c) The city may pay all or a part of impact fees due for a new development pursuant to duly adopted criteria.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.18), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.017)
Sec. A16.018 Impact fees as additional and supplemental regulation
Impact fees established by this article are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of
land or the issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the city's comprehensive land
use plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning regulations, subdivision regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to
ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. (Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.19), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec.
A16.018)
Sec. A16.019 Relief procedures
(a) Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which an impact fee has been paid may petition the city council to determine whether any duty
required by this article has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and
request that the duty be performed within sixty days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this article and is late in being
performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within sixty days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. This subsection is not applicable to matters
which may be appealed pursuant to section A16.013.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/349
(b) The city council may grant a variance from any requirement of this article, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to this article, following
a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in confiscation of the property.
(c) If the city council grants a variance to the amount of the impact fee due for a new development under this section, it shall cause to be appropriated from other city
funds the amount of the reduction in the impact fee to the account for the service area in which the property is located.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.20), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.019)
Sec. A16.020 Exemptions
(a) Any applicant which has paid a water or sewer availability fee pursuant to former section 32.1400 or 32.1700 of chapter 32 of the 1972 City Code prior to the
effective date of this section shall be exempt from the assessment and payment of an impact fee, unless approval for the project lapses prior to completion, or the fee
was subsequently refunded to the property owner.
(b) Any building permit application which was duly accepted for filing prior to the effective date of this article, and which is subsequently granted, shall be exempt from
the assessment and payment of an impact fee, unless such application thereafter expires.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (1.21), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.020)
Sec. A16.021 Water facilities impact fees
(a) Water benefit area.
(1) There is hereby established a water benefit area, constituting portions of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as depicted on exhibit D attached to
Ordinance 08-002 and incorporated herein by reference.
(2) The boundaries of the water benefit area may be amended from time to time, or new water benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures
in section A16.016.
(b) Water capital improvements plan.
(1) The water improvements plan, which includes water supply acquisitions for the city, is hereby adopted as exhibit D attached to Ordinance 08-002 and
incorporated by reference herein.
(2) The water improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section A16.016.
(c) Water facilities impact fees.
(1) The maximum impact fees per service unit for water facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule I.
(2) The impact fees per service unit for water facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule II.
(3) The impact fees per service unit for water facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section A16.016.
(d) Water supply impact fees.
(1) The maximum impact fees per service unit for water supply are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule I.
(2) The impact fees per service unit for water supply, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule II.
(3) The impact fees per service unit for water supply may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section A16.016.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (2), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.021)
Sec. A16.022 Wastewater facilities impact fees
(a) Wastewater benefit area.
(1) There is hereby established a wastewater benefit area, constituting the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, as depicted on exhibit D attached to
Ordinance 08-002 and incorporated herein by reference.
(2) The boundaries of the wastewater benefit area may be amended from time to time, or new wastewater benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to the
procedures in section A16.016.
(b) Wastewater capital improvements plan.
(1) The wastewater capital improvements plan for the city is hereby adopted as exhibit B attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
(2) The wastewater capital improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section A16.016.
(c) Wastewater facilities impact fees.
(1) The maximum impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule I, exhibit C.
(2) The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in
schedule II, exhibit C.
(3) The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section A16.016.
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (3), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.022)
Sec. A16.023 Applicability to existing development
(a) Fees for existing development.
(1) If any existing development within the benefit area presently utilizes a water well, a septic tank, or an individual waste disposal system and the property
owner requests to be connected to the city's water or wastewater system, the customer shall pay the fee prescribed by section A16.010 prior to connection to
such system.
(2) If the property owner of any existing development within the benefit area requests enlargement of a water meter presently serving the development, and
no new development is to occur on the property, the owner shall pay the fee prescribed by section A16.010 for the increase in size of the capacity of the
meter prior to installation of the enlarged meter.
(b) Availability charges replaced. This article replaces and supersedes those provisions for water and sewer availability charges originally imposed pursuant to former
sections 32.1400 and 32.1700 of the 1972 City Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/349
(Ordinance 08-002, sec. 2 (4), adopted 1/15/08; 2008 Code, sec. A16.023)
ARTICLE A17.000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Sec. A17.001 Burglar alarms
Fee for excessive false alarms: $25.00. (Ordinance 95-05, sec. 1, adopted 1/3/95; 2008 Code, sec. A17.001)
Sec. A17.002 Garage sale permit
Permit fee: $5.00. (1972 Code, sec. 27.203; 2008 Code, sec. A17.002)
Sec. A17.003 Adult entertainment license
(a) Nonrefundable application fee: $500.00.
(b) Nonrefundable renewal processing fee: $500.00.
(c) Fee for reinstatement of license instead of suspension: $200.00.
(1972 Code, ch. 34, secs. 4.01, 4.05, 4.06; 2008 Code, sec. A17.003)
Sec. A17.004 Permit for temporary parking in no parking zone
Application fee: $5.00. (1972 Code, sec. 26.1401; 2008 Code, sec. A17.004)
Sec. A17.005 Overweight truck permit fee
Overweight truck (33,000 lbs. or more) permit fee: $500.00. (Ordinance 2017-36, sec. 4, adopted 7/18/17)
Sec. A17.006 Handbill distributors application permit fee
Handbill distributors permit fee (per application): $100.00. (Ordinance 2017-42, sec. 17, adopted 8/1/17)
Sec. A17.007 Fortune teller establishment
Fortune teller establishment permit fee: $200.00 annually. (Ordinance 2018-4, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. A17.008 Massage establishments
(a) Massage establishment permit fee: $200.00 annually.
(b) Massage therapist licensing fee: $100.00 annually.
(Ordinance 2018-6, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. A17.009 Game room establishments
(a) Game room establishment permit fee: $200.00 annually.
(b) Game room operator licensing fee: $100.00 annually.
(Ordinance 2018-36, sec. 2, adopted 4/17/18)
ARTICLE A18.000 IMPOUND LOT FEES
(a) Wrecker towing and storage fees (towing fee charged per vehicle and per type):
(1) Wrecker tow fee up to 25 feet in length: $95.00.
(2) Heavy duty vehicles: $425.00.
(3) Vehicles greater than 25 feet in length: $225.00.
(4) Recreational vehicles: $125.00.
(5) Tilt-bed vehicle towing: $95.00.
(6) Off road or winching of vehicle: $225.00.
(7) Per mile charge outside of the city: $3.00.
(8) Storage fee (first 24 hours): $200.00.
(9) Daily fee (after first 24 hours): $20.00.
(10) Certified letter of abandonment (each letter): $25.00.
(Certified letter to be sent to address on registration and lienholder if applicable.)
(b) Retrieval of vehicle: To retrieve a vehicle from the impound facility, the retriever must be the registered owner of the vehicle, and must present a valid and current
driver's license, valid and current insurance and registration documents, and must not have any outstanding warrants for arrest.
(Ordinance 2017-21 adopted 5/16/17)