7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/420
City of Lamesa
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 9
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through 1/15/19.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Lamesa, Texas, as compiled, edited and published
by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Lamesa, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Lamesa, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/420
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city
administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be
construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officer or department, respectively, of the City of Lamesa, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Lamesa, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Dawson, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/420
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/420
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/420
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Intention in enactment of code
In enacting this code, it is presumed that:
(1) Compliance with the city charter and the constitutions of the state and the United States is
intended;
(2) The entire code is intended to be effective;
(3) A just and reasonable result is intended;
(4) A result feasible of execution is intended;
(5) The public interest is favored over any private interest; and
(6) The protection of the public safety and welfare is intended.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/420
(1998 Code, sec. 1.011)
Sec. 1.01.011 Interpretation of code
In interpreting this code, a court shall diligently attempt to ascertain legislative intent and shall consider at all
times the evil and the remedy. (1998 Code, sec. 1.012)
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION*
Sec. 1.02.001 City boundaries
The corporate boundaries and limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be as designated and
described on the official map of the city, which map shall be kept in the office of the city secretary. (1998 Code,
sec. 2.001)
Charter references–Boundaries, art. II, sec. 1; extension of boundaries, art. II, sec. 2.
State law reference–Map of municipal boundaries and extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 41.001.
Sec. 1.02.002 City seal
The official corporate seal of the city shall be an impression of a star enclosed by the words “City of Lamesa,
Texas” in a circle and shall look and appear as follows:
(1998 Code, sec. 2.002)
Sec. 1.02.003 Unauthorized use of city insignia
A person commits an offense if he or she uses the official flag, seal, badge, logo, or other insignia of the city or a
department of the city or a facsimile of the flag, seal, badge, logo, or other insignia of the city or a department of
the city, or in any other written or spoken form uses the name of the city:
(1) For a commercial purpose; or
(2) To signify sponsorship or approval by an agency or department of the city;
without first obtaining express written authorization from the city manager.
(1998 Code, sec. 2.003)
Sec. 1.02.004 Official newspaper
(a) Designation. The official newspaper of the city shall be the Lamesa Press-Reporter, same being a
newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(b) Date of publication. The official date of publication for any notice required by this code or as otherwise
required by law shall be the date of publication as indicated upon the masthead of said newspaper.
(1998 Code, sec. 2.004)
Sec. 1.02.005 Claims against city
(a) Liability for damages. Before the city shall be liable for damages for personal injuries of any kind or for
injuries to or destruction or damage to property of any kind, the person injured or the owner of the property so
injured, damaged, or destroyed, or someone on his behalf, shall give the mayor and city council notice in writing
of such injury, damage, or destruction within six (6) months after the same has been sustained, stating in such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/420
written notice when, where and how the injury, damage or destruction occurred, the apparent extent thereof, the
amount of damages sustained, the amount for which the claimant will settle, the street and residence number of
the claimant at the time and date the claim was presented and the actual residence of the claimant for the six
months preceding the occurrence of such injuries, damage or destruction, and the names and addresses of the
witnesses upon whom he relies to establish his claim; and a failure to so notify the mayor and city council within
the time and manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse and except the city from any liability whatsoever.
(b) Suits. No suit shall be instituted or maintained on any claim against the city until the expiration of ninety
(90) days from the time the notice required under subsection (a) shall have been given.
(1998 Code, sec. 2.005)
Charter reference–Liability for negligence, art. III, sec. 8.
State law reference–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101.
Sec. 1.02.006 Appeals of actions of officers
Any person aggrieved by any decision regarding the enforcement or application of any provision of this code or
any policy of the city shall file an appeal of any such action, decision, or any matter related to the enforcement
or application of this code with the city manager or any other specified official. Except as otherwise provided by
state or federal law, any further appeal shall be made to the 106th District Court of the state in Dawson County.
(1998 Code, sec. 2.006)
Sec. 1.02.007 Rules of procedure for city council
The city council in its meetings shall follow and be guided by the rules of procedure set out in Robert's Rules of
Order. (1998 Code, sec. 2.007)
Charter reference–Rules of the city council, art. IV, sec. 16.
Sec. 1.02.008 Fiscal year
The fiscal year of the city shall begin with the first day of October of each year and shall end with the thirtieth
day of September of the following year. (1998 Code, sec. 2.008)
State law reference–Annual budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 102; authority to establish fiscal year different from
charter, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
ARTICLE 1.03 CITY OFFICERS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. City Attorney
Sec. 1.03.031 Appointment of attorneys
The city council shall appoint such attorneys as necessary to represent the city in all suits to which the city is a
party, to prosecute all violations of city ordinances, and to provide legal counsel to the city council and
administration. Such representation may be made by individuals or firms hired or contracted to provide such
representation, provided that the council may retain special counsel at any time they deem necessary and
appropriate. (1998 Code, sec. 5.021)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/420
Sec. 1.03.032 Prosecuting attorney
(a) Appointment. There shall be a prosecuting attorney appointed by the city council, who shall hold the office
at the pleasure of the city council and shall receive such compensation for services as may be fixed by the
council.
(b) Qualifications. The prosecuting attorney shall be a licensed lawyer in the state and competent to discharge
the duties required by this code and the ordinances of the city.
(c) Duties. It shall be the duty of the prosecuting attorney to prosecute all violations of any city law or
ordinance and all criminal prosecutions before the proper authorities and render such advice on proposed penal
ordinances as may be requested by the city council or administration.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.022)
Sec. 1.03.033 Legal counsel
(a) Appointment. There shall be a legal counsel appointed by the city council, who shall hold the office at the
pleasure of the city council and shall receive such compensation for services as may be fixed by the council.
(b) Qualifications. The legal counsel shall be a licensed lawyer in the state and competent to discharge the
duties required by this code and the ordinances of the city.
(c) Duties. It shall be the duty of the legal counsel to initiate, prosecute and defend all suits to which the city is
a party in all the courts of the state; to prosecute all writs of error and appeals when in his opinion it is in the
interest of the city to require appeals to be taken; to give legal advice to the officers of the city, and to the city
council and its committees, upon questions arising relative to the business of the city; to give an opinion to the
city council upon legal questions when so required; to draw deeds, contracts or articles of agreement to which
the city is a party; to review ordinances prior to their final passage by the council, and see that they conform to
the laws of the state whenever the same shall be presented for that purpose; to attend meetings of the city council
when such attendance shall be requested or necessary; and to perform such other duties pertaining to the
profession of the law as the interest of the city may require.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.023)
Secs. 1.03.034–1.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. City Treasurer
Sec. 1.03.061 Appointment; oath; bond
The city treasurer and at least one deputy shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city
council and, before entering upon his duties as such, shall take the oath of office as prescribed by the state
constitution and shall enter into bond which shall be procured from a regular surety company in such sum as
designated by the council, and payable to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties as
such. (1998 Code, sec. 5.031)
Sec. 1.03.062 Signing of checks and warrants
The city treasurer shall sign all checks and warrants as prepared by the director of finance upon city funds and
the same shall be countersigned by the city manager or mayor. (1998 Code, sec. 5.032)
Secs. 1.03.063–1.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. Director of Finance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/420
Sec. 1.03.091 Appointment; oath; bond
The director of finance shall be appointed by the city manager with the approval of the city council and, before
entering upon his duties as such, shall take the oath of office as prescribed by the state constitution, and shall
enter into bond which shall be procured from a regular surety company in such sum as designated by the city
council, and payable to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties as such. (1998 Code,
sec. 5.041)
Sec. 1.03.092 Keeping of books; financial reports
The director of finance shall keep all books pertaining to his office in such a manner as will clearly show the
financial condition of the city at all times, which books shall be open to the inspection of any member of the
council or other officer of the city. The director of finance shall make financial reports as directed by the city
manager. (1998 Code, sec. 5.042)
Sec. 1.03.093 Receiving and disbursing moneys; signing of checks
The director of finance shall receive and safely keep all moneys belonging to the city, give receipts therefor, and
shall disburse the same upon checks or warrants, which checks are to be signed by the city treasurer and
countersigned by the city manager or mayor. (1998 Code, sec. 5.043)
Sec. 1.03.094 Social security assessments, collections and reports
The director of finance is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assessments, collections,
payments, and reports as required by law in connection with the federal old-age and survivors' insurance
program. (1998 Code, sec. 5.044)
ARTICLE 1.04 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.04.001–1.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Commission
Sec. 1.04.031 Created; composition; term of members
(a) Created; regular members. There is hereby created and established for the city a planning and zoning
commission, which shall be composed of seven (7) members. The members shall be resident citizens, and
qualified voters of the city, all of whom shall be appointed by the city council to serve for terms of three (3)
years. The original members shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2) or three (3) years so that
overlapping terms will be accomplished.
(b) Alternate members. The planning and zoning commission shall be composed of two (2) additional
alternate members who shall have the same qualifications as the regular members and be appointed by the city
council to serve for two (2) years. The original alternate members shall be appointed for terms of two (2) and
three (3) years each. The chairman of said commission shall have the authority to call in one of such alternate
members to serve on said board in the absence of any regular member at any meeting of said board.
(1998 Code, sec. 12.001)
Sec. 1.04.032 Chairman and vice-chairman; staff; bylaws
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/420
(a) Chairman and vice-chairman; staff. The city council shall annually appoint the chairman and vicechairman
from the membership of the planning and zoning commission, effective January 1st of the following
year. The city council shall furnish qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and
undertakings of the planning and zoning commission.
(b) Bylaws. The planning and zoning commission shall have the power to make rules, regulations, and bylaws
for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city council, and
same shall be subject to approval by the city council. Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions
for:
(1) Regular and special meetings;
(2) Records of its proceedings to be open for inspection by the public;
(3) Reporting to the governing body annually and as directed by the city council; and
(4) The holding of public hearings as directed by the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 12.002)
Sec. 1.04.033 Recommendation of comprehensive plan
The planning and zoning commission shall recommend for adoption a comprehensive city plan, as a whole or in
parts, for the future development and redevelopment of the municipality and its environs. The plan, among other
things, but not limited thereto, will include:
(1) To make studies and project plans for the improvement of the city with a view of its
development and extensions, and to recommend to the city council matters for the development and
advancement of the city facilities, layouts, and appearance, and to perform the duties imposed upon
the city planning commission by the statutes of the state.
(2) To make plans and maps of the whole or any portion of the city and of land outside the city
limits located within the planning area of the city limits, and any other land outside the city which in
the opinion of the city planning commission bears a relation to the planning of the city, and to make
such changes in additions and extensions of plans or maps within the city as it deems advisable.
(3) To plan and recommend the location, plan, and extent of city alleyways, parks, playgrounds,
airports, automobile parking places, and other public grounds and public improvements, for the
location and planning of public buildings, schools, and other properties, and of public utilities,
including bus terminals, railroad depots and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned, for
water, lights, sanitation, sewage disposal, drainage, flood control, transportation, communication, and
shipping facilities, and for the removal, relocation, widening, extension, narrowing, vacation,
abandonment, or change of use of any of the foregoing public places, work buildings, facilities, or
utilities.
(4) To recommend to the city council routes of streets, avenues, and boulevards and particularly to
investigate and recommend the opening, widening, or abandonment of streets, avenues, boulevards,
and alleyways or the changing thereof to conform to the city's system, present and future, all streets,
avenues, boulevards, alleyways, and parks.
(5) To investigate, consider and report to the city council on the layout and plan of any new
subdivision to the city or property situated within the planning area and approve all plats, plans, or
replats of additions, within the city limits or within the planning area.
(6) To recommend to the city council for adoption, rules and regulations governing plats and
subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the city or of the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/420
city or within the planning area to promote health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community, and the safe and orderly and healthful development of the community; such rules and
regulations may be adopted by the city council only after public hearing held thereon.
(7) To recommend plans to the city council for improving, developing, expanding, and beautifying
the parks, lakes, and public buildings in or adjacent to the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 12.003)
Sec. 1.04.034 Duties relative to zoning
It shall be the duty of the commission to make recommendations to the city council relative to changes,
alterations, and additions to the zoning ordinance of the city and to perform other duties as authorized by law.
(1998 Code, sec. 12.004)
Sec. 1.04.035 Conditional approval of plats
The planning and zoning commission shall review the preliminary plat and other material submitted for
conformity thereof to the subdivision regulations as provided in section 10.02.044. (1998 Code, sec. 21.001)
Sec. 1.04.036 Applications for zoning changes
Any person desiring a change in the provisions of article 14.03 (zoning) or in the zoning map shall make
application for a change to the planning and zoning commission. (1998 Code, sec. 21.002)
ARTICLE 1.05 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.05.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the word “committee” shall mean the city's municipal emergency management and
disaster relief committee, and the word “coordinator” shall mean the municipal emergency management
coordinator of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 81.001)
Sec. 1.05.002 Conflicts with state or federal law or military regulations
This article shall not be construed or applied so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any
military or naval order, rule or regulation. (1998 Code, sec. 81.002)
Sec. 1.05.003 Exemption from liability
(a) City. This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public
peace, health and safety, and neither the city, nor the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual,
receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any agent thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with, or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to person or property as the result of said
activities.
(b) Individuals. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without
compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use
the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an
actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
(1998 Code, sec. 81.003)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/420
Sec. 1.05.004 Emergency management and disaster relief committee
(a) Created; composition. There is hereby created a municipal emergency management and disaster relief
committee of the city, which shall consist of the following:
(1) The mayor of the city, who shall serve as chairman of the committee and as director of
emergency management.
(2) The city manager or his designee shall serve as emergency management coordinator of the city,
and shall serve as vice-chairman of the committee, and shall be charged with the preparation of an
emergency management plan for the city, together with such other duties as the coordinator may
prescribe.
(3) The directors of divisions or chiefs of services of such divisions as may be provided for by
resolution by the city council or by directive of the coordinator.
(4) Representatives, not to exceed ten (10) in number, from civic, business, industry, labor,
veterans, professional, or other groups, to be selected and appointed by the mayor.
(b) Meetings. The committee shall meet upon the call of either the chairman or the vice-chairman.
(1998 Code, sec. 81.021)
Sec. 1.05.005 Emergency management plan
(a) Duties of committee.
(1) The powers and duties of the committee shall include the recommendation for adoption by the
city council of an emergency management plan for the city and mutual aid plans and agreements
which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan.
(2) The duties of the committee shall also include the making of a survey of the availability of
existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during an emergency, as
provided for in this article, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and
improvements in the emergency management plan adopted by the city council.
(b) Adoption.
(1) The emergency management plan for the city, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city
secretary, being marked and designated as the “Emergency Management Plan for the City of Lamesa
and Dawson County,” is hereby adopted and approved for use by all city departments, agencies, and
employees.
(2) A copy of the emergency management plan for the city is attached to the ordinance codified in
this section and a copy of such plan shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.
(1998 Code, sec. 81.022)
Sec. 1.05.006 Emergency management director
(a) Office created; designation of mayor. The office of municipal emergency management director of the city
is hereby created. The mayor shall serve as such director.
(b) Declaration of emergency. The director shall have the authority to request the declaration of the existence
of an emergency by the city council or by higher authority. In the event it is deemed necessary to declare the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/420
existence of an emergency without delay, the coordinator may, if the city council is not in session, do so, but
such action shall be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting.
(c) Powers and duties. The duties and responsibilities shall include the following:
(1) The control and direction of the actual operation or training efforts of the emergency
management and disaster relief organization of the city;
(2) The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management and disaster relief organization of the city;
(3) The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, district, county, state, regional,
federal, or other emergency management organizations;
(4) The marshalling, after declaration of an emergency, of all necessary personnel, equipment or
supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the emergency management
plan;
(5) The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of an emergency and the
immediate operational effectiveness of the emergency management plan;
(6) The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the
protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the
city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity will be of aid and comfort to the
enemy;
(7) The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of efforts in emergency
management and disaster relief;
(8) The supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions;
(9) The authorizing of agreements, after approval of the city attorney, for the use of private
property for air raid shelters and other purposes.
(1998 Code, sec. 81.023)
Sec. 1.05.007 Operational organization generally
(a) Composition. The operational emergency management and disaster relief organization of the city shall
consist of the officers and employees of the city designated by the coordinator as well as all volunteer municipal
emergency management workers.
(b) Functions and duties. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such
divisions, services and special staff as the city council shall prescribe by resolution or the coordinator shall
provide by directive. Any such resolution or directive shall set forth the form of organization, establish and
designate divisions and services, assign functions, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to
carry out the provisions of this article.
(c) Conformance with state and federal recommendations. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles
and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and of
the federal government.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/420
(1998 Code, sec. 81.024)
Sec. 1.05.008 Oath of personnel
Each person serving as a member of the committee, or as an officer, employee or volunteer in any capacity in the
city organization created by resolution or directive pursuant to the authority herein conferred, shall, prior to
assuming their duty or duties, take an oath which shall be substantially as follows:
I, ________________, do solemnly swear (affirm) that I will support and defend the
Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the State of Texas, against all enemies,
foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this
obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (affirm)
that I do not advocate, nor am I a member or an affiliate of any political party or organization,
group or combination of persons that advocates, the overthrow of the Government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am a member of the
Municipal Emergency Management Civil Defense and Disaster Relief Committee of the City of
Lamesa, I will not advocate nor become a member or an affiliate of any organization, group, or
combination of persons or of any political party that advocates the overthrow of the
Government of the United States or of this State by force or violence.
(1998 Code, sec. 81.025)
Sec. 1.05.009 Participation in county-wide program
The mayor of the city is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the
county in formation of an emergency management and disaster relief council for the county and shall have the
authority to cooperate in the formation of an emergency management plan for the county and in the appointment
of an emergency management director for the county, as well as all other powers necessary to participate in a
county-wide program of emergency management and disaster relief insofar as said program may affect the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 81.026)
Sec. 1.05.010 Expenditure of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 81.051)
Sec. 1.05.011 Emergency orders and regulations supersede existing regulations
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in
effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules, sections of this code and regulations insofar as
the latter may be inconsistent therewith. (1998 Code, sec. 81.052)
Sec. 1.05.012 Obstructing enforcement; violations generally
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or to do any
act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. (1998 Code, sec.
81.053)
Sec. 1.05.013 Display of light contrary to emergency regulation
(a) Any light displayed contrary to any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this
article constitutes a public nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/420
(b) When deemed necessary or in order to protect life or property during blackouts or air raids, the police are
authorized and directed to enter upon any premises within the city, using reasonable force, if necessary, and
extinguish such lights or take other necessary action to make effective any order, rule or regulation promulgated
under the authority conferred by this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 81.054)
Sec. 1.05.014 Simulation of blackout or air raid signal
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a blackout signal or air raid,
or the termination of a blackout or air raid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 81.055)
Sec. 1.05.015 Impersonating emergency management personnel
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority so to do has
been granted to such person by the proper official. (1998 Code, sec. 81.056)
ARTICLE 1.06 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.06.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (1998 Code, sec. 15.001)
Sec. 1.06.002 Additional definitions
In this article, unless the content of any section makes such definition inapplicable thereto, the following words
shall mean:
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the
city that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in
an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records liaison officers. The persons designated under section 1.06.009 of this article.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/420
Records management committee. The persons designated in section 1.06.006 of this article.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.06.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.06.007 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1998 Code, sec. 15.002)
Sec. 1.06.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 1.06.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city.
No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records
even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files,
or use of such records is prohibited. (1998 Code, sec. 15.003)
Sec. 1.06.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (1998 Code, sec. 15.004)
Sec. 1.06.005 Records management officer
(a) Designation. The administrative assistant and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records
management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or
her name with the director and librarian of the state library within thirty days of the initial designation or of
taking up the office, as applicable. (Ordinance O-01-13 adopted 1/22/13)
(b) Duties. In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of records in order to reestablish
operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a
manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/420
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control
schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and
administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of
records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management
program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and
space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city council on implementation of the records management plan in each
department of the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under
subsection (13); and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city
personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local
Government Records Act.
(1998 Code, sec. 15.005)
Sec. 1.06.006 Records management committee
A records management committee consisting of the city manager, city secretary, director of finance, chief of
police, and personnel director is hereby established. The committee shall:
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing
the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and
improvements if needed;
(3) Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer;
(4) Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control
schedules; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 15.006)
Sec. 1.06.007 Records management plan
(a) Records management plan to be developed. The records management officer and the records management
committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan
must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/420
to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are
of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her
duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Approval of plan. Once approved by the city, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) Authority of plan. State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of
a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the
application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the
department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 15.007)
Sec. 1.06.008 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 15.008)
Sec. 1.06.009 Records liaison officers
(a) Designation. Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison
officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management
officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one records liaison
officer should be designated for a department, the department head shall designate the number of records liaison
officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be
thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to
all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or
removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department head
shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records liaison
officer for his or her department.
(b) Duties. In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation
for the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(1998 Code, sec. 15.009)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/420
Sec. 1.06.010 Records control schedules
(a) Preparation. The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison
officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created
or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also
contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may
require.
(b) Amendment. Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records
management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued
by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the
records management program of the city.
(c) Adoption.
(1) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be
approved by the department head and the members of the records management committee.
(2) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by
the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the
schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall
submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian.
(d) Implementation. A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under
section 1.06.007 shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies
and procedures of the records management plan.
(e) Destruction of records.
(1) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed
unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent
to a pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management
committee that the record be retained for an additional period.
(2) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization
for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records
management committee.
(1998 Code, sec. 15.010)
Sec. 1.06.011 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (1998 Code, sec. 15.011)
Sec. 1.06.012 Records center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 1.06.007, shall be under the direct control
and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of
the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 1.06.007. (1998
Code, sec. 15.012)
Sec. 1.06.013 Micrographics
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/420
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all
microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer.
The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records,
including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the
microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives commission. The
plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for
ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject
to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and
compliance with commission rules. (1998 Code, sec. 15.013)
ARTICLE 1.07 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.07.001–1.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Economic Development Corporation
Sec. 1.07.031 Created; authority of city council; powers and duties
(a) There is hereby created the city economic development corporation, which shall act on behalf of the city to
carry out the public purposes of section 4A of the Development Corporation Act of 1979 ([Vernon's Ann. Civ.
St.] article 5190.6). Said corporation shall be organized and governed in accordance with the provisions of said
act, and shall have all the powers, and shall be subject to any limitations, provided for said corporations by said
act. The city shall be considered the unit under whose auspices the city economic development corporation is
created and the city council shall be considered to be the governing body. The corporate existence of the city
economic development corporation shall begin upon the issuance of a certificate of incorporation by the
secretary of state.
(b) At any time, the city council may in its sole discretion alter the structure, organization, programs, or
activities of the corporation or terminate or dissolve the corporation, subject only to any limitation provided by
the constitution and laws of the state on the impairment of contracts entered into by the corporation. Such
alteration or dissolution shall be made by an ordinance duly passed and approved by the city council.
(c) The corporation shall have and exercise all of the rights, powers, privileges, authority, and functions given
by section 23 of the Development Corporation Act of 1979 ([Vernon's Ann. Civ. St.] article 5190.6).
(1998 Code, sec. 13.001)
Sec. 1.07.032 Board of directors established
The corporation shall have a board of directors in which all powers of the corporation shall be vested and which
shall consist of five directors who shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two years, and [all] of
whom shall be removable by the city council for cause or at will. The directors shall serve without compensation
except that they shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. (1998
Code, sec. 13.002)
Sec. 1.07.033 Meetings of board of directors; adoption of bylaws
(a) The board of directors is subject to the Open Meetings Act (Govt. Code, chapter 551) and the Open
Records Act (Govt. Code, chapter 552).
(b) The initial bylaws of the corporation shall be adopted by its board of directors and approved by resolution
of the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/420
(1998 Code, sec. 13.003)
Sec. 1.07.034 Finances
(a) The city council will approve all programs and expenditures of the corporation and annually review any
financial statements of the corporation, and at all times the city council will have access to the books and records
of the corporation.
(b) The corporation shall be a nonprofit corporation, and no part of its net earnings remaining after payment of
its expenses shall inure to the benefit of any individual, firm, or corporation, except that, in the event the board
of directors shall determine that sufficient provision has been made for the full payment of the expenses, bonds,
and other obligations of the corporation, then any net earnings of the corporation thereafter accruing shall be
paid to the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 13.004)
ARTICLE 1.08 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.08.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Board. The park board of the city.
Deface. Damage.
Litter. To throw papers and/or other debris on the surface of the park in areas other than those designated by the
park superintendent.
Livestock. Cattle, horses, mules, goats and sheep.
Parks or city parks. All areas under the supervision of the city park board used by the general public for
recreation and picnicking.
Park superintendent. The park superintendent of the city.
Picnic areas. The area set apart by the park board to be used by picnickers.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.001)
Sec. 1.08.002 Penalty
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be assessed a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day that any person or
persons occupy the campgrounds described in this article after the limits of stay as provided in this article shall
be deemed a separate violation of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 76.049)
Sec. 1.08.003 Opening and closing hours for park areas, ball parks and tennis courts
(a) Opening and closing hours. All park areas, ballparks and tennis courts in the city shall be open for public
use between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12 o'clock midnight each day of the week.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/420
(b) Penalty. Entry upon the premises of any park area, ballpark or tennis court by any person at any hour other
than those prescribed above shall constitute a misdemeanor and any person who is found in any park area,
ballpark or tennis court after 12 o'clock midnight and before 6:00 a.m. the following morning shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two
hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ordinance O-17-17 adopted 9/29/17)
(c) Exclusions. The provisions of this section do not apply to the following:
(1) Bona fide users of the travel trailer park located within Forrest Park for overnight camping
within the designated camping area.
(2) Special events within any park area, ball park, or tennis court authorized by the city manager
upon recommendation by the park board for which a special permit has been issued by the city
manager.
(3) Continuous travel upon designated streets through any park.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.002)
Sec. 1.08.004 Prohibited acts in parks
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts within the parks of the city:
(1) To allow livestock to graze in the city parks.
(2) To play golf in or adjacent to picnic areas in parks.
(3) To ride horses or other livestock in the parks, except in roadways and bridle paths or as a part
of an organized festival or celebration approved by the mayor of the city.
(4) To play ball in picnic areas.
(5) To litter the park.
(6) To deface trees or property situated in parks.
(7) To display a gun or guns in parks.
(8) To possess intoxicating liquors of any kind.
(9) To operate a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour, except on
Houston Avenue.
(10) To drive or operate any motor-propelled vehicle within any city park except upon designated
roads and parking areas.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.003)
Sec. 1.08.005 Use of public recreation buildings for financial gain
The use of any public recreation building by any person, club or organization for financial gain is prohibited.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.004)
Sec. 1.08.006 Park fees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/420
(a) Fees for use of the Weaver Sports Complex.
(1) Per league per season (Cal Ripken Baseball League and Lamesa Girls Fast Pitch Association):
$350.00.
(2) Per season for city traveling teams (includes usage of 2 days a week (Wednesday evening and
Friday evening) for 2.5 hours per day, lighting not included): $350.00.
(3) Out-of-town teams:
(A) Refundable deposit: $500.00.
(B) Per field per day: $100.00.
(Ordinance O-2-17 adopted 3/21/17)
(b) Fees for the use of city swimming pool.
(1) Child fee: $3.00 per day.
(2) Adult fee: $4.00 per day.
(3) Splash pass – child (15 visits): $35.00.
(4) Splash pass – adult (15 visits): $45.00.
(Ordinance O-18-16, sec. 5, adopted 8/30/16)
(5) Refundable deposit for pool rentals: $125.00.
(6) Rental of pool: $60.00 per pool party (4-hour maximum).
(7) Salary of 2 lifeguards per pool party: $12.25 per hour per lifeguard (totals $98.00 for 4 hours).
Note: Maximum of 25 people per lifeguard.
Parties will be held to a maximum of 175 people. Fees will increase incrementally based on these maximums
listed above.
(Ordinance O-7-17 adopted 5/2/17)
(c) Fees for use of the adult softball field.
(1) League play.
(A) Fee for usage: $350.00 per season per league. Must pay in full before use.
(B) Refundable deposit: $275.00 per season per league. Refundable deposit can be retained
by city for damage to the facility, fences, equipment and/or for prohibited conduct (i.e. fighting,
etc.) as determined by the city manager.
(C) Fee to prep the field for a tournament (1x only per tournament): $50.00. Teams
responsible for up keep of fields for other games during tournament.
(2) Tournament play.
(A) Nonprofit entity.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/420
(i) Per day fee for use of the field: $150.00, plus refundable deposit of $275.00.
Refundable deposit can be retained by city for damage to the facility, fences, equipment
and/or for prohibited conduct (i.e. fighting, etc.) as determined by the city manager.
(ii) Cost to prep the field for a tournament (1x): $50.00. Teams responsible for up keep
for other games in tournament.
(B) Private tournament.
(i) Per day fee for use of the field: $150.00, plus refundable deposit of $275.00.
Refundable deposit can be retained by city for damage to the facility, fences, equipment
and/or for prohibited conduct (i.e. fighting, etc.) as determined by the city manager.
(ii) Cost to prep the field for a tournament (1x): $50.00. Teams responsible for up keep
for other games in tournament.
(Ordinance O-8-17 adopted 5/23/17)
Secs. 1.08.007–1.08.040 Reserved
Division 2. Park Board
Sec. 1.08.041 Created
There is hereby created in and for the city a board which shall be known as the park board of the city. (1998
Code, sec. 76.021)
Sec. 1.08.042 Membership
(a) Composition. The park board [shall] be composed of at least five (5) but no more than seven (7) members
with each member appointed to serve a term determined by the city council, not to exceed five (5) years.
(b) Term of members. The term of office for each member shall be for a term of five (5) years.
(c) Staggered terms. The terms of the members shall be so arranged that only one (1) member shall be
reappointed or replaced each year.
(d) Qualifications of members. No person shall be appointed to the board who is not a citizen of the United
States and a resident of the city.
(e) Compensation of members. The members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.022)
Sec. 1.08.043 Officers
The park board shall elect one (1) of its members president, one (1) vice-president and one (1) secretary, who
may or may not be a member of the board. The officers shall hold office for one (1) year and until their
successors are elected and qualified. (1998 Code, sec. 76.023)
Sec. 1.08.044 Removal of members
(a) Generally. The members of the board shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for any
cause deemed by the council sufficient for their removal in the interest of the public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/420
(b) Right to hearing. Each member of the board shall be entitled to ten (10) days' notice of intention to
remove. If demanded within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice, a public hearing shall be granted to the
member so affected before the city council and upon charges publicly made.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.024)
Sec. 1.08.045 Vacancies
Any vacancy in the membership of the park board shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of the
member whose place has become vacant. (1998 Code, sec. 76.025)
Sec. 1.08.046 Powers and duties
(a) Advisory functions. The park board shall function as an advisory board only and in this capacity shall
advise the city council from time to time concerning the management, maintenance and beautification of the
public parks and public buildings surrounding all city-owned buildings, now owned or controlled or that may
hereafter be acquired by the city, either within or without the corporate limits of the city.
(b) Power to receive donations. The park board shall have power for and on behalf of the city to receive
donations, legacies or bequests for the improvement or maintenance of the public parks of the city, or for the
acquirement of new parks, and all such moneys derived from such donations, legacies or bequests shall be
deposited in the city treasury to the credit of the public park fund, and the same may be drawn therefrom and
paid out only in the manner provided for the payment of moneys legally appropriated for the acquirement,
support and improvement of the public parks of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.026)
Sec. 1.08.047 Meetings
The park board shall meet as deemed necessary and shall establish rules and regulations for its government and
for the performance of its duties. (1998 Code, sec. 76.027)
Sec. 1.08.048 Reports and recommendations
It shall be the duty of the park board to make such recommendations to the city council as they may deem
advisable, for the improvement and betterment of public parks and community improvement. (1998 Code, sec.
76.028)
Secs. 1.08.049–1.08.080 Reserved
Division 3. Campgrounds
Sec. 1.08.081 Permit required for camping
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or stay overnight in any city park except in a designated campground
or by special permit issued by the park superintendent, the chief of police, or designated agent. The officer
issuing such special permit shall promptly notify the other officers of such issuance. (1998 Code, sec. 76.041)
Sec. 1.08.082 Designated campgrounds
The below listed areas in the city parks are hereby designated as campgrounds and shall be open to the public for
camping subject to the provisions of this article:
Forrest Park: Between South 9th Street and South 10th Street and to the west of Avenue H and
east of Bryan Avenue.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/420
(1998 Code, sec. 76.042)
Sec. 1.08.083 Availability and use
(a) Availability for public use. The campgrounds in city parks shall be open to and for public use at all hours
of the day subject to the restrictions provided in this article and to such other restrictions due to inclement
weather, the condition of the campground, the presentation of special events and like causes, as may be
determined by the park superintendent.
(b) Limitations on use.
(1) Right to limit use. The right to use, or exercise any privilege at or in connection with, any
campground in the city parks is limited by the extent of the facilities available, and there is hereby
reserved to the city in the public interest the right to deny any person the use of, or the exercise of,
any facilities which are unavailable either because of the absence of such facilities or because
existing facilities are then being fully utilized by others.
(2) Prohibited uses. The campgrounds in the city parks shall be available exclusively for the use of
tourists and other visitors to the city and shall not be available for commercial use or for use by any
persons plying any vocation or business within the city or county, nor shall same be used by the
public as a vehicle parking area, picnic area or general park recreation area without the consent of the
park superintendent.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.043)
Sec. 1.08.084 Release of city from liability
Use of the campgrounds in the city parks shall be conditioned that, by the acceptance of camping facilities
offered in said parks, any and all persons camping in said parks and campgrounds shall be deemed to have
released the city fully and completely from any and all damages that may be sustained by such persons camping
in said parks and campgrounds. Use of the campgrounds and adjacent park grounds shall constitute acceptance
of this release. (1998 Code, sec. 76.044)
Sec. 1.08.085 Fees and limits of stay
(a) Fees. The following schedule of daily fees or charges for camping in the city parks shall be and such is
hereby adopted and established as follows, to wit:
(1) One (1) to four (4) days: No charge.
(2) Every day in excess of four (4) days: Twenty dollars ($20.00) per day.
(b) Limits of stay. The maximum length of stay in said campgrounds shall not be more than ten (10)
consecutive days or not more than twelve (12) days in any thirty (30) day period; any requests for extensions on
length of stay shall be made to the park superintendent and approved by the city manager.
(c) Enforcement; collection of fees. The park superintendent or his agent shall collect all fees and charges and
enforce the conditions on limit of stay.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.045)
Sec. 1.08.086 Prohibited acts
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts within or adjacent to the campgrounds in
the city parks:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/420
(1) To engage in disruptive, destructive, or violent conduct which endangers property or the health,
safety, or lives of persons in or adjacent to the campground.
(2) To discard any refuse, trash, litter, garbage, or waste in the campground, other than in
containers or facilities supplied by the city.
(3) To drive or park vehicles on any areas except the roadways and parking areas established for
those purposes.
(4) To cut, burn, or destroy any living tree or shrub within or adjacent to the campground.
(5) To possess intoxicating liquors or substances of any kind.
(6) To erect a tent or otherwise camp or sleep on the ground except in designated areas of the
campground or dig a trench to otherwise modify the ground around any such tent or sleeping space.
(7) To use the campground as a temporary place of abode while engaged in the plying of a trade or
vocation or otherwise engaged in business activities within the limits of the city or the county or any
surrounding area.
(8) To allow dogs or other animals to be at large in the campground or adjacent park areas.
(9) To use the dump station for the disposal of any substance other than toilet waste.
(1998 Code, sec. 76.046)
Sec. 1.08.087 Abandoned personal property
No person shall abandon or leave unattended personal property at any campground in the city parks. No
responsibility whatsoever shall be assumed by the city for any personal property in any park or campground
therein. If such property is abandoned or left unattended for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours, and if
such property is not reclaimed, an impoundment charge of five dollars ($5.00) a day shall be charged, and if not
paid within ninety (90) days, the personal property may be sold, destroyed, converted to city use, or otherwise
disposed of by the city. (1998 Code, sec. 76.047)
Sec. 1.08.088 Expulsion from park
Compliance with the rules and regulations of this article is a condition of the use of the campgrounds in the city
parks, and the park superintendent and all police officers shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this
article by expulsion from the campgrounds and parks. Such expulsion shall be in addition to any other penalty
prescribed by this code. (1998 Code, sec. 76.048)
ARTICLE 1.09 MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.09.001 Membership fees and dues
(a) Membership dues: $95.00 per month.
(b) The following membership discounts are available:
(1) 10% discount on membership dues if active or retired military personnel or if person is over 65
years of age;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/420
(2) 10% discount on membership dues for members paying one year of dues in advance, provided
no other discount is applicable. If any other discount on the membership dues is applicable, an
additional 5% discount is available for members paying one year of dues in advance.
(c) Cart shed rental: $10.00 per month.
(Ordinance O-08-15 adopted 4/21/15)
(d) Private cart trail fee: $150.00 per year per cart. (Ordinance O-18-16, sec. 5, adopted 8/30/16)
(e) Green fees:
(1) Weekday (Monday–Friday): $20.00 for all day.
(2) Weekend (Saturday–Sunday): $25.00 for all day.
(3) Cart rental:
(A) Up to 18 holes: $15.00.
(B) Over 18 holes: $7.50 each additional 9 holes.
(Ordinance O-08-15 adopted 4/21/15)
(f) Golf scramble fee: $5.00 per person. (Ordinance O-18-16, sec. 5, adopted 8/30/16)
Sec. 1.09.002 No waiver of fees or dues
It shall be unlawful for any person to play golf at the city's municipal golf course without paying the above
applicable fees and dues.
(Ordinance O-08-15 adopted 4/21/15)
Secs. 1.09.003–1.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Municipal Golf Board
Sec. 1.09.031 Created
There is hereby created in and for the city a board which shall be known as the municipal golf board of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 78.001)
Sec. 1.09.032 Membership
(a) Composition. The municipal golf board shall be composed of seven (7) members appointed by the city
council. The city manager will serve as ex-officio.
(b) Term of members. The term of office for each member shall be for a term of four (4) years unless sooner
removed by action of the city council.
(c) Staggered terms. The terms of the members shall be so arranged that only 2 members shall be reappointed
or replaced each year. However, there will be one year where three board members will need to be reappointed
or replaced.
(d) Qualifications of members. No person shall be appointed to the board who is not a member of the
municipal golf course, must not be delinquent in membership dues and must live in the county.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/420
(e) Compensation of members. The members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(1998 Code, sec. 78.002)
Sec. 1.09.033 Officers
The municipal golf board shall elect one (1) of its members president, one (1) vice-president and one (1)
secretary. The officers shall hold office for one (1) year and until their successors are elected and qualified.
(1998 Code, sec. 78.003)
Sec. 1.09.034 Removal of members
Removal by city council. The members of the board shall be subject to removal from office by the city council at
any time at the will of the city council, no matter whether with or without cause. (1998 Code, sec. 78.004)
Sec. 1.09.035 Vacancies
Any vacancy in the membership of the municipal golf board shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired
term of the member whose place has become vacant. (1998 Code, sec. 78.005)
Sec. 1.09.036 Powers and duties
(a) Advisory functions. The municipal golf board shall function as an advisory board only and in this capacity
shall advise the city council from time to time concerning the management, maintenance and beautification of
the golf course.
(b) Power to receive donations. The municipal golf board shall have power for and on behalf of the city to
receive donations, legacies or bequests for the improvement or maintenance of the golf course of the city, and all
such moneys derived from such donations, legacies or bequests shall be deposited in the city treasury to the
credit of the municipal golf course enterprise fund, and the same may be drawn therefrom and paid out only in
the manner provided for the payment of moneys legally appropriated for the acquirement, support and
improvement of the municipal golf course of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 78.006)
Sec. 1.09.037 Meetings
The municipal golf board shall meet as deemed necessary and shall establish rules and regulations for its
government and for the performance of its duties. (1998 Code, sec. 78.007)
Sec. 1.09.038 Reports and recommendations
It shall be the duty of the municipal golf course board to make such recommendations to the city council as they
may deem advisable, for the improvement and betterment of the municipal golf course and community
improvement. (1998 Code, sec. 78.008)
ARTICLE 1.10 AIRPORT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.10.001 Joint airport zoning board
Subject to like provisions being made by the commissioners court of the county, by proper order, duly
promulgated and entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of chapter 391 of the Acts of the
Regular Session of the 50th Legislature, 1957, there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/420
as the Lamesa Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in
sections 2 and 3 of chapter 391 of the Acts of the Regular Session of the 50th Legislature, 1947. (1998 Code,
sec. 77.021)
State law reference–Joint airport zoning board, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 241.014.
Sec. 1.10.002 Airport zoning commission
The planning and zoning commission of the city shall serve as the airport zoning commission pursuant to the
requirements of section 241.016 of the Texas Local Government Code and shall have the powers and exercise
the duties set forth in said section 241.016 of the Texas Local Government Code. (1998 Code, sec. 77.022)
State law reference–Airport zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 241.016.
Sec. 1.10.003 Airport zoning board of adjustment
The zoning board of adjustment of the city shall serve as the airport zoning board of adjustment pursuant to the
requirements of section 241.032 of the Texas Local Government Code and shall have the powers and exercise
the duties set forth in section 241.033 of the Texas Local Government Code. (1998 Code, sec. 77.023)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et
seq.
Secs. 1.10.004–1.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Joint Airport Board of Managers
Sec. 1.10.031 Created; powers and duties
Subject to like provisions being made by the commissioners court of the county, by proper order, duly
promulgated and entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of article 46d-14 of the Municipal
Airports Act, there is hereby created a joint airport board of managers, to be known as the Lamesa Airport
Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in said article 46d-14. (1998 Code, sec.
77.001)
Sec. 1.10.032 Powers and duties
The joint airport board shall serve as the administrative agency for the administration and enforcement of the
airport zoning regulations pursuant to the requirements of section 241.031 of the Local Government Code and
shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in said section 241.031 of the Local Government Code.
(1998 Code, sec. 77.002)
Sec. 1.10.033 Membership
The city airport board shall be composed of six (6) members, three (3) to be appointed by the city council and
three (3) members to be appointed by the commissioners court of the county. (1998 Code, sec. 77.003)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/420
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
Certain words in this chapter are defined as follows:
Animal. Any living creature, including but not limited to dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles,
insects, fowls, and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings.
Cat. Felis catus.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city.
Dog. A domesticated member of the family Canidae, but shall not include a wolf, jackal, fox, or other wild
animal of this family.
Licensed veterinarian. A veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in one or more of the 50 states of
the United States of America.
Livestock. Includes horses, mules, jacks, jennets, cattle, sheep, goats and swine or other similar animals
commonly classified as livestock.
Owner. Any person, firm, or corporation having title to any animal or a person who has, harbors, or keeps, or
who causes or permits to be harbored or kept, an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or
about his premises.
Person. An individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision, or agency, business trust, estate,
partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
Quarantine. Strict confinement under restraint by closed cage or padlock or in any other manner approved by
the animal control officer.
Rabies. An acute viral disease of man and animal affecting the central nervous system and usually transmitted by
animal bite.
Running at large. Not completely confined by a building, wall, or fence of sufficient strength or construction to
restrain the animal, except when such animal is either on a leash or held in the hands of the owner or keeper, or
under direct supervision of the owner within the limits of the owner's private property.
Stray. Any animal running free with no physical restraint beyond the premises of the owner and/or keeper.
Vicious animal. Any individual animal of any species that has on two previous occasions without provocation
attacked or bitten any person or other animal, or any individual animal which the chief of police has reason to
believe has a dangerous disposition, or any species of animal which the chief of police has reason to believe has
a dangerous disposition likely to be harmful to humans or other animals; and shall include a dangerous dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other
than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and was reasonably certain to prevent the dog
from leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept
and was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts
cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person.
Wild animal. Any poisonous or dangerous reptile, or any other animal which can normally be found in the wild
state not normally capable of being domesticated, including but not limited to skunks, foxes, leopards, panthers,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/420
tigers, lions, and lynx, unless certified for medical, biological, herpetological, or other scientific research or
study.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.001)
Sec. 2.01.002 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00), and such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or portion thereof in which the violation is continued or permitted. (1998 Code, sec. 63.004)
Sec. 2.02.003 Enforcement
(a) Generally. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or any police
officer or animal control officer of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any person
authorized to enforce this chapter in the performance of his duties.
(b) Complaints. Witnesses to an act which is in violation of the provisions of this chapter may institute
enforcement by the filing of a complaint in municipal court.
(c) Pursuit of animal running at large. When the animal control officer or any police officer of the city has
commenced pursuit of an animal running at large, he or she may continue said pursuit and follow the animal
onto any unenclosed private property for the purpose of apprehending it as soon as possible.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.021)
Sec. 2.01.004 Taking or using animal of another
Any person who shall, within the city, take and use or take up and use any horse, mare, gelding, mule, ox, cow
or any other dumb animal, the property of another, without the consent of the owner thereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. If any person shall, without the consent of the owner thereof, milk the cow of another, he shall be
guilty of the unlawful use thereof within the meaning of this section. (1998 Code, sec. 63.002)
Sec. 2.01.005 Injuring animal or fowl of another
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city willfully to kill, maim, wound, poison or disfigure any horse,
mule, ass, cattle, sheep, dog, goat or other domesticated animal, or any domesticated bird or other fowl, with
intent to injure the owner thereof. In prosecutions under this section the intent to injure may be presumed from
the perpetration of the act. (1998 Code, sec. 63.003)
ARTICLE 2.02 NUISANCE ANIMALS*
Sec. 2.02.001 Generally
The following shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be unlawful:
(1) Any animal which molests passersby or passing vehicles.
(2) Any animal which attacks another animal.
(3) Any animal which trespasses on school grounds.
(4) Any wild or vicious animal that has demonstrated a fierce or dangerous propensity or tendency
to do any act which might endanger the safety of persons or property in a given situation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/420
(5) Any dog which, by loud, unusual, continuous, or untimely barking or howling, shall cause the
peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the occupants of the adjacent premises to be disturbed, or
which renders the enjoyment of life and property uncomfortable or interferes with public peace and
comfort.
(6) The keeping of any other animal which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall
disturb the comfort and repose of any person of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity.
(7) The keeping of any animal in such a manner as to endanger the public health or as to annoy
neighbors by the accumulation of droppings and putrescible materials which cause foul or offensive
odors.
(8) The keeping of any animal which habitually deposits body wastes upon, or destroys by
chewing, scratching, digging or otherwise, property other than that of the owner of the animal.
(9) The keeping of bees in such a manner as to deny the lawful use of adjacent property or
endanger personal health and welfare.
(10) Persistent laxness in supervision of cats so that their running at large results in disturbance to
persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(11) Allowing any livestock, fowl, dogs, or wild or vicious animals to run at large.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.022)
Sec. 2.02.002 Cats
(a) Responsibilities of owner. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a cat, or a person in control of or harboring
a cat, or keeping a cat on his premises or in or about his premises or on premises under his control, to permit or
allow a cat to be a public nuisance or a nuisance animal as defined in this chapter or to keep within the city
limits a cat which has not been vaccinated for rabies as provided by this chapter.
(b) Impoundment. The humane officer is authorized to humanely trap or otherwise capture and impound a cat
under the terms and subject to the same conditions as provided in this chapter for dogs, and when a complaint
has been received that a cat causes a nuisance or hazard to the health or welfare of the human or animal
population.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.023)
Sec. 2.02.003 Dogs
(a) Responsibilities of owner. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dog, or a person in control of or harboring
a dog, or keeping a dog on his premises or in or about his premises or on premises under his control, to:
(1) Permit or allow or fail to prevent:
(A) A dog to run at large within the city;
(B) A dog to be a public nuisance or a nuisance animal as defined in this chapter;
(C) A dog which, by loud or unusual barking or howling, shall cause the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood or the occupants of the adjacent premises to be disturbed;
(D) A female dog in heat to run at large or be maintained in a public place;
(2) Keep within the city limits:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/420
(A) A dog which has vicious propensities;
(B) A dog which has evidenced a disposition to bite, scratch or otherwise attack human
beings or domestic animals without provocation, while the person so attacked was not
trespassing on the property of the owner or person having custody of such dog and was not
engaged in an assault upon either the owner or person having custody of such dog or upon any
member of such person's immediate family;
(C) A dog which has otherwise demonstrated a fierce or dangerous propensity or tendency to
do any act which might endanger the safety of persons or property in a given situation; or
(D) A dog which has not been vaccinated for rabies as provided by this chapter; or
(3) To restrain or anchor a dog by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope, cord or other restraint,
unless the tether, chain, cable, rope, cord or other restraint is being personally held by the owner,
caregiver, keeper or other person having possession or control of the dog. No dog may be attached to
any inanimate object.
(b) Restraint or confinement.
(1) A dog is at large if it is not within an enclosure adequate to contain the dog upon or within
property owned, leased, or otherwise occupied by its owner, caregiver, keeper or person having
possession or control of the dog, or restrained by a leash or harness personally held by the owner,
caregiver, keeper or other person having possession or control of the dog.
(2) Any dog confined within a fenced yard or run must be provided with at least 100 square feet of
space for each dog. The enclosure shall be constructed of such material and of sufficient height to
prevent the dog from escaping from the enclosure. The top of the enclosure shall be covered with
material to provide the dog with shade and protection from the elements.
(c) Defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged offense under this section that any dog kept
within the cab or bed of any motor vehicle, or under the immediate control of the owner, caregiver, keeper or
other person having possession or control of the dog, is kept in a manner that prevents the animal's escape or
contact with any other person or animal.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.024)
Sec. 2.02.004 Authority to kill or impound animals; impoundment procedures and fees
(a) Authority of chief of police. The chief of police is authorized to:
(1) Kill any animal which poses an imminent danger to a person or property and a real or apparent
necessity exists for destruction of the animal;
(2) Impound any animal which is diseased and endangers the health of a person or another animal;
(3) Impound any animal that creates a nuisance as defined in this chapter;
(4) Impound any animal running at large as stipulated in this chapter;
(5) Impound any animal in violation of any provision of this chapter.
(b) Impoundment procedures and fees; disposition of impounded animals.
(1) If any of the animals named in this chapter are found upon the premises of any person, the
owner or occupant of the premises shall have the right to confine such animal in a humane manner
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/420
until he can notify the chief of police to come and impound such animal. When so notified it shall be
the duty of the chief of police to cause such animal to be impounded as herein provided.
(2) Reasonable effort shall be made by the chief of police to contact the owner of any animal
impounded under the provisions of this chapter; however, final responsibility for location of an
impounded animal is that of the owner.
(3) The owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter can resume
possession of the impounded animal upon payment of impoundment fees, veterinarian bills, and
handling fees incurred by the chief of police for the welfare of the animal, and upon payment of any
fines levied by the municipal court, and upon compliance with the vaccination provisions of this
code.
(4) Any animal, except vicious or wild animals, not reclaimed by the owner may be humanely
euthanized after being impounded for 72 hours.
(5) Any impounded vicious or wild animal, unless there is reason to believe that it has an owner,
may be immediately disposed of as may be deemed appropriate by the chief of police.
(6) Impoundment fees shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each animal, plus a handling fee of
ten dollars ($10.00) per day for every day, or fraction thereof, that the animal is at the animal shelter.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.025)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
ARTICLE 2.03 RABIES CONTROL
Sec. 2.03.001 Adoption of state law
The city council hereby adopts the provisions of the Rabies Control Act of 1981 to establish a local rabies
control program and to designate an officer to act as a local health authority for the purposes of the act. (1998
Code, sec. 63.041)
State law reference–Authority of municipalities to establish rabies control programs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.015.
Sec. 2.03.002 Designation of local health authority
For the purposes set forth in the Rabies Control Act of 1981, the animal control officer of the city shall act as the
local health authority. The duties of the animal control officer shall include but are not limited to the
enforcement of:
(1) The provisions of the Rabies Control Act of 1981 and the rules of the state board of health
which comprise the minimum standards for rabies control.
(2) The ordinances and rules of the city.
(3) The rules adopted by the state board of health under the area quarantine provisions of section
3.09 of the Rabies Control Act of 1981.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.042)
Sec. 2.03.003 Reports of rabies
(a) Duty to report. Any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an individual that the person
could reasonably foresee as capable of transmitting rabies or of an animal that the person suspects is rabid shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/420
report the incident to the animal control officer. The report shall include the name and address of any victim and
of the owner of the animal, if known, and any other data which may aid in the locating of the victim or animal.
(b) Submission of animal for quarantine. The owner of an animal that is reported to be rabid or to have
exposed an individual or that the owner knows or suspects to be rabid or to have exposed an individual shall
submit the animal for quarantine to the animal control officer.
(c) Investigation. The animal control officer shall investigate all reports filed under this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.043)
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041.
Sec. 2.03.004 Quarantine and disposition of animal that has bitten human
(a) Quarantine of dogs, cats and domestic ferrets. When a dog, cat or domestic ferret which has bitten a
human has been identified, the owner or custodian will be required to place the animal in quarantine. The 10-day
observation period will begin on the day of the bite incident. The animal must be placed in a TDSHS
(department of state health services) approved facility specified by the local health authority. However, the
owner of the animal may request permission from the local health authority for home quarantine if the following
criteria can be met:
(1) Secure facilities must be available at the home of the animal's owner, and must be approved by
the local health authority.
(2) The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies and satisfies the following criteria:
(A) The animal must have been at least three months of age at the time of vaccination.
(B) At least 30 days have elapsed since the initial vaccination.
(C) Not more than 12 months have elapsed since the most recent vaccination.
(3) The local health authority or a licensed veterinarian must observe the animal at least on the first
and last days of the quarantine period. If the animal becomes ill during the observation period, the
local health authority must be notified by the person having possession of the animal. At the end of
the observation period, the release from quarantine must be accomplished in writing.
(4) The animal was not a stray at the time of the bite.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.044; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Destruction of animal.
(1) Dogs and cats. A dog or cat which has bitten a human and has been designated by the local
health authority as unclaimed may be humanely killed in such a manner that the brain is not
mutilated. The brain shall be submitted to a TDSHS certified laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
(2) High risk animals. If the biting animal is a high risk animal, it shall be humanely killed and the
brain submitted for rabies testing. High risk animals are those which have a high probability of
transmitting rabies; they include skunks, bats, foxes, and raccoons.
(3) Low risk animals. If the biting animal is a low risk animal, neither quarantine nor rabies test
will be required unless the local health authority has cause to believe the biting animal is rabid, in
which case it shall be humanely killed and tested for rabies. Low risk animals are those which have a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/420
low probability of transmitting rabies; they include all animals of the orders Marsupialia, Insectivora,
Rodentia, Lagomorpha and Xenarthrai.
(4) Animals inflicting multiple wounds to face, head or neck. The local health authority may
require an animal which has inflicted multiple bite wounds, punctures, or lacerations to the face,
head, or neck of a person to be humanely killed and the brain tested for rabies.
(5) Other animals. If the biting animal is not included in subsection (a), (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), or (b)
(4) of this section, the biting animal will be humanely killed and the brain tested for rabies or the
local health authority may require the animal to be confined for a thirty (30) day observation period
as an alternate method to killing and testing, otherwise conforming to the requirements delineated in
subsection (a).
(6) Animals that cannot be maintained in secure quarantine. Any animal required to be quarantined
under this section which cannot be maintained in a secure quarantine shall be humanely killed and
the brain tested for rabies.
(c) Conditions for release of animal. If a veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal does not show the
clinical signs of rabies, the animal control officer shall release it to the owner following the quarantine period if:
(1) The owner has an unexpired rabies vaccination certificate for the animal; or
(2) The animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense.
(d) Quarantine fees. The owner of an animal that is quarantined under this section shall pay to the city the
reasonable costs of the quarantine and disposition of the animal, not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) a day for
care and feeding, and the city may bring suit to collect those costs. The city may sell and retain the proceeds or
keep, grant, or destroy an animal that the owner or custodian does not take possession of on or before the third
day following the final day of quarantine.
(e) Violation of quarantine requirement. A person commits an offense if he fails or refuses to quarantine or
present for quarantine any animal which is required to be placed in quarantine under this chapter.
(f) Violation of dog and cat restraint requirements. A person commits an offense if he fails or refuses to
restrain any dog or cat of which he is the owner of such animal as required under this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.044)
State law references–Quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042; release or disposition of quarantined
animal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.043.
Sec. 2.03.005 Vaccination of dogs and cats required
(a) Periodic vaccination required. Except as otherwise provided by rule of the state board of health, the owner
of each dog and cat shall have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies by the time the dog or cat is four months
of age and at regular intervals of not less than twelve (12) months.
(b) Certificate of vaccination. A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall issue to the
owner of the animal a vaccination certificate in a form which meets the minimum standards approved by the
state board of health.
(c) Vaccination tag. All dogs and cats so vaccinated shall wear and have securely fastened upon their collar or
harness a metal tag showing that such dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies.
(d) Violations. A person commits an offense if he fails or refuses to have each dog or cat of which he is the
owner vaccinated against rabies and such animal is required to be vaccinated under this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/420
(1998 Code, sec. 63.045)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.03.006 Vaccinations to be administered by licensed veterinarian
(a) To prevent improper vaccination of animals against and the accidental exposure of humans to rabies,
modified live rabies vaccine for animals shall be administered only by or under the direct supervision of a
veterinarian who is licensed to practice in the state.
(b) A person commits an offense if he administers or attempts to administer modified live virus rabies vaccine
in a manner not authorized by this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.046)
ARTICLE 2.04 LIVESTOCK AND FOWL
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.04.001 Running at large
(a) Livestock. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having in his charge any horse, mule, jack, jennet,
cattle, sheep, goats or swine to allow such stock to run at large at any time, day or night.
(b) Fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow chickens, turkeys, ducks or other fowl to run at large
within the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.061)
State law reference–Animals running at large on highways, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, sec. 143.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.04.002 Impoundment
(a) Impoundment of animals and fowl running at large.
(1) Duty of chief of police. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or any person by him
deputized, to seize and impound in the public pound of the city any and all stock found running at
large in violation of this article.
(2) Notice. The chief of police shall, on the day after impounding any such stock, post three (3)
notices in public places in the city, one of which shall be the city hall. The notices shall describe the
stock impounded, and give notice that, unless such stock are redeemed, they will be sold on the sixth
(6th) day after posting of the notices, to the highest bidder for cash.
(b) Impoundment of livestock in violation of livestock zoning regulations.
(1) Duty of chief of police. It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or any person by him
deputized, to seize and impound in the public pound of the city any and all stock found within the
city in violation of the livestock zoning regulations.
(2) Notice. The chief of police shall, on the day after impounding any such stock, post three (3)
notices in public places in the city, one of which shall be the city hall. The notices shall describe the
stock impounded, and give notice that, unless such stock are redeemed, they will be sold on the sixth
(6th) day after posting of the notices, to the highest bidder for cash.
(c) Seizure of fowl or livestock on private property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/420
(1) Authority of chief of police. The chief of police or person deputized by him may go on private
property to seize fowl or livestock in the enforcement of this chapter.
(2) Notice. The chief of police shall, on the day after impounding any such stock, post three (3)
notices in public places in the city, one of which shall be at the city hall. The notices shall describe
the stock impounded, and give notice that, unless such stock are redeemed, they will be sold on the
sixth (6th) day after posting of the notices, to the highest bidder for cash.
(d) Fees. The fees of the chief of police for taking up, impounding, advertising and selling livestock shall be
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day, per head.
(e) Record of sales; disposition of proceeds of sale. The chief of police shall keep a record of all sales of
livestock, giving a description of same. If the owner of any such stock sold shall make satisfactory proof of his
ownership to the mayor or chief of police within six (6) months after the sale of such stock, he shall be paid the
amount of such sale, less the fees of the chief of police.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.062)
State law reference–Estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, ch. 142.
Sec. 2.04.003 Keeping fowl
(a) Proximity to neighbors.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit to remain within twenty-five feet (25') of
any residence, house or place of business belonging to another within the city limits any chickens,
ducks, turkeys, geese, guinea fowl or any other domesticated fowl.
(2) The term “keeping and permitting to remain” shall mean a period of twenty-four (24) hours or
more.
(3) The keeping of such fowls within twenty-five (25) feet of any residence, house, or place of
business of another within the city is a nuisance and each and every day such fowls are kept or
permitted to remain within such distance shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Nuisance fowl. Any fowl shall be declared a public nuisance, and the keeping of such shall be unlawful,
which:
(1) Is allowed or permitted to run at large;
(2) By loud, unusual, continuous, or untimely crowing, cackling, honking, gobbling, or other
sound shall cause the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the occupants of the adjacent premises
to be disturbed, or which renders the enjoyment of life and property uncomfortable or interferes with
public peace and comfort;
(3) By causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person
of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity; or
(4) Endangers the public health or annoys neighbors by the accumulation of droppings and
putrescible materials which cause foul or offensive odors.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.063)
Sec. 2.04.004 Pig pens
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/420
All pig pens built, operated, constructed or maintained within the city shall be located next to the alley of the
premises on which they are situated and shall be kept in a sanitary condition. (1998 Code, sec. 63.064)
Sec. 2.04.005 Livery stables and sales barns prohibited in fire limits
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or have or to permit to be operated or maintained on his
premises, within the fire limits of the city, any sales barn, sales pen or livery stable wherein horses, mules, cattle,
swine, goats or other animals, other than fowl, are kept for board, sale, trade or hire. (1998 Code, sec. 63.065)
Sec. 2.04.006 Riding unmanageable horse or running horse race on street
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Knowingly and intentionally lead, ride or drive any wild and unmanageable horse or mule
along or upon the public square or any of the public streets of the city.
(2) Run or be in any way concerned in running any horse race in, along or across any public
square, street, road or alley in the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.066)
Secs. 2.04.007–2.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Keeping Livestock
Sec. 2.04.041 Compliance; violations declared nuisance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to keep livestock within the city except in zones
established by the city council, and the keeping of livestock in a tract not zoned for livestock shall be deemed a
nuisance.
(b) It shall be a nuisance for any person to keep livestock within the city and not comply with the sanitary
requirements for keeping livestock as set out in this division.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.067(a))
Sec. 2.04.042 Enforcement
It shall be the duty of the city health department to enforce all health and sanitary measures contained in this
division. (1998 Code, sec. 63.067(b))
Sec. 2.04.043 Livestock zone permit
(a) Application. Any person desiring a tract to be designated “livestock zone” shall file a written application
with the city secretary for a permit, which application shall show the number and kind of each type of livestock
for which a permit is desired and shall affirmatively show that the tract has facilities for keeping such livestock
in quarters meeting the standards set by the health department of the city and/or by the Code of Ordinances of
the city, or, if such facilities are not on the tract at the time of the application, a description of what facilities will
be built before used as a livestock zone.
(b) Action by health department. The application will be delivered by the city secretary to the city health
department. The city health department will inspect the tract and facilities or proposed facilities and will make
recommendations as to the effect such zoning would have on the public health and public welfare and as to the
condition of the facilities on the tract. In the event facilities are to be built, the city health department will
inspect the site and plans and will report with recommendations as to how it would affect the public health and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/420
public welfare. The application, with recommendations, will be returned by the city health department to the city
secretary. The city secretary will put the application for zoning on the agenda for the meeting of the city council.
The city secretary will mail the applicant a notice of the hearing by the city council on his application.
(c) Action by city council. The city council will determine at a council meeting whether such application shall
or shall not be granted after taking into consideration what is in the best interest of the public health and general
welfare of the community and the recommendation of the city health department. The applicant may appear
before the city council at the time of the consideration of his application.
(d) Duration; renewal. A zoning permit issued under this division shall be valid and effective for twelve
months from the date of issuance unless sooner revoked. A new application must be made within each twelve
months therefor, at least a month before the expiration of the existing permit.
(e) Revocation. A zoning permit may be revoked by the city council for the reason that it is in the interest of
the public health and general welfare and/or that the holder has not complied with the standards set by the city
health department and/or this code. A notice of such hearing shall be furnished the holder of the zoning permit
by mail prior to the meeting considering said revocation.
(f) Assignment. A zoning permit may not be assigned by the holder.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.067(c))
Sec. 2.04.044 Proximity of pens to dwellings; minimum space; sanitary condition of pens
(a) Proximity of pens or stalls to dwellings. No pen, stall or other facility for keeping livestock as authorized
by a zoning permit issued under this division shall be so located as to allow the livestock confined therein to
come within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior limits of any dwelling other than the dwelling occupied by
the holder of the permit.
(b) Minimum space for horses, mules, etc. There shall be a minimum space for stable and lot of five hundred
(500) square feet for each horse, mule, jack and/or jennet. Each additional animal of such classification must be
given an additional five hundred (500) square feet of space.
(c) Minimum space for cows. There shall be a minimum space for shed and lot of five hundred (500) square
feet for each cow. Each additional cow that is kept on the same lot must be given an additional five hundred
(500) square feet.
(d) Minimum space for sheep, goats and hogs. There shall be a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet in
lot for each sheep, goat or hog that is kept.
(e) Sanitary condition of pens. Each pen in which livestock is kept shall be maintained in a sanitary condition,
free from offensive odors, flies, litter and waste water.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.067(d))
Sec. 2.04.045 Storage and removal of manure
(a) Each premises, unless otherwise provided by this division, where livestock is kept will be required to
provide an impervious (concrete) bin which will act as a storage place for all manure from such livestock. It
shall be covered with a cover approved by the city health department that will prevent the entrance or exit of
flies. It will also exclude any runoff or rainwater. The bin will be large enough to contain seven days' collection
of manure and will allow one cubic foot of manure per animal per day. The thickness of the walls of the bin shall
be a minimum of three inches. The lid shall be anchored by bolts and hinges.
(b) Any person, unless otherwise provided by this division, who maintains any livestock shall make daily
collections of manure, and the collections shall be placed in the bins built for this purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/420
(c) It shall be the responsibility of anyone maintaining such manure bins as described above to remove the
manure from the bins each week in a sanitary manner as may be approved by the city health department. Each
day past one week that the manure is not removed shall constitute a separate offense under this division.
(d) Where a pasture is maintained for livestock, a manure bin will not be required provided that no livestock
may be kept in an area closer than five hundred (500) feet from the dwelling of any person other than the owner
of the livestock or the owner of the pasture; and providing that not more than one horse, or one cow, or one
mule, or one jack, or one jennet, or more than five sheep or goats, or more than five swine, may be contained in
an area comprising an acre of ground; and provided further that such pasture shall be so fenced so as to not allow
more than one horse, or one mule, or one jack, or one jennet, or one cow, to water and feed in one location, or
not more than five sheep or goats to water and feed in one location, or not more than five swine to water and
feed in one location; provided further that such pasture shall be kept clean and not have an accumulation of
manure that will attract flies or give an offensive odor.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.067(e))
Sec. 2.04.046 Grazing livestock on public property or property not zoned for livestock
It shall be unlawful for any person to stake any livestock for the purpose of grazing upon or within the reach of
any public street, alley, sidewalk, park or property not zoned for the livestock within the city limits. (1998 Code,
sec. 63.067(f))
Sec. 2.04.047 Cowbells or other noisy devices
It shall be unlawful for any person to attach or permit to be attached to any animal belonging to him, or in his
possession, any cowbell or loud-sounding, noisy, or disturbing implement within the limits of the city where
such noise would be disturbing to persons of ordinary sensibility. (1998 Code, sec. 63.067(g))
Sec. 2.04.048 Exceptions
(a) Existing auction barns and packing houses. The provisions of this division setting the space per animal
shall not be construed to prohibit any person who, at the time this division is passed, is engaged in operating an
auction barn or packing house from keeping livestock for a period not exceeding one week while awaiting their
use in the operation of such auction barn and packing house.
(b) Existing animal hospitals. The provisions setting the space per animal of this division shall not apply to
animal hospitals existing at the time this division is passed.
(c) County fair and grounds controlled by Rodeo Association. The provisions of this division shall not apply
to the area used by the county fair during show time and the grounds controlled by the Rodeo Association during
rodeos.
(d) Circus and carnivals. The provisions of this division shall not apply to a circus or carnival which has
obtained a permit for operation of same from the proper city authority.
(1998 Code, sec. 63.067(h))
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/420
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 3.01.001 Building inspector
(a) Office created. There is hereby created the office of building inspector to be conducted under the
supervision of the city manager.
(b) Bond. The building inspector shall execute and deliver to the city secretary a surety bond in the amount of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the city, conditioned upon his faithful performance of duties in
compliance with this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.001)
ARTICLE 3.02 BUILDING BOARD
Sec. 3.02.003 Established; membership
(a) Composition. There is hereby created a building board consisting of fourteen (14) members, any seven (7)
of which shall constitute a quorum. The board shall include the city manager, or any person duly designated by
him, who shall be chairman of the board, the building inspector, the chief electrical inspector of the city, two (2)
licensed and active master electricians, two (2) active journeyman electricians, two (2) licensed and active
master plumbers, two (2) journeyman plumbers, one (1) property owner who resides in the city, and two (2)
builders or persons engaged in the building or contracting business.
(b) Appointment and term of members. The building board shall be appointed by the city council and shall
hold office for two (2) years from the date of such appointment or until their successors have been appointed and
qualified.
(c) Compensation of members. All members shall serve on the building board without pay.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.002)
Sec. 3.02.004 Appeals
(a) Right of appeal; filing. Any person aggrieved by a decision or ruling of the building inspector shall have
the right to appeal to the building board for its review. Such appeal shall be perfected by a request in writing to
the city manager for a hearing in which the nature of the applicant's grievance is briefly described and his correct
name and address stated.
(b) Date for hearing; decision. The chairman of the board shall fix a date for said hearing within three (3)
days, at which time the board shall hear the testimony of all parties concerned and shall render a decision within
three (3) days after said hearing.
(c) Appeal to city council. If the appellant is then aggrieved by the decision of the board, appeal may be made
from the board's ruling to the city council, and such appeal shall be perfected by a letter addressed to the mayor
or the city manager. A member of the board shall have no vote on his own appeal before the board.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.003)
ARTICLE 3.03 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.03.001 International codes adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/420
(a) All of the codes of the International Code Council, 2012 editions, are hereby adopted as the building code
for the city, except as the provisions of such codes conflict with the other provisions of this chapter.
(b) A copy of each said codes is incorporated hererin as though set out completely in detail.
(Ordinance O-05-12, sec. 4, adopted 4/3/12)
Cross reference–Fire prevention code, article 5.04.
Secs. 3.03.002–3.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 3.03.051 Adopted
(a) The International Building Code, 2012 edition, is hereby adopted as the building code for the city.
(Ordinance O-05-12, sec. 1, adopted 4/3/12)
(b) A copy of said code is incorporated herein as though set out completely in detail. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 3.03.052 Penalty
The penalty for violation of the building code adopted in section 3.03.051 shall be as set forth in section
3.01.001 of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 32.012)
Sec. 3.03.053 Fees
(a) Payment. No permit as required by the building code shall be issued until the fee prescribed in this
division shall have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be approved until the additional fee, if any,
due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure shall have been paid. (1998 Code, sec.
32.014)
(b) Construction permit fee. For a permit for the construction or alteration of a building or structure, the fee
shall be at the rate of $5.00 per thousand dollars of the estimated cost up to twenty-five thousand dollars
($25,000.00); plus $2.50 per thousand dollars of the estimated cost in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars up
to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); plus $1.25 per thousand dollars of the estimated cost in excess
of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00); but not less than $25.00 in case; provided that no fee shall be
required when the estimated cost does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 1,
adopted 3/15/11)
(c) Building removal or moving permit fee. For a permit for the removal or moving of a building or structure
from one lot to another, the fee shall be $35.00 for each building or structure.
(d) Building demolition permit fee. For a permit for the demolition of a building or structure, the fee shall be
at the rate of five dollars ($5.00) for each building or structure.
(e) Adjustment of fee when work is abandoned or discontinued. In the case of abandonment or
discontinuance, the cost of work performed under a permit may be estimated, an adjustment of the fee made and
the portion of the fee for the uncompleted work returned to the permit holder, provided that no refund of a
prescribed minimum fee shall be made. If such discontinuance is due to revocation of permit, a similar
adjustment and return may be made, provided that no refund shall be made until all penalties incurred or
imposed by due authority shall have been collected. After such a refund has been made, no work shall be
resumed until a new application has been made and a new permit has been issued.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/420
(f) “Estimated cost” defined. The term “estimated cost,” as used in this section, means the reasonable value of
all the services, labor, materials, and use of scaffolding and other appliances or devices entering into and
necessary to the prosecution and completion of the work ready for occupancy; provided that the cost of
excavation or grading, and of painting, decorating or other work that is merely embellishment, or not necessary
for the safe and lawful use of the building or structure, is not deemed a part of such estimated cost.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.014)
(g) Work commencing prior to permit issuance. Any contractor, subcontractor, or property owner who
commences work on a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the
necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100% of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit
fee as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Any emergency repair made after normal business hours shall
be permitted the next business day. (Ordinance O-14-12 adopted 12/18/12)
Secs. 3.03.054–3.03.100 Reserved
Division 3. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 3.03.101 Adopted
(a) The International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, is hereby adopted as the building code for the city.
(Ordinance O-05-12, sec. 2, adopted 4/3/12)
(b) A copy of said code is incorporated herein as though set out completely in detail. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
Secs. 3.03.102–3.03.150 Reserved
Division 4. Electrical Code†
Sec. 3.03.151 Scope
All electrical work performed within the city shall be performed in conformity with the provisions of this
division, and it is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform any electrical
work in violation of the provisions of this division.
Sec. 3.03.152 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following words shall be defined as herein stated. In the event of a dispute
as to the meaning on an application of any word, phrase, or descriptive term as used herein, a determination of
the meaning by the board shall be conclusive on all parties. For the purpose of this division, the following words
shall have the following meanings:
Board. The term “board” shall mean the electrical advisory and appeals board.
Building official. The person charged with the administration of this division.
Direct supervision. The continual oversight and control of electrical apprentices by a licensed residential
wireman, for residential work only, a licensed journeyman electrician or a licensed master electrician, who shall
be physically present at the jobsite or installation, at all times any electrical work is in progress. The term shall
also mean the continual oversight and control of all journeyman electricians, residential wireman, and electrical
apprentices by the master electrician, who shall personally direct day-to-day activities, work of the firm, prepare
bids, enter into agreements or sign contracts and manage the firm's financial affairs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/420
Electrical apprentice. An individual licensed as an apprentice who works under the direct supervision and orders
of a master electrician, a journeyman electrician, or a residential wireman, and who is registered with the state.
Electrical contractor. A person or entity, licensed as an electrical contractor, that is in the business of performing
“electrical contracting” as defined by Texas Occupations Code, section 1305.002(5).
Electrical inspector. The duly appointed electrical inspector of the city and all duly appointed assistant electrical
inspectors.
Electrical installation. The installation of wiring, devices or equipment for the distribution, transmission or
utilization of electrical energy.
Electrical maintenance work. The replacement or repair of existing electrical appurtenances, apparatus,
equipment, machinery, or controls used in connection with the use of electrical energy in, on, outside, or
attached to a building, residence, structure, property, or premises. All replacements or repairs must be of at least
the same rating and type as the existing installation. Any replacement or repair that shall be made to bring such
work in compliance with applicable codes under Texas Occupations Code, chapter 1305. Electrical maintenance
work does not include the installation of any new electrical appurtenances, apparatus, equipment, machinery, or
controls beyond the scope of any existing electrical installation.
Fixture. A unit which supports a means of illumination.
General supervision. Exercise of oversight by a master electrician on behalf of any electrical contractor, or
electrical sign contractor, or by a master sign electrician on behalf of an electrical sign contractor of performance
by all classes of electrical licensees of electrical work bearing responsibility for the work's compliance with
applicable codes under Texas Occupations Code, chapter 1305.
Journeyman electrician. A person who works for or under the supervision of or by the direction of a master
electrician in the electrical trade, has passed a journeyman electrician examination approved by the state, and is
qualified as provided in this division. Said journeyman electrician shall be physically present on the jobsite at all
times electrical work is in progress and shall maintain continual oversight and control of all electrical
apprentices.
Master electrician. Any person who holds himself/herself out to the public to do electrical work or to contract to
do any or all kinds of electrical work stated in this division. A person who himself/herself or by the employment
of journeyman electricians, restricted residential wiremen and/or apprentices performs the work of installing
wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures or other appliances for carrying or using electricity for light, heat, or other
purposes whether the master electrician contracts to do the work personally or through others and is licensed as
is provided in this division.
Master sign electrician. Any person who holds himself/herself out to the public to contract for himself/herself or
by the employment of registered sign technicians and/or registered sign trainees to perform the work of
manufacturing, installing, connecting, reconnecting, or servicing of electric signs, or any cold cathode or neon
gas tubing, inside or outside, of whatever description or for any purpose and is licensed as provided in this
division. This work shall not include extension of or additions to an existing branch circuit.
Maintenance electrician. One who is a full-time employee of a company or business and whose duty is to
maintain existing electrical installations, including all fixtures and appurtenances contained in a designated
property building or buildings either: (1) owned by his employer; or (2) operated under a maintenance contract
by his employer. A person holding this license shall not otherwise engage himself as a maintenance electrician
on any buildings other than those designated on the maintenance license.
National Electrical Code. The current edition of the National Electrical Code (NFPA 70) as approved by the
National Fire Protection Association and adopted by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/420
Offer to perform. To make a written or oral proposal, to contract in writing or orally to perform electrical work
or electrical sign work, or to advertise in any form through any medium that a person or business entity is an
electrical contractor or electrical sign contractor, or that implies in any way that a person or business entity is
available to contract for or perform electrical work or electrical sign work.
On-site supervision. A licensed individual other than an electrical apprentice must exercise the supervision of
electrical work or electrical sign work. Continuous supervision of an electrical apprentice is not required, though
the on-site supervising licensee is responsible for review and inspection of the electrical apprentice's work to
ensure compliance with any applicable codes or standards.
Opening or outlet. The location where a ceiling light, bracket light, wall light, porch light, or a floodlight is to be
mounted: also, any electrical consuming opening or outlet.
Residential appliance. A unit of electrical equipment that is designed and installed in a dwelling by direct
connection to any existing electrical circuit to perform a specific function, such as a water heater, for example.
The term does not include general use equipment, such as an electric motor, for example, that is not designed for
a specific function.
Residential appliance installer. An individual, licensed as a residential appliance installer, who on behalf of a
residential appliance installation contractor, performs electrical work that is limited to residential appliance
installation as defined by Texas Occupations Code, section 1305.002(12-e).
Residential appliance installation contractor. A person or entity licensed as a residential appliance installation
contractor, that is in the business of residential appliance installation as defined by Texas Occupations Code
section 1305.002(12-d).
Residential wireman. An individual licensed as a residential wireman, who works under the general supervision
of a master electrician on behalf of an electrical contractor, or employing governmental entity, while performing
electrical work that is limited to electrical installations in single-family and multifamily dwellings not exceeding
three stories, as defined by Texas Occupations Code, section 1305.02(13).
Sign electrician journeyman. One skilled and experienced in the physical labor involved in electrical
installations of signs and who does or holds himself out as intending to do electrical installation and/or
maintenance under the supervision of a master sign electrician and who holds a license issued under the
provisions of this division. This definition does not include running lines or circuits from sign location to or into
the building or load center.
Signs. Any physical device, panel, or installation attached to or located on a building or structure, used to display
any message or communicate any thought or idea and which uses electricity for its intended operation.
Sec. 3.03.153 Applicability
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any electrical installation or to make any alteration, repair or addition
to an existing electrical installation except as provided in this division.
Sec. 3.03.154 Exemptions
(a) Traffic/signal work. The provisions of this division shall not apply to the fire, police or public safety
installation, or other similar installations installed and maintained by the city or installed under contract by a
private installer for a government agency.
(b) Franchises. The provisions of this division shall not apply to electric light, heat and power companies,
telephone and telegraph companies and cable television or other communication companies, operating under a
city franchise or state or federal laws in the installation, maintenance, removal or repair of wires or other
equipment used in connection with their business or plants.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/420
(c) Manufacturers of electrical equipment. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit manufacturers of
electrical apparatus or equipment from carrying on reasonable electrical experiments with materials and products
within the confines of their own premises and all installations therein, provided further that the electrical
inspector may require the manufacturer to make whatever changes the inspector believes necessary for the
protection of public life, welfare and property.
(d) Street lighting. The provisions of this division shall not apply to installations in connection with the
illumination of public streets, alleys or parkways by the city, the state highway department, the public electric
utility company or federal highway agencies.
Sec. 3.03.155 Penalty
(a) Penalty. Any person or persons, who installs, or causes to be installed, maintains or causes to be
maintained, electrical wiring, devices, or equipment used in connection with the installation or maintenance of
electrical wiring, devices, and equipment in violation of the provisions of this division, or who fails to do any act
required hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, “general penalty; continuing violations.”
(b) Liability of corporations, associations, officers, and agents. Violation of any of the terms or provisions of
this division by any corporation or association shall be subject to the penalty provided in this section.
(c) Revocation of registration. Conviction under the provisions of this division shall be deemed just cause for
the revocation of any registration which such person may have or hold under the provisions of this division and
examinations for reissue of such registration shall be at the discretion of the board.
(d) Enforcement. The building official, the electrical inspector, and their assistants shall be empowered to
cause criminal charges to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction consistent with the enforcement of this
division.
Sec. 3.03.156 Electrical inspector; enforcement
(a) Office created; assistant authorized. There is hereby created the office of the electrical inspector of the city,
within which may be assistant electrical inspectors.
(b) Appointment. The electrical inspector and the assistant electrical inspectors shall be appointed by the
building official with the approval of the city manager. The electrical inspector shall be under the administrative
supervision of the building official.
(c) Enforcement. The building official, electrical inspector, and their designated representative shall be
empowered to compel the suspension of any electrical installation being done in violation of this division.
Sec. 3.03.157 Right of entry; identification
(a) Right of entry.
(1) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this division or
whenever the building official, the electrical inspector, or their designated representative has
reasonable cause to believe that a condition exists in violation of the electrical code thus making such
building or premises unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous, said official may enter such building or
premises at all reasonable times to inspect same or perform any duty imposed upon the electrical
inspector by this division. If such building or premises is occupied, there shall first be presented
proper credentials and entry requested.
(2) If such building or premises is unoccupied, reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner
or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/420
(3) If entry is refused, the building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative
shall have recourse to any remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(b) Identification. When on duty, the electrical inspector shall carry a means of identification furnished by the
city and shall show same upon the request of any person at the jobsite.
Sec. 3.03.158 Liability for damages
The building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative charged with the enforcement of this
division, acting in good faith and without malice in the discharge of their duties, shall not thereby render
themselves personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or
omission in the discharge of their duties.
Sec. 3.03.159 Records
(a) Required records. The electrical inspector shall keep or cause to be kept a written record of all of the
following which are required to be issued or performed under the provisions of this division.
(1) Permits.
(2) Licenses.
(3) Inspections.
(4) Condemnations.
Sec. 3.03.160 Inspections generally
The electrical inspector shall:
(1) Inspect all electrical installations which shall include alterations, repairs and additions, to
assure compliance with the provisions of this division.
(A) There shall be a minimum of a rough-in inspection and a final inspection on such
electrical installation. The owner whose installation is ready for inspection shall allow the
electrical inspector's office twenty-four (24) hours, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays recognized
by the city excepted, after notification to inspect before the work proceeds on the electrical
installation.
(B) The licensed master electrician or homeowner shall be responsible for notifying the
electrical inspector when the electrical installation is ready for rough-in inspection. An
electrical installation shall be considered ready for rough-in inspection at such time as all
raceways, panel board cabinets, service equipment, outlet boxes, junction boxes, conductors
and conductor splices are installed and before concealment.
(C) Upon application of the master electrician or his authorized representative in charge of
the project, the electrical inspector shall make a final inspection of the installation, and, if such
work is found to comply with this division, a certificate of inspection shall be issued stating that
the work has been done according to the provisions of this division and the rules governing the
respective class to which it belongs. Such certificate shall not relieve the master electrician of
responsibility for any defective work that may have been concealed or escaped the notice of the
electrical inspector.
(2) Make inspections of existing electrical installations when he reasonably believes they are
unsafe, improper, and constitute a hazard to life or property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/420
Sec. 3.03.161 Tags indicating approval or disapproval
(a) At the completion of the initial or rough-in inspection, the electrical inspector or his deputy shall, if such
installation is approved, cause a green “approval” tag to be affixed to a visible and accessible point on the
electrical work approved. If such inspector determines that such installation is not acceptable, he shall affix to
such electrical work, a red “violation” tag which shall have printed thereon in substance, a warning that the work
or installation will not pass inspection, and that it is a violation of city ordinances to conceal or continue any of
the electrical work until the installation is reinspected and approved. If, upon reinspection, the violation has been
satisfactorily corrected, the electrical inspector shall then cause the red “violation” tag to be removed and the
green “approval” tag to be affixed in its place. The same process shall be followed upon the final inspection,
with a red “violation” tag to be affixed if the installation is not approved. Approval on final inspection, or final
reinspection, shall be denoted by placing a green “approval” tag on the approved installation. Whenever a red
“violation” tag is affixed on the installation, at either the rough-in or final inspection, the electrical inspector
shall note on the back of such tag the precise violation involved and such other factual information as the
electrical inspector may feel necessary to inform the master electrician of the specific items that need to be
corrected.
(b) No person, firm or corporation engaged in any work at the building site shall ever cause, allow or suffer
electrical work to be covered over unless same bears an inspection tag showing final approval, nor shall any red,
or green inspection tag be affixed to any electrical work by anyone other than the city's electrical inspector or his
deputies.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy or deface a red or green tag, or for a contractor or
any other person to conceal any wiring or conduit which has not been approved as indicated by the presence of
the inspection tag. The electrical inspector shall have the authority to require any person, firm or corporation to
uncover any wiring or electrical equipment which has been concealed without the knowledge or permission of
the electrical inspector.
Sec. 3.03.162 Correction of unsafe, improper or unlawful installations
(a) Notice. The electrical inspector shall, upon determining that an unsafe, improper or unlawful electrical
installation exists, immediately notify the owner of the premises, his agent, or the electrician performing work in
the premises. The notice shall be in writing, specifying the exact deficiency existing, and shall allow the parties a
reasonable time, as determined by the electrical inspector, to correct the deficiency.
(b) Default (electricity ordered discontinued). If corrective action is not begun immediately or the deficiency
is not corrected within the prescribed time, the electrical inspector shall, if he believes public welfare
endangered, in writing, order the electrical supply to the premises discontinued.
Sec. 3.03.163 Stop-work notice
(a) Authority to stop work. The electrical inspector shall stop the installation, alteration, operation or repair of
any electrical work on or in any premises when, in the inspector's opinion, the work is being done in a reckless,
careless or unsafe manner or in a manner which violates the provisions of this division.
(b) Posting of notice. Upon determining that particular work should stop, the electrical inspector shall post a
notice to that effect on the consumer's premises and thereafter no person shall proceed with the installation until
the electrical inspector has cancelled the stop-work notice.
(c) Effect of posting red tag or card. The posting of a red tag or card on the premises shall constitute a stopwork
notice, as stated on the red tag.
(d) Removing or damaging notice. It shall be a violation of this division to remove, deface, damage or
mutilate, or conceal the stop-work notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/420
Sec. 3.03.164 Electrical advisory and appeals board
(a) Establishment; membership.
(1) The board shall be known as the city's electrical advisory and appeals board and shall consist of
nine (9) members with the following qualifications:
(A) One electrical contractor.
(B) Two master electricians.
(C) Two journeyman electricians.
(D) One representative of the local electric service provider.
(E) One person who by experience has knowledge of the trade.
(F) One citizen representative.
(G) The city building official or authorized representative shall be an ex-officio member and
serve as secretary for the board without voting privileges.
(2) The members of the board shall be appointed by the city council and serve staggered terms of
two (2) years. Vacancies occurring in the membership shall be filled by appointment for the
unexpired term, by the city council.
(b) Powers and duties; appeals.
(1) Notice of appeal. The board shall require notice of appeal in writing stating grounds for appeal
and other such matters. A person directly interested, affected, or aggrieved in decisions made by the
building official or the building official's subordinates pertaining to the administration of this division
may request an appeal of such decision before the board. The appellant and the building official,
electrical inspector, or their designated representative shall be given reasonable notice of the time and
place of appeal.
(2) Appeals from board's actions. Any action of the board may be appealed by a person directly
interested, affected, or aggrieved in the action by written petition filed with the board and the city
secretary within twenty-one (21) days of such action for a hearing before the city council.
(3) Advisory responsibility. The board shall submit to the city council such recommendation for
the improvement and revision of the adopted codes as it may deem necessary and proper regarding
new information, materials, methods, or techniques which will result in a better or more economical
installation.
Sec. 3.03.165 General license requirements
(a) A person, firm, or corporation shall not perform work requiring an electrical license under title 8,
Occupations Code, chapter 1305, and title 16 Texas Administrative Code chapter 73, except as provided by
section 1305.003. A person, firm, or corporation may not perform or offer to perform electrical work or
residential appliance installation unless the person or business holds an appropriate license issued or recognized
under this division.
(b) A licensed applicant or licensee shall file with the city a completed certificate of insurance or other
evidence satisfactory to the city when applying for initial and renewal licenses and any time requested by the
city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/420
(c) Such applicant shall furnish the building official with a certificate of insurance on an industry standard
certificate of insurance form with a thirty-day cancellation notice.
(d) The insurance policy shall include a provision that in the event such coverage is cancelled or reduced, the
insurance company shall notify the building official prior to such cancellation or reduction in coverage.
Sec. 3.03.166 Licensed contractor's responsibilities
(a) A person shall not engage in the business of electrical contracting without being licensed, insured, or
bonded and registered in the manner required by this section as a licensed electrical contractor, licensed
electrical sign contractor, or a licensed residential appliance installation contractor.
(b) Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contracting shall make application for
registration and shall pay the $30.00 annual registration fee at the office of the electrical inspector. This
registration must include the name and license number of the person holding the master electrician's license, the
name of the business and contractor license number under which work is to be performed, the street address,
mailing address and permanent telephone number of the place of business, and the names and license number of
all journeymen and residential wiremen employed by the firm.
(c) Upon application for registration, the electrical inspector shall verify the vehicle(s) used by the contractor
has signage as required by section 1305.166 of the Texas Occupations Code:
(1) The contractor shall display the business name and license number issued on each vehicle.
(2) The required information must be printed in letters and numbers at least two inches (2") high
and in a color that contrasts with the color of the background surface.
(3) The required information must be permanently affixed in conspicuous places on both sides of
the vehicle.
Sec. 3.03.167 Scope of license
(a) The maintenance electrician's license shall not be construed in any way to allow the holder thereof to
install any new circuit, outlet, or additions, or to perform any electrical work for which a permit is required, or to
perform any work required by this division to be performed by a master electrician, master sign electrician,
journeyman electrician or journeyman sign electrician.
(b) Every electrical apprentice shall undertake electrical work only when under the direct supervision of a
master electrician, master sign electrician, journeyman electrician or journeyman sign electrician, or for
residential installations by a residential wireman. Commercial installations shall require the direct supervision of
no less than a journeyman electrician.
Sec. 3.03.168 Suspension or revocation of electrical registration
(a) The board may request suspension of the registration of any electrician who has committed any of the
following:
(1) The practice of any fraud or deceit in obtaining a permit or registration;
(2) Intentionally violating any provision of this division; or
(3) Any gross negligence, incompetency or misconduct in the performance of electrical work
within the city.
(b) In considering charges under this division, the board shall proceed upon sworn information furnished by
an official of the city, or by some person having knowledge of an alleged violation in the performance of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/420
electrical work. Such information shall be in writing and shall be duly verified by the person familiar with the
allegations made. The board, if it deems the information sufficient to support further action on its part, shall
issue an order setting the matter for hearing at a specified time and place and the secretary of the board, with the
advice and counsel of the city attorney, shall cause a copy of the board's order and of the information to be
personally served upon the electrician or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least fifteen (15) days
before the date set for the hearing.
Sec. 3.03.169 Application for permit; permit fees
Applications for permits, either by phone or in person by the contractor, must be secured prior to
commencement of any work. Contractors may pay in advance, or apply for an account to be paid once a month.
Contractors will be billed monthly. If an approved contractor fails to pay his/her account within 15 days after the
date of the billing statement, no permits can be issued to the contractor until the past-due account has been paid
in full. Electrical permit fees are as follows:
(1) New commercial or residential construction*: $0.04 per sq. ft.
(2) New construction, additions to existing buildings*: $0.04 per sq. ft.
(3) Minimum permit fee: $25.00.
(4) Alterations to existing buildings (minimum permit fee): $25.00.
(A) First 100 outlets: $0.40 each.
(B) Additional outlets over 100: $0.30 each.
(5) Altering, change-out, or installation of meter loop: $25.00.
(6) Construction meter loop: $25.00.
(7) Sign connections: $25.00.
(8) Reinspection or red tag fee: $25.00.
(9) Reconnection of service inspection: $15.00.
(10) Any inspection not listed: $25.00.
* On any new construction, addition, or alteration the building wiring, meter loop and construction meter loop
are separate permits.
Sec. 3.03.170 Issuance and contents of permits
(a) Permits may be issued to applicants when:
(1) Arrangements for payment of fees have been made.
(2) All license and bond requirements of the code have been complied with.
(3) When the plans and specifications of the proposed electrical work have been approved.
(4) The property will be actually used for the purposes for which the permit is made.
(b) The applicant shall state the kind of work to be done and the address of the building where the work is to
be done. The building inspection personnel will issue a permit and such permit shall be without effect as to any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/420
work not therein described or as to any place other than described.
(c) Permits issued to homeowners shall be valid only for work done at the residence occupied by the
homeowner at the time the permit is issued. Permits for commercial buildings, leased or rented property, shall be
issued only to an electrical contractor.
(d) After first registering with the city and paying the registration fee, further applications may be made
verbally by telephone by registered individuals with a valid charge account.
(e) An application for a permit shall be considered permission from an authorized representative of the
applicant to inspect the premises.
(f) Falsification of an application for a permit by an electrical contractor, master electrician, or a homeowner
shall be justification for the electrical inspector to refuse to issue a permit or to cancel a permit if one has been
issued.
Sec. 3.03.171 Approval of plans and specifications
The plans and specifications of the electrical work of all new buildings or buildings to be remodeled in which
electrical wires are to be installed will be submitted to the electrical inspector by the electrical contractor, owner,
or architect for approval before the permit will be issued. All such plans shall specify the size of feeders and
subfeeders and their length when there are more than four (4) branch circuits. When, according to such plans and
specifications, the electrical work specified complies with the provisions of this division, the electrical inspector
shall approve the plans and specifications therefor in writing. If any changes are required by the electrical
inspector, he shall attach a list of such requirements to the plans or specifications. When such plans and
specifications have been corrected, they shall be resubmitted for approval.
Sec. 3.03.172 Permit for temporary installations
(a) When a permit to install work of a temporary character, for a time to be specified in such permit, and not
in any case to exceed thirty (30) days, shall have been issued by the electrical inspector, strict compliance with
the rules of permanent work will not be exacted, provided the character of the work is entirely safe for the period
designated in the permit. No temporary work or alterations shall be allowed on live circuits unless protected by a
proper switch and fuse.
(b) Should the temporary electrical installation be needed beyond the thirty-day period, subsequent permits
may be issued. An inspection shall be made before the issuance of any subsequent permit, and each subsequent
permit shall be for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
(c) Upon the expiration of a temporary permit, the holder thereof shall immediately discontinue the use of the
temporary installation. All temporary wiring installed must be removed.
Sec. 3.03.173 Ready-built homes
Where buildings are constructed in lumberyards or on premises within the city limits, other than where the
building is on a permanent foundation, and where such building is to be moved into and located within the city
limits, wiring installation shall be made by a bonded and licensed master electrician in conformity with this
division, and permits shall be applied for.
Sec. 3.03.174 Emergency work
In case of emergency necessitating immediate new wiring or repairs to electrical wiring at a time when the office
of the electrical inspector is closed, the work may be carried out without first obtaining a permit. Thereafter, a
written application shall be submitted to the electrical inspector for a permit during the next day that such office
is open. Before the permit shall be issued, all requirements for its issuance must be complied with.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/420
Sec. 3.03.175 Expiration of permit
(a) Every permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the installation authorized by such
permit is not commenced within ninety (90) days from the date of such permit or if the installation authorized by
such permit is suspended or abandoned, at any time after the work is commenced, for a period of sixty (60) days.
(b) Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall be obtained. The fee therefor shall be one-half
(1/2) the amount paid for the original permit.
Sec. 3.03.176 Surrender of unused permit
A master electrician or homeowner who has obtained an electrical permit shall surrender said permit to the
electrical inspector within sixty (60) days of the issuing date of the permit to be eligible for a refund of the
permit fee, provided no work has begun on the electrical installation.
Sec. 3.03.177 Electrical code adopted
All installations hereafter installed within the corporate limits of the City shall be done in a good and
workmanlike manner in accordance with the 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the
National Fire Protection Association, and said National Electrical Code and incorporated references and
appendices are made a part of this division, with the additions and deviations therefrom contained in this code.
State law reference–National Electrical Code adopted as municipal residential and commercial electrical code, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 214.214.
Sec. 3.03.178 Local amendments to the National Electrical Code
(a) Minimum size wire and use of aluminum conductors.
(1) Nothing less than No. 12 AWG copper wire will be permitted within the corporate limits of the
city, with the following exceptions:
(A) That ground wire in nonmetallic cable shall be in accordance with the National Electrical
Code; and
(B) For special circuits such as controls, public address systems, annunciators and signals,
ordinary switch legs for lighting systems will not be construed as control wiring.
(2) Use of aluminum conductors shall not be permitted for use in any structure within the city with
the following exception:
(A) Aluminum underground feeders shall be allowed and will terminate at the first means of
disconnect in the structure being served.
(b) Wiring and meters in townhouses, apartments and condominiums.
(1) Wiring in townhouse units. In townhouse units separated by a two-hour firewall meeting
building code requirements, type NM wiring methods may be used. All electrical wiring in common
or party walls is to be placed in conduit. Electrical outlets, boxes and fixtures installed in common
walls shall not be less than eighteen (18) inches apart horizontally or vertically.
(2) Wiring in apartment buildings. Apartment buildings of more than four (4) dwelling units shall
have all wiring encased in approved raceways.
(3) Meters in apartment houses and condominiums. Apartment houses of more than five (5)
individual dwelling units and residential condominiums shall be provided with individual metering
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/420
devices to each dwelling.
(c) Change in location or use of building.
(1) Change in location. Should any residence or building be moved from one location to another
and should the wiring be nonconforming to the new location, the residence or building shall be
rewired.
(2) Change in use. Should the occupancy of a residence be changed entirely from residential to
another use, the wiring shall be made to conform to the requirements of the new use.
(d) Service disconnects and service entrance wiring.
(1) Service disconnects. All residential services rated 200 amperes or less shall be equipped with
disconnecting switches set on the exterior of buildings within 2 feet of the meter.
(2) Disconnect switches. Fusible disconnects shall not be permitted for use as a disconnecting
means on residential services rated 200 amperes or less.
(3) Size of conductors, service. Minimum size of meter base and conductors for any service use
shall be rated a minimum of 100 ampere, and the minimum size conductors shall be No. 4 copper
from the point of the service entrance to main circuit breaker panel.
Sec. 3.03.179 Fire damage
(a) Inspection of premises. Where, in the opinion of the fire marshal or electrical inspector, a fire originated
due to faulty electrical wiring, overloading of wiring or equipment or any unauthorized electrical installation, it
shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to inspect the premises involved.
(b) Reconnection of service when lines cut for firefighting. Where lines or electrical services have been cut in
the firefighting process, no electrical service shall be reinstated or reconnected until the premises conform to the
provisions of this division.
(c) Authority to disconnect service where hazardous conditions exist. Where the lines have not been cut in the
firefighting process, and the fire marshal or electrical inspector deems such premises to be dangerous or
hazardous to life and property, he shall order the electrical service to be disconnected immediately and remain
disconnected until such defects have been corrected to the satisfaction of the electrical inspector.
Sec. 3.03.180 Violations
(a) Penalty. Any person or persons who offers to perform or who installs or causes to be installed, maintains
or causes to be maintained, electric wiring, devices, or equipment used in connection with the installation of
and/or maintenance of electric wiring, devices, and equipment in violation of the provisions of this division, or
who fails to do any act required hereby shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished as provided in section 1.01.009, of this code. Each and every day of continuance thereof shall
constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(b) Liability of corporations, associations, officers, and agents. Violation of any terms or provisions of this
division by any corporation or association shall subject officers and agents of such corporation or association to
the penalty provided in this section.
(c) Criminal charges. The building official, electrical inspector, or their designated representative is
empowered to cause criminal charges to be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction consistent with the
enforcement of this division.
(Ordinance O-14-16 adopted 7/19/16)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/420
Secs. 3.03.181–3.03.200 Reserved
Division 5. National Fire Protection Association 1194, Standard for Recreational Vehicle Parks and
Campgrounds
Sec. 3.03.201 Adopted
(a) The NFPA 1194, Standard for Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds, 2014 edition, is hereby
adopted as the building code for the city.
(b) A copy of said code is incorporated herein as though set out completely in detail.
(Ordinance O-04-15 adopted 1/20/15; Editorially supplied)
ARTICLE 3.04 STRUCTURAL STANDARDS CODE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 Applicability
The provisions herein shall be controlling in the use, maintenance and occupancy of all dwellings (permanent,
movable, and mobile), dwelling units and/or structures within the area of jurisdiction of the city. (1998 Code,
sec. 32.031)
Sec. 3.04.002 Title; scope
(a) Title. The provisions embraced in the following sections shall constitute and be known as the structural
standards code of the city.
(b) Minimum standards established. The code establishes minimum standards for occupancy, and does not
replace or modify standards otherwise established for construction, replacement or repair of buildings.
(c) Scope. Every building, structure or dwelling, permanent, movable or mobile, shall conform to the
requirements of this code regardless of the primary use of the building, structure or dwelling, and regardless of
when such building, structure or dwelling may have been constructed, altered, or repaired.
(d) Code is remedial. This code is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the
beneficial interests and purposes thereof (which are public safety, health, and general welfare) through structural
strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other
hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings,
dwellings and structures (permanent, movable, and mobile).
(e) Hazardous structures. This code does not alter the provisions for the immediate security or demolition of
hazardous structures in cases where there exists imminent danger to life or health.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.032)
Sec. 3.04.003 Definitions
(a) For the purposes of this code, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words, and their derivatives shall be
construed as set forth in this section.
(b) Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter. Words in the feminine and neuter gender include the masculine. The singular number includes the
plural and the plural number includes the singular.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/420
(c) The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article:
Alter or alteration. Any change or modification in construction or occupancy.
Applicable governing body. The city council, to administer and enforce the provisions of this code, as adopted or
amended.
Approved. Approved by the building official.
Basement. A portion of a building located partly underground but having less than one-half or more of its clear
floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Building. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of
any kind. The term “building” shall be construed as if followed by the words “or part thereof.”
Building official. The officer, or other person, charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, or
his duly authorized representative.
Cellar. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, having one-half or more of its clear floorto-
ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
Dwelling. Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human
occupants, whether or not such building is occupied or vacant; provided that temporary housing as hereinafter
defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling, nor shall trailers be included as a dwelling.
Dwelling unit. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with
facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, whether or not such unit
is occupied or vacant.
Extermination. The control and extermination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage
places, by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, or trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods.
Family. One or more persons living together, whether related by blood, marriage or adoption, and having
common housekeeping facilities.
Floor area. The total area of all habitable space in a building or structure.
Garbage. The animal, mineral and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and
consumption of food.
Habitable room. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or
eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, or communicating
corridors, closets, and storage spaces.
Infestation. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests.
Multiple dwelling. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be
occupied, or which is occupied, as the home or residence of more than two (2) families living independently of
each other and doing their own cooking in the building, and shall include flats and apartments.
Openable area. That part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens
directly to the outdoors.
Operator. Any person who has charge, care of control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or
rooming units are let.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/420
Owner. The holder of the title in fee simple and any person, group of persons, company, association or
corporation in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. It shall also mean any person who, alone or
jointly or severally with others:
(1) Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying any
actual possession thereof; or
(2) Shall have charge, care, or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, executor,
executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in
possession, assignee of rents, lessee, or other person, firm, or corporation in control of a building, or
their duly authorized agents. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to
the same extent as if of these regulations pertaining to the property which apply to the owner.
Person. Any individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
Plumbing. The practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of
all piping, fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or
storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to
any building, structure, or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance,
extension, or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste, or sewage, and water supply systems of any premises to
their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal.
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon. In the case of multidwelling
units, each dwelling unit as defined in this article shall be considered a separate premises.
Public area. An unoccupied open space adjoining a building, and on the same property, that is permanently
maintained accessible to the fire department and free of all encumbrances that might interfere with its use by the
fire department.
Repair. The replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not
including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change
required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, or plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or
that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term “repairs” shall not apply to any change of
construction.
Required. Required by some provision of this code.
Residential occupancy. Buildings in which families or households live or in which sleeping accommodations are
provided, and all dormitories, shall be classified as “residential occupancy.” Such buildings include, among
others, the following: dwellings, multiple dwellings, and lodging houses.
Rooming house. Any dwelling, or part of any dwelling, containing one or more rooming units, in which space is
let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or
father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living
and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; and the term shall include the
residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metal, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust.
Stairway. One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them to form a
continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/420
Story. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the
floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper
surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially
built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term “structure” shall be construed as
if followed by the words “or part thereof.”
Supplied. Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under control of the owner or operator.
Temporary housing. Any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be
transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same
premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
Ventilation. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space.
Yard. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending along the entire length of a street or
rear or interior lot line.
(d) Whenever the words “dwelling,” “dwelling units,” “rooming house,” “rooming units,” or “premises” are
used in this article, the same shall be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
(1998 Code, sec. 32.037)
Sec. 3.04.004 Existing buildings
The provisions of this code shall apply to any building, dwelling or structure regardless of when said building,
dwelling or structure was constructed, altered or repaired. (1998 Code, sec. 32.033)
Sec. 3.04.005 Maintenance required; responsibility for maintenance
All buildings or structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this code in a building when erected, altered, or
repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for
the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises to the extent set out in this code. The tenant shall be
responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, and premises to the extent set out in this code. (1998
Code, sec. 32.034)
Sec. 3.04.006 Moving building or structure
(a) Permit required. No structure or building shall be moved from one lot to another or erected within the city
limits until a permit for the moving of such structure or building shall have been issued. No permit shall be
issued for the moving of such structure or building unless the structure or building conforms with the provisions
of this article.
(b) Failure to obtain permit. Any structure hereafter erected or moved without a permit and not in conformity
with this article shall be removed at the owner's expense.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.035)
Sec. 3.04.007 Pending actions
Nothing in this article or in the code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding now
pending in any court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, nor any cause or causes or action accrued or
existing, under any act or ordinance repealed hereby. Nor shall any right or remedy which now exists be lost,
impaired or affected by this article. (1998 Code, sec. 32.036)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/420
Secs. 3.04.008–3.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Minimum Standards for Basic Equipment and Facilities
Sec. 3.04.041 General standards
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, nor shall any
vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Sanitary facilities required. Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink,
lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet, all in good working condition and properly connected to
an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be
properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks and
obstructions.
(2) Location of sanitary facilities. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the
dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet, and the tub or shower,
shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user.
(3) Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have connected to the kitchen sink,
lavatory, and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be
supplied through an approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
(4) Water heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are properly
installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition.
(5) Heating facilities.
(A) Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, and which
are maintained in safe and good working condition.
(B) Where a gas or electric central heating system is not provided, each dwelling unit shall be
provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, or gas vents to which heating appliances
may be connected so as to adequately heat same.
(6) Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment and facilities shall be
installed in accordance with the city's building, gas or electrical code and shall be maintained in a
safe and good working condition.
(7) Garbage disposal facilities. Every dwelling unit shall have access to adequate garbage disposal
facilities or garbage storage containers, the type and location of which facilities or containers comply
with the regulations for solid waste disposal.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.040)
Sec. 3.04.042 Light and ventilation
(a) General requirements. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or sublet to another for occupancy, any
dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, nor
shall any vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist, which does not comply with the following
requirements:
(1) Light. Every habitable room shall, where practical, have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/420
habitable room shall be seven (7) percent of the floor area of any such room, except sleeping rooms,
where the minimum total window area shall be the lesser of seven (7) percent of the floor area or
twelve (12) square feet. If light-obstructing structures are located less than five (5) feet from the
window, and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be
deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required
minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the
top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least fifteen (15) percent of the
total floor area of such room. Existing structures as of the date of enactment of this article shall not
be required to be modified to comply herewith.
(2) Ventilation. Year-round mechanically ventilating conditioned air systems may be substituted
for windows, as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes.
(b) Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be
opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every
habitable room shall equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size, as required, or shall have other approved equivalent ventilation. Existing structures
as of the date of enactment of this article shall not be required to be modified to comply herewith.
(c) Bathrooms. Every bathroom shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms
except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system and except that no existing structure as of the date of enactment of this article shall
be required to be modified to comply herewith.
(d) Electric lights and outlets required. Every dwelling shall be wired for electric lights and convenience
receptacles. Every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least one (1) separate floor or wall-type
electric convenience outlet, and every kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, corridors or hallways,
and porches shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and
fixture shall be properly installed in accordance with the city's codes, and shall be connected to the source of
electrical power in a safe manner.
(e) Light in public halls and stairways. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing
five (5) or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in
structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four (4) dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned
on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. All public outdoor walkways or sidewalks within multiple
complexes shall be adequately lighted at all times. Adequate lighting shall be defined as an average horizontal
footcandle level of 0.2 lumens per square foot with no value of less than 0.02 lumens per square foot.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.041)
Sec. 3.04.043 Electrical system
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for occupancy any building, dwelling or
structure, nor shall any vacant building, dwelling or structure be permitted to exist, which does not comply with
the following requirements:
(1) All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair,
safe, and capable of being used and installed and connected to the source of electric power.
(2) Where the determination is made, upon examination of the existing electrical service supply,
that such electrical service supply is being used in such manner as would constitute a hazard to the
occupants or would otherwise constitute a hazard to life and property, the following shall be used for
determining the adequacy of such service supply and main disconnect switch:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/420
Total Number of Lighting
Electrical Outlets Only
Capacity of Main Service Supply and
Main Disconnect Switch
0 - 24 60 amp service
25 - 50 100 amp service
(3) The minimum capacity of the service supply and the main disconnect switch shall be sufficient
to adequately carry the total load required.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.042)
Sec. 3.04.044 Exterior and interior of structure
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let or sublet to another for occupancy, any building, dwelling or
structure, nor shall any building, dwelling or structure be permitted to exist, which does not comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Foundation. The building foundation walls, piers, or other structural elements shall be
maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be
placed thereon.
(2) Exterior walls. The exterior walls shall be substantially watertight, shall be made impervious to
the adverse effects of weather, and shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.
(3) Roofs. Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and shall have no defects which admit rain
or cause damage in the walls or interior portion of the building.
(4) Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress, with
minimum ceiling height of seven feet (7') leading to a safe and open space at ground level.
(5) Stairs, porches, and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch and other
appurtenance shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be
placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
(6) Protective railings. Protective railings shall be required on any unenclosed structure over five
(5) feet from the ground level or on any steps containing four (4) risers or more.
(7) Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement door or cellar door, and hatchway
shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent-proof and shall be kept in good repair.
(8) Windows to be openable. Every window required for light and ventilation for habitable rooms
in dwellings or dwelling units shall be capable of being opened.
(9) Door hardware. Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in
good condition.
(10) Door frames. Every exterior door of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall fit reasonably well
within its frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the dwelling building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/420
(11) Protective treatment. All exterior wood surface, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment.
(12) Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings and other accessory structures shall be
maintained and kept in good repair.
(13) Interior floor, wall and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially
rodent-proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
(14) Structural supports. Every structural element of the building, dwelling or structure shall be
structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would render same incapable of
carrying the loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
(15) Protective railings for interior stairs. Interior stairs and stairwells with more than four (4)
risers shall have handrails located in accordance with the requirements of the building code.
Handrails or protective railings shall be capable of bearing normally imposed loads and be
maintained in good condition.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.043)
(16) Anchors for manufactured carports. Every manufactured carport shall be affixed to the ground
with no less than six (6) J-bolts of at least seven (7) inches in length and 1/2 inch in diameter encased
in at least twelve (12) inches of concrete below ground. Installation of manufactured carports on a
pre-existing concrete slab must be anchored and bolted to existing concrete with 6 inch expansion
anchor in 1/2 inch diameter, 3 on each side at ground level. (Ordinance O-18-17 adopted 8/29/17)
Sec. 3.04.045 Minimum dwelling space
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein, nor shall any
vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Required space in dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor space per
additional occupant. Existing structures as of the date of enactment of this article shall not be
required to be modified to comply herewith.
(2) Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space,
and every room occupied for sleeping purposes for more than one occupant shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. Existing structures as of the date of enactment of
this article shall not be required to be modified to comply herewith.
(3) Minimum ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room, foyer, hall
or corridor shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet (7'), and the floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling height is less than seven feet (7') shall not be considered as part of the floor
area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy thereof.
(4) Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade. No basement or cellar space shall be used as a
habitable room or dwelling unit unless the floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground
and surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.044)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/420
Sec. 3.04.046 Sanitation requirements
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let or sublet to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling
unit designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein, nor shall any
vacant dwelling building be permitted to exist, which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1) Maintenance of public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing three or more dwelling
units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas
of the dwelling and premises thereof.
(2) Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that
part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises thereof which he occupies and controls or which is
provided for his particular use.
(3) Garbage disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
garbage and other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, as well as all rubbish, in a
clean and sanitary manner in accordance and complying with the applicable city ordinances.
(4) Extermination of insects, rodents and other pests. Every occupant of a single dwelling building
and every owner of a building containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests within the building or premises.
(5) Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep
all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.045)
Sec. 3.04.047 Rooming houses
No person shall operate a rooming house, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in
any rooming house, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this code.
(1) Water closet, lavatory, and bath facilities.
(A) At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected
to a water or sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four (4)
rooms within a rooming house wherever said facilities are shared.
(B) All such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within the dwelling so as to be
reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities.
(2) Water heater required. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot
water at all times.
(3) Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
person shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space
for each occupant thereof.
(4) Exit requirement. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to
safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of the governed area or of the state.
(5) Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/420
other part of the rooming house, and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of
the entire premises owned, leased or occupied by the operator.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.046)
Sec. 3.04.048 Unsafe structures
All structures, dwellings, apartment houses, rooming houses, buildings or outbuildings which are unsafe,
unsanitary, or unfit for human habitation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human
life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, abandonment, or lack of adequate egress, are hereby deemed to be
unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are hereby declared illegal and a public nuisance and shall be abated
by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of this article and the laws of the
state. (1998 Code, sec. 32.047)
ARTICLE 3.05 SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES*
Sec. 3.05.001 Purpose
This article covers all aspects of substandard, dangerous and dilapidated structure demolition and removal under
the authority of the city and is enacted to implement the stated purpose of protecting the health, safety and
welfare of the people of the city.
Sec. 3.05.002 Applicability of article
The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings and structures or portions thereof and all related
structures and their premises which are located within the corporate limits of the city, any and all territory
subsequently annexed into the corporate limits of the city, and all areas lying within 5,000 feet of the corporate
limits of the city, and shall apply to any individual, corporation, organization, government, governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity, including all federal
installations, within the city limits.
Sec. 3.05.003 Applicability of state law
The provisions of sections 214.001, 214.0015, and 214.003 of the Local Government Code of the state shall
apply and the city shall exercise all authority granted under said statute.
Sec. 3.05.004 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms have the meanings ascribed to them by this
section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Building. Includes any erection or structure of any kind or any part thereof.
Building code. The edition of the National [International] Building Code as adopted by the city.
Building inspector. The legally designated inspection authority of the city, or his authorized representative.
City council. The governing body of the city.
Dangerous building. All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed
“dangerous buildings” under the terms of this article:
(1) Any building:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/420
(A) With roof, ceiling, floors, sills, or foundations, or any combination thereof, rotted or
decayed and falling apart;
(B) With improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are
overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used; or
(C) With windows or doors out or open to outdoor space or not otherwise protected against
the entry of vermin, disease vectors, or vandals;
(2) Any building which is uninhabitable, untenable and unsightly, due to obsolescence and
deterioration caused by neglect or vandalism or fire damage or old age or the elements;
(3) Any building which is structurally unsafe or in danger of falling and injuring the person or
property of another;
(4) Any building which is a fire menace, to wit, by being in a dilapidated condition, as fully
described in subsections (1), (2) or (3) hereof, and which has an accumulation of rubbish and trash in
and around said building which is likely to become a fire, or to be set on fire, endangering the person
or property of another;
(5) Any building which is in the condition or conditions described in subsection (1), (2), (3), or (4)
hereof which is damp and in an unsanitary condition which is likely to create disease and sickness; or
(6) Any building which is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to
the public health, safety, and welfare.
Dilapidated building. The same as “dangerous building.”
Nuisance building. The same as “substandard building” under the terms of this article.
Owner. The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser estate therein, or a mortgagee or vendee in
possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a structure.
Premises. A lot or parcel of land, including a building or dwelling, and auxiliary structures thereon, or any part
of such building, dwelling or structure.
Structure. The same as “building.”
Structure maintenance ordinance. Article 3.04 of this chapter.
Substandard building. All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following conditions shall be
deemed a “substandard building” under the terms of this article:
(1) Any building which may be deemed as a “dangerous building” as described in this article;
(2) Any building which may be deemed as an “unsafe building” as defined in section 8.1 of the
building code;
(3) Any building which may be deemed as an “unsafe structure” as defined in section 3.04.048;
(4) Any building which has been abandoned and is open, permitting the unauthorized entry of any
person, and if such entry or entries have in fact occurred as evidenced by such signs of vandalism;
(5) Any building which by virtue of its materials or condition will have an adverse effect on
adjacent premises by reducing the desirability of living conditions in the immediate neighborhood
and cause a substantial depreciation in property values;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/420
(6) Any portion of a building or structure remaining on a site after the demolition or destruction of
that building or structure;
(7) Any building which is vermin infested; or
(8) Any building having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the
health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein.
Unsafe building. The same as “dangerous building.”
Sec. 3.05.005 Minimum standards for continued use and occupancy
Any building that is not substandard as defined in this article shall be deemed as meeting the minimum standards
for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings regardless of the date of their construction, and any
building deemed as a dangerous or substandard building by this article shall not be deemed as meeting said
minimum standards for continued use and occupancy.
Sec. 3.05.006 Declaration of nuisance
All substandard buildings, as defined in this article, located within the corporate limits of the city or in an area
lying within 5,000 feet of the corporate limits of the city are declared to be public nuisances and unlawful, and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, removal, or demolition as provided herein or by any other procedures
provided by law.
Sec. 3.05.007 Enforcement
(a) Enforcement officer. The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building
inspector, or his duly authorized representative, of the city.
(b) Notice of violation.
(1) Whenever the building inspector or any other agent of the city has reason to believe that a
violation of any provision of this article or any applicable state or federal law or regulation has
occurred, written notice shall be served upon the alleged violator or violators. The notice shall
contain:
(A) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the
property on which it is located;
(B) A description of the violation of the standards that is present in the building; and
(C) A statement that, if the conditions are not corrected within ten (10) days after such notice
is served, charges for violation of this article may be filed in municipal court, or proceedings
may be commenced as provided herein to abate said condition.
(2) Notice shall be deemed made when personally delivered or mailed to the alleged violator by
U.S. mail certified, postage prepaid, return receipt requested.
(c) Remedies. In the event that corrective action is not taken within the specified time, or if the condition or
conditions constitute a clear and present danger to the public health and welfare which requires immediate
action, the city or its agent may prosecute any alleged violations in the municipal court or in a court of
appropriate jurisdiction, or institute a civil suit for injunctive relief or civil penalty in a court of proper
jurisdiction to relieve such condition, or initiate the process to abate the condition as hereinafter provided.
(d) Action by building inspector. In the event that the building inspector is:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/420
(1) Unable to locate the owner of a substandard building for the purpose of securing voluntary
compliance or for prosecution in municipal court; or
(2) Otherwise unable to secure compliance with this article;
then the building inspector may begin proceedings to secure the repair, removal or demolition of said
substandard structure by the process as provided in this article.
(e) Efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city or its agents from
making efforts to obtain voluntary compliance through warning, conference or any other appropriate means.
Sec. 3.05.008 Liability
Neither the city nor any authorized agent or employee of the city acting under the terms of this article shall be
liable or have any liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article.
Sec. 3.05.009 Access to premises
The building inspector shall enforce the provisions of this article, and, upon presentation of proper identification
to the owner of such property, and in such manner as to not cause unreasonable inconvenience to the persons in
possession, may enter any building, structure, or premises, during all reasonable hours, to make inspections or
examinations thereof in order to perform the duties imposed on him by this article.
Sec. 3.05.010 Notice of violation
(a) Notice to owner. When it shall be determined by the building inspector that a building or structure is
deemed a substandard building or structure within the terms of this article, the building inspector may cite the
owner of such building or structure, or his authorized agent or representative, to appear before the city council
and show cause why such building should not be declared a public nuisance and why the owner should not be
ordered to repair, renovate, remove or demolish and clear such building or structure from the premises. The date
of such hearing shall not be less than ten (10) days after the owner and any lienholders are cited as hereinafter
provided.
(b) Notice to lienholders. The building inspector shall notify each mortgagee and lienholder of such public
hearing and such mortgagees or lienholders shall be served with the same form of notice as is served on the
owner.
(c) Service of citation. Notice shall be by citation served upon such owner and any lienholder by personal
delivery of a copy thereof to the owner of the property, as such ownership appears on the last city tax roll, or by
depositing such citation properly addressed, postage prepaid, by U.S. mail certified, return receipt requested, and
by attaching a copy of such citation in a place of prominence on such building or structure. In the event personal
service cannot be effected on the owner, or if the owner is unknown, notice shall be given to owner by
publishing the same in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least ten (10) days prior to the date set
for a hearing, which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing.
(d) Contents of citation. The citation shall contain:
(1) The street address or a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which
the building is located.
(2) A statement that the building inspector has found the building to be in violation of the
provisions of this article, with a brief and concise description of the condition or conditions found to
render the building substandard.
(3) A statement advising that a hearing has been set before the city council for the purpose of
making a determination of whether the building is a substandard building or structure under the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/420
provisions of this article, specifying the date, time and place of such hearing.
(4) A statement advising that, if the city council finds that such building is a substandard building
or structure, the city council may order the abatement of said condition or conditions by repair,
renovation, removal, or demolition by the owner within a reasonable time to be set by the city council
and that the city may repair, renovate, remove or demolish said building if the owner does not
comply with such order in the time provided.
Sec. 3.05.011 Hearing; abatement by city
(a) Generally. On the date and at the time and place designated for hearing, a hearing shall be had at which the
city council shall determine whether or not such building or structure complies with the minimum standards of
continued use and occupancy or is a substandard building or structure under the terms of this article.
(b) Order by council; abatement by city; lien for city's expenses.
(1) After proper hearing, if the city council determines that a building or structure is in violation of
standards set out in this article, the city council may order the building or structure be vacated,
secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a reasonable specified time.
(2) If the owner, or a lienholder, does not take the ordered action within the specified time, the city
may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the building or structure at its own expense.
(3) Unless such premises upon which the building or structure is located constitute the homestead
of the owner, the city may assess a lien against such premises for all expenses incurred by the city in
connection with the vacation, securing, removal or demolition of such building or structure. Such lien
arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the
office of the county clerk. The notice must contain:
(A) The name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with
reasonable effort;
(B) A legal description of the real property on which the building is located;
(C) The amount of expenses incurred by the city and the balance due.
If the notice is given and the opportunity to repair, remove, or demolish the building is afforded
to each mortgagee and the lienholder, the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens
and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the
city's lien attaches.
(c) Notice to owners and lienholders. After proper hearing, a copy of the city council's order, which shall be in
the form of a resolution, shall be served upon each owner and lienholder, by mailing a copy of such order to
such owner and lienholders by U.S. certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. A copy of such
order shall also be posted in a prominent place upon the premises.
(d) Interference with abatement. Any person who shall use, enter or occupy such premises, and/or any person
who shall interfere with or hinder the demolition or removal of any building or structure under the terms of this
article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine as prescribed herein.
Sec. 3.05.012 Repair of residences with ten or fewer dwelling units; appointment of receiver
(a) Limitation on repair of residences with ten or fewer dwelling units.
(1) The city may repair a substandard building only to the extent to bring the building into
compliance with the minimum standards if the building is a residence building with ten (10) or fewer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/420
dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the building exceeds
minimum housing standards.
(2) The city may repair the building at the expense of the city and assess a lien on the land and
building for such expenses.
(b) Court-appointed receiver. The city may bring an action in district court against an owner of residential
property that is not in substantial compliance with city ordinances regarding fire protection, structural integrity,
zoning, or disposal of refuse. The court may appoint a receiver to take control and rehabilitate the property in
order to make any repairs necessary to bring the property into compliance with the minimum standards as
provided in this article.
Sec. 3.05.013 Assessment of city's expenses
(a) Statement of expenses. Whenever any work is done on any building or structure by the city under the
provisions above, the building inspector, on behalf of the city, shall file a sworn statement of the expenses
incurred with the county clerk. Such statement shall specify the amount of such expenses and the date or dates
on which the work was done or the expenses incurred, and costs of demolishing, cleaning, or removing the
building or structure. A copy of said statement shall be mailed to the owner by U.S. mail, return receipt
requested, to the address on the tax roll.
(b) Lien. When this sworn statement is filed with the county clerk, the city shall have a prior lien on the lot or
real estate upon which the work was done to secure the expenses involved. Such lien shall be inferior only to tax
liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent
(10%) per annum from the date the statement was filed with the county clerk. The sworn statement of expenses
for work done and filed with the county clerk, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the
amount expended for such repairs, demolition, clearance or removal.
(Ordinance O-5-18 adopted 4/17/18)
ARTICLE 3.06 MANUFACTURED HOUSING*
Sec. 3.06.001 Purpose
This article covers all aspects of manufactured housing regulation under the authority of the city and is enacted
to implement the stated purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. (1998
Code, sec. 32.081)
Sec. 3.06.002 Applicability of article
The provisions of this article shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the city and to any and all
territory subsequently annexed into said corporate limits as specified, and shall apply to any individual,
corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, partnership,
association, or other legal entity. (1998 Code, sec. 32.082)
Sec. 3.06.003 Applicability of state law
The provisions of Texas Occupations Code, ch. 1201 otherwise known as the Texas Manufactured Housing
Standards Act, shall apply and the city shall exercise all authority granted under said statute, and when it appears
that a violation of said statute, or any rule, regulation, permit, license, or other order of an appropriate state
agency granted in said statute, occurs or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the city, or is causing or will
cause injury to or an adverse effect on the health, welfare or physical property of the city or its inhabitants, then
the city may cause a civil suit to be instituted in district court through its own attorney for the injunctive relief or
civil penalties, or both, as authorized in said statute, against the person who committed, is committing, or is
threatening to commit the violation. (1998 Code, sec. 32.083)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/420
Sec. 3.06.004 Definitions
(a) For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms have the meanings ascribed to them by this
section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Chief building official. The chief inspector of the city, and includes all persons authorized to perform building,
electrical, plumbing, and mechanical inspections pursuant to the codes of the city.
HUD-code manufactured home. A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in
the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected onsite,
is 320 or more square feet, which is built on a permanent chassis [and] designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is
defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
Installation. When used in reference to manufactured housing, means the transporting of manufactured homes or
manufactured home components to the place where they will be used by the consumer, the construction of the
foundation system, whether temporary or permanent, and the placement and erection of a manufactured home or
manufactured home components on the foundation system, and includes supporting, blocking, leveling,
securing, anchoring, and proper connection of multiple or expandable sections or components, the installation of
air conditioning, and minor adjustments.
Mobile home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, which is built on a permanent chassis [and] designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems.
Manufactured housing, manufactured housing unit, or manufactured home. A HUD-code manufactured home or
mobile home, and collectively means and refers to both.
(b) The definitions of “mobile home,” “HUD-code manufactured home,” and “manufactured housing” set
forth in this section are binding on all persons as a matter of law. A mobile home is not a HUD-code
manufactured home and a HUD-code manufactured home is not a mobile home for any purpose under this
article or under the laws of the state.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.084)
Sec. 3.06.005 Installation of mobile homes prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to install a mobile home, as defined within this article and constructed
before June 15, 1976, for use or occupancy as a residential dwelling within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a mobile home installed before the effective date of this
article and used as a residential dwelling within the city. A building permit issued for the installation of said
mobile home or a record of taxes paid may serve as sufficient evidence of said previous installation.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.085)
State law reference–Authority to prohibit installation of mobile homes used for residences, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec.
1201.008.
Sec. 3.06.006 Allowable installation of manufactured housing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/420
(a) Upon application to the chief building official of the city and upon the issuance of the required permit and
payment of the applicable fee, the installation of HUD-code manufactured homes shall be permitted as
residential dwellings in those areas determined appropriate by the city.
(b) An application to install a new HUD-code manufactured home for use and occupancy as a residential
dwelling is deemed approved and granted unless the chief building official denies the application in writing
within 45 days from receipt of the application setting forth the reason.
(c) This section shall not affect the validity of any deed restriction that is otherwise valid.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.086)
Sec. 3.06.007 Construction and safety standards
(a) All manufactured housing placed within the city limits shall conform with the federal Mobile Home
Construction and Safety Standards, dated June 16, 1976, established for manufactured housing by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development relating to manufactured housing and shall bear a label
or seal of compliance indicating such compliance.
(b) All other structures on-site shall comply with all city codes and ordinances. In addition, compliance shall
be made with the appropriate sections of this code concerning foundations, supports, and utility connections.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.087)
Sec. 3.06.008 Installation standards
The following requirements shall be applicable to manufactured homes installed within the city, and shall be in
addition to any other requirements found in the building code:
(1) Minimum anchoring standards. The “Mobile Homes Tie Down Standards” contained in the
Standard Building Code, 1990 edition, shall apply in all respects to the anchoring and tie-down of
manufactured homes within the city and shall apply to subsequent installation of previously occupied
mobile homes within the city.
(2) Minimum underpinning standards.
(A) All manufactured homes and all mobile homes installed within the city shall have
constructed a continuous skirt or underpinning constructed around the perimeter of said home
within thirty (30) days of said installation.
(B) The intervening space between floor sills and the ground shall be protected by a
nonbearing wall below the floor level of the structure extending from the bottom of the frame to
the ground level and fully enclosing the perimeter of the structure and fastened securely to the
exterior wall of the structure.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.088)
Sec. 3.06.009 Inspections and permit
(a) A permit shall be secured from the chief building official by any person desiring to install a manufactured
housing unit within the city. Such permit shall be secured before any preparation of the lot is begun and prior to
moving in a manufactured housing unit upon such lot.
(b) A single permit shall be issued for the placement or installation of a manufactured home. This permit shall
include electrical, plumbing, and such mechanical inspections as may be required. A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00)
shall be charged for the manufactured home installation permit, and all other fees required by the electrical,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/420
plumbing, and building codes shall be waived. Any additions to the manufactured housing unit shall require
permits in accordance with the building code, the electrical code, and the plumbing code.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to make or have made any connection with any water, wastewater,
electrical, or natural gas service to a manufactured housing unit or mobile home without having first obtained a
permit as specified in this section.
(d) An electrical inspection shall be required to restore electric service to any mobile home or manufactured
housing unit from which service has been discontinued.
(e) Additional charges for reinspections may be made when additional inspections are required by the chief
building official.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.089)
Sec. 3.06.010 Access to premises
The chief building official of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all premises upon which
manufactured housing units are placed for the purpose of insuring compliance with the terms of this article
applicable to said manufactured housing units, and any refusal shall result in refusal of the issuance of any
permit required under this article or revocation of any issued permit until such permission is granted. (1998
Code, sec. 32.090)
Sec. 3.06.011 Enforcement
(a) Notice of violation. Whenever the chief building official or any other agents of the city have reason to
believe that a violation of any provision of this article or any applicable state or federal law or regulation has
occurred, such officer or agent may cause written notice to be served upon the alleged violator or violators. The
notice shall specify the provision of this article, law or regulation alleged to be violated, and the facts alleged to
constitute a violation thereof, and may order that corrective action be taken within a reasonable time.
(b) Remedies. In the event that said corrective action is not taken within a reasonable or specified time, or if
the conditions constitute a clear and present danger to the public health and welfare which requires immediate
action, the city or its agents may prosecute any alleged violations in the municipal court or in a court of
appropriate jurisdiction, or institute a civil suit for injunctive relief or civil penalty in a court of proper
jurisdiction to relieve such condition.
(c) Efforts to obtain voluntary compliance. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city or its agents from
making efforts to obtain voluntary compliance through warning, conference or any other appropriate means.
(1998 Code, sec. 32.091)
ARTICLE 3.07 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.07.001 Statutory authorization
The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315,
delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows.
Sec. 3.07.002 Findings of fact
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/420
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
Sec. 3.07.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.07.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.07.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/420
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/420
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding.
Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally dependent use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/420
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new
construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/420
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/420
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
Sec. 3.07.006 Lands to which this article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.07.007 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Dawson County, Texas and
Unincorporated Areas,” dated February 4, 2011, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated
February 4, 2011, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
article.
Sec. 3.07.008 Establishment of development permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.07.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.07.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.07.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be;
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Sec. 3.07.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/420
Sec. 3.07.013 Penalties for noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this court order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court
order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than
$2,000.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the city council from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
Secs. 3.07.014–3.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 3.07.031 Designation of the floodplain administrator
The city manager/city inspector is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement
the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance
- National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.07.032 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse,
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.07.007, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division 3 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/420
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
Sec. 3.07.033 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on
forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.07.062(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.07.032(1);
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/420
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
Sec. 3.07.034 Variance procedures
(a) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.07.033(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article (section 3.07.003).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/420
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)–(i) of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Secs. 3.07.035–3.07.060 Reserved
Division 3. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 3.07.061 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Sec. 3.07.062 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.07.007, section 3.07.032(8), or section 3.07.063(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the
floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 3.07.033(a)(1), is
satisfied.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/420
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home
park or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion
to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result
of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/420
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: (A) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days; or (B) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (C) meet the permit requirements of
section 3.07.033(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in
subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions.
Sec. 3.07.063 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with sections 3.07.002, 3.07.003, and 3.07.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.07.008, section 3.07.033,
and the provisions of division 3 of this article.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.07.007 or section 3.07.032(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Sec. 3.07.064 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.07.007, are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance O-02-11 adopted 2/1/11)
ARTICLE 3.08 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/420
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.08.001 Barricading or covering excavations or obstructions
Any person having charge of any public or private improvement in the city who shall leave any hole, ditch, other
excavation or any obstruction in or adjoining any public square, street, alley, sidewalk or other public place
without guarding or covering the same so as to prevent persons or animals from the danger of falling therein, or
providing warning lights or flares thereon, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 91.003; Ordinance
adopting Code)
State law reference–Municipal regulation of obstructions on streets, etc., V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 311.
Sec. 3.08.002 Access driveways to state highways
Texas Administrative Code, title 43, part 1, chapter 11, subchapter C is hereby adopted by the city for the public
safety and protection of the citizens of the city. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.08.003 Line and grade limit for sidewalk and curb construction
No person who owns property in this city or his agent shall place any curb or sidewalk in this city without first
obtaining from the city the correct line and grade limit where same is to be placed, and the same shall then be
placed in conformity with the line and grade limit. Any person violating this section shall be fined as provided in
section 1.01.009 of this code; and any sidewalk placed without following the provisions of this section, and
which is incorrectly placed, shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be abated as such. (1998 Code, sec.
91.005)
Secs. 3.08.004–3.08.050 Reserved
Division 2. Right-of-Way Management*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.08.051 Purpose and intent
This division covers all aspects of right-of-way management and regulation under the authority of the city and is
enacted to implement the stated purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. It is
intended to implement the applicable provisions of chapter 283 of the Local Government Code of Texas entitled
“Management of Public Right-of-Way Used by Telecommunications Provider in Municipality.” (1998 Code, sec.
91.010)
Sec. 3.08.052 Applicability
The provisions of this division shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the city and to any and all
territory subsequently annexed into said corporate limits and to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as
specified, and shall apply to any individual, corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity, including all federal installations involved
in any aspect of the management of city-owned right-of-way within the city limits. (1998 Code, sec. 91.011)
Sec. 3.08.053 Definitions
Certificated telecommunications provider. A person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and
necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the state
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/420
public utility commission to offer local exchange telephone service.
Street or public way or public right-of-way or public rights-of-way or rights-of-way or right-of-way. The surface
of, and the space above and below, the area dedicated for a public street, roadway, highway, land, path, public
way or place, alley, court, boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, drive, waterway, utility easement in which the
municipality has an interest or any other easement now or hereafter held or under the control of the city, to
which the city holds the property rights in regard to the use for utilities. The term does not include the airwaves
above a right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.
User of the right-of-way. Any person, company, partnership, agency or other public or private entity, excepting
the city or a person or entity performing an excavation or other work for and at the direction of the city, making
or seeking to make any excavation in or under the surface of or use of any portion of any public street, alley,
sidewalk, or any other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel,
utility pole, or any other facility or installation or for any other purpose.
Utility service provider. A person who has been granted a permit, franchise, right-of-way use agreement,
easement or other formal consent to utilize the city's right-of-way issued by the city council in order to offer
utility services, including electric, gas, cable television, telecommunications services, water, wastewater, or any
other service utilizing the public right-of-way within the city limits.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.012)
Sec. 3.08.054 Violations; penalty
(a) For a violation of this division:
(1) Any violation or failure to abide by, or comply with, any provision or requirement of this
division shall be a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the city and shall be punishable as a class C
misdemeanor, subject to a fine as provided in this code, per occurrence, unless otherwise provided by
state law.
(2) Each day upon which there exists a violation of this division, or a failure to abide by or comply
with any provision or requirement of this division, shall constitute a separate occurrence. Each day a
violation of this division occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(3) Prosecution pursuant to this section is in addition to and does not supplant other remedies.
(b) For unauthorized use of public right-of-way:
(1) A person commits an offense if a person uses the public right-of-way to provide a utility
service that has not been authorized by the city.
(2) A person commits an offense if a person places facilities on public structures or utility
infrastructure to provide a service not allowed under the terms of a municipal consent or other
authorization.
(3) Each unauthorized use of the public right-of-way and each unauthorized placement of facilities
constitute a separate offense. Each day a violation of this division occurs shall constitute a distinct
and separate offense.
(4) An offense under this subsection is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as provided in
this code.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.017)
Sec. 3.08.055 Conflicts with state law
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/420
If any provision of this division is found to be in conflict with the provisions of chapter 283, Local Government
Code of the state, the provisions of said chapter shall control. (1998 Code, sec. 91.018)
Sec. 3.08.056 Rights and duties of franchised or certificated utilities
Subject to any applicable state or federal regulations, franchised or certificated utilities shall have the following
rights:
(1) Tree trimming. The right, license, privilege and permission is hereby granted to franchised or
certificated utility companies with poles on the city's right-of-way, to reasonably trim trees upon and
overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the city, so as to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming in contact with the wires or cables of the franchised or certificated utility
companies, and, when so ordered by the city, said trimming shall be done under the supervision and
direction of the director of public works or of any city official to whom said duties have been or may
be delegated. All pruning shall be done in accordance with ANSI A300-1995.
(2) Placement of poles and conduit. All poles to be placed in the city's right-of-way shall be of
sound material and reasonably straight, and shall be so set that they will not interfere with the flow of
water to any gutter or drain, and so that the same will not interfere with the ordinary travel on the
street or sidewalk. The location and route of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, conduits and cables to be
placed and constructed and the location of all conduits to be laid on the right-of-way within the limits
of the city under this section shall be subject to the reasonable and proper regulation, control,
direction, and prior approval of the director of public works or of any city official to whom such
duties have been or may be delegated. Nothing in this division is intended to add to or detract from
any authority granted by state law to the city.
(3) Temporary removal of wires. A franchised or certificated utility company with lines over the
city's right-of-way, on the request of any person, shall remove or raise or lower its wires within the
city temporarily to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such
temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the benefited party or parties, and
the franchised or certificated utilities may require such payment in advance. The franchised or
certificated utilities shall be given not less than five (5) days' advance notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.015)
Sec. 3.08.057 Rights of city
(a) City has first priority. In the exercise of functions for the public benefit, the city has first priority over all
other uses of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water, and other pipelines or
cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachment, restructuring or changes in
aerial facilities, in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or right-of-way occupied by a user of the
right-of-way, and to change the curbs, sidewalks or the grade of streets.
(b) Right to make additional use of poles and conduits. Subject to any applicable state or federal regulations,
the city shall have the right to make additional use, for any public purpose to the extent other third parties are
allowed use, of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained exclusively by or for the franchised or certificated
utility company in any street, provided:
(1) Such use by the city does not interfere with the use by the franchised or certificated utility
company; and
(2) The city holds the franchised or certificated utility company harmless against and from all
claims, demands, causes of actions, suits, actions, proceedings, damages, costs or liabilities of every
kind and nature whatsoever arising out of the city's use of said poles or conduits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/420
The franchised or certificated utility company may be compensated for such use at market rates.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.016)
Secs. 3.08.058–3.08.090 Reserved
Part II. Use of Right-of-Way
Sec. 3.08.091 Generally
No person, company, partnership, agency or other public or private entity may make use of any public street,
alley, sidewalk, or any other public place except as provided in this part. (1998 Code, sec. 91.013)
Sec. 3.08.092 Authorized users
Authorized users of the right-of-way shall include the following:
(1) All members of the public utilizing the right-of-way for the purpose of traveling from one place
to another in accordance with all applicable city ordinances and state laws.
(2) A service or utility service provider, including a certified telecommunications provider, that has
been granted a permit, franchise, right-of-way use agreement, easement or any other formal
permission, consent or operating authority to utilize the city's right-of-way by the city in accordance
with the provisions of this code, the city charter and state and federal law.
(3) A person operating a motor vehicle selling goods on the streets that has obtained a valid
itinerant business permit issued by the city.
(4) A person or group engaged in a parade, procession or other temporary use in accordance with
the provisions of this code.
(5) A person who has obtained an easement, right-of-way use agreement or permit from the city
council to encroach upon the public right-of-way abutting their property for the purpose of erecting a
line, burying an underground pipe, wire or cable, [or erecting an] awning, fence, building or other
structure as provided in this code.
(6) Abutting property owners utilizing that portion of the right-of-way between the road surface or
curbline and their property for the purpose of parking or landscaping in accordance with the
applicable sections of this code. However, no portion of this division shall be interpreted as to relieve
the abutting property owner of their responsibility under the provisions of this code to maintain that
portion of the abutting right-of-way to such standards as may be required in this code.
(7) A person obstructing a street or sidewalk under an exception provided by section 3.08.193(b) of
this code.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.013(b))
Sec. 3.08.093 Conditions of permit, franchise or other formal consent to use
(a) Limitations. The issuance of a permit, franchise, right-of-way use agreement, easement or other formal
consent to utilize the city's right-of-way does not in any way confer upon the user any property rights in the
continued use of said right-of-way. It is specifically understood that the city has no obligation to renew or extend
any said permit, franchise, right-of-way use agreement, easement or other formal consent beyond its stated term.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/420
(b) Maximum term. The issuance of a permit, franchise, right-of-way use agreement, or other formal consent
to utilize the city's right-of-way shall be for a period of time not to exceed five (5) years except as provided in
the city charter. If the city council takes no action following the expiration of said permit, franchise, right-of-way
use agreement or other formal consent, the user may continue said use under the current terms until action is
taken by the city council with respect to said use.
(c) Liability.
(1) Upon acceptance of a permit, franchise, right-of-way use agreement, or other formal consent to
utilize the city's right-of-way, the right-of-way user shall be liable for any damage or loss occasioned
by any act or omission occurring in connection with said use, and shall fully indemnify and hold the
city and its officers and employees harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs,
liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense), proceedings,
actions, demands, causes of action, liability, suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily
injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought
that is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused by the negligent act, error, or omission
of the user of the right-of-way, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or
subcontractor of the user of the right-of-way, or their respective officers, agents, employees,
directors, or representatives, while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in the public rightof-
way, unless otherwise provided for by law.
(2) The right-of-way user or city shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or
demand against the right-of-way user or city related to or arising out of the right-of-way user's
activities in a public right-of-way.
(3) Neither the city nor any officer or employee thereof shall be held responsible for any damages
caused by any such use in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place made by any person
pursuant to the provisions of this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.013(c)(1))
Sec. 3.08.094 Long-term occupancy
(a) Formal consent required. To occupy a specific portion of a city street or right-of-way for a period of more
than 180 days, a permit, franchise, right-of-way use agreement, easement or other formal consent to utilize the
city's right-of-way issued by the city council is required.
(b) Specific requirements for formal consent. Formal consent from the city council is required for long-term
occupancy of city right-of-way. Long-term occupancy formal consent is required for, but not limited to:
(1) Utility service providers.
(A) General requirement. The occupancy of the public right-of-way within the city by a
utility service provider shall be governed by a franchise with the city, unless exempted by state
or federal laws.
(B) Certificated telecommunications providers exempted.
(i) In general. A certificated telecommunications provider is exempt from the formal
consent provisions of this division except that the city shall exercise police power based
regulations in the management of the activities of certificated telecommunications
providers within a public right-of-way only to the extent that they are reasonably
necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(ii) Right-of-way fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/420
a. No additional fees required. A certificated telecommunications provider that
provides telecommunications services within the city shall pay only the
compensation amount determined by the state public utilities commission under
section 283.055 of the Local Government Code, and any restoration costs permitted
by section 3.08.137 of this code, for use of the public right-of-way in the city. Said
compensation is in lieu of any permit, license, approval, inspection, or other similar
fee or charge, including all general business license fees customarily assessed by the
city for the use of a public right-of-way against persons operating
telecommunications-related businesses.
b. Effect of payment of fees. A certificated telecommunications provider that
complies with chapter 283 of the Texas Local Government Code is authorized to
erect poles or construct conduit, cable, switches, and related appurtenances and
facilities and excavate within a public right-of-way to provide telecommunications
service.
c. Prohibition on other fees. A certificated telecommunications provider is not
required to pay any compensation other than the fee authorized by section 283.055
of the Local Government Code, and any restoration costs permitted by section
3.08.137 of this code, including an application, permit, excavation, or inspection fee,
for the right to use a public right-of-way to provide telecommunications services in
the municipality.
(iii) Permits.
a. Permits issued without cost. A construction permit shall be issued without cost
to a certificated telecommunications provider locating facilities in or on public
rights-of-way within the city. The terms of the permit shall be consistent with
construction permits issued to other persons excavating in a public right-of-way.
b. Processing. The city shall promptly process each valid and administratively
complete application of a certificated telecommunications provider for any permit,
license, or consent to excavate, set poles, locate lines, construct facilities, make
repairs, affect traffic flow, obtain zoning or subdivision regulation approvals, or for
other similar approvals, and make every reasonable effort to not delay or unduly
burden that provider in the timely conduct of its business.
(C) Removal of obsolete facilities.
(i) Utility service providers, including certificated telecommunications providers, shall
remove installed facilities when such facilities are no longer in service, and either create a
visual blight or create a nuisance for the public, or when requested by the city.
(ii) When permanent structures in a public right-of-way are removed or abandoned, the
city shall be notified through the director of public works. The director of public works
may direct such remedial measures as deemed necessary for public safety and the integrity
of the public right-of-way and the utility service provider shall perform the measures so
directed.
(2) Abutting property owners.
(A) Formal consent required. Property owners must obtain formal consent to occupy space
under or over the surface of any street, alley, or right-of-way abutting their property for the
purpose of placing pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fences or other structures relating to their use
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/420
of the property. This subsection shall not apply to connections made to or by a franchised or
certificated or permitted utility or service provider.
(B) Issuance of permit. The property owner shall apply to the city council for a right-of-way
occupancy permit on a form to be provided by the city manager. The city manager shall submit
the permit application to the city council for action within thirty (30) days. The city council
may disapprove, approve, or approve the application with special conditions. Upon approval of
the application, with or without special conditions, the city secretary shall issue a conditional
right-of-way occupancy permit to the applicant.
(C) Rights and conditions. The formal consent to an abutting landowner's use or occupation
of space under or over the surface of any street, alley, or right-of-way shall be subject to the
rights of a utility service provider also occupying said right-of-way and shall be subject to all of
the applicable provisions of this division relating to the installation and maintenance of said
occupancy.
(D) Revocation of permit. The city manager may recommend to the city council the
revocation of a right-of-way occupancy permit and shall give written notice to the permit holder
stating the reason for the proposed revocation and the date of a hearing before the city council.
Said notice shall be delivered personally or by registered mail to the permit holder or an
authorized representative. The city council may revoke the permit, or add or modify conditions
contained therein. Notice of the city council decision shall be provided to the permit holder. The
permit holder shall immediately comply with the decision of the city council.
(E) Permit fees. The application fee for a right-of-way occupancy permit shall be fifty dollars
($50.00). No additional fees shall be required if the activity does not raise the cost of street
maintenance and repair, does not reduce the useful life of the street, or does not require any
other personnel or material cost to be expended by the city. If any such costs are to be borne by
the city, the permit fee will be based upon actual expenses incurred by the city according to a
schedule to be provided by the director of public works.
(F) Awnings. Formal consent for the placement of an awning shall be in accordance with the
provisions of section 3.08.193(b) of this code.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.013(c)(2))
Sec. 3.08.095 Temporary occupancy
(a) Consent or permit required. To temporarily occupy a specific portion of a city street or right-of-way for a
period of less than 180 days, other than as permitted above, a temporary right-of-way occupancy consent or
permit issued by the director of public works is required.
(b) Specific requirements for consent or permit. The director of public works may give a verbal consent for
the temporary occupancy of the city right-of-way as provided in this subsection. Such consent shall be
documented in a memorandum to be filed with and approved by the city manager. A temporary right-of-way
occupancy consent is required for, but not limited to:
(1) Construction activities, including but not limited to:
(A) Placement of construction refuse containers on city right-of-way;
(B) Construction trailers placed on city right-of-way;
(C) Construction work that uses any portion of city right-of-way;
(D) Temporary storage of construction materials on city right-of-way;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/420
(E) Placing of cranes or construction equipment on city right-of-way.
(2) A written permit stating the conditions of the temporary street occupancy shall be required for
any other temporary occupancy of city streets or rights-of-way not enumerated above or provided for
elsewhere, including:
(A) Filming on city streets.
(c) Fee. No fee shall be required if the activity does not raise the cost of street maintenance and repair, does
not reduce the useful life of the street, or does not require any other personnel or material cost to be expended by
the city. If any such costs are to be borne by the city, the permit fee will be based upon actual expenses incurred
by the city according to a schedule to be provided by the director of public works. Any person required to pay
said fee who desires to protest or otherwise challenge imposition of the fee shall tender to the city payment in
full of the fee when due, accompanied by a written notice containing the following information:
(1) A statement that the required payment is tendered under protest; and
(2) A description of the factual and legal basis for the protest.
(d) Extension of consent or permit. The director of public works may extend the term of a temporary right-ofway
occupancy consent or permit for one (1) additional 180-day period upon receiving a written request from
the holder and upon approval by the city manager. Additional extensions will require approval by the city
council.
(e) Revocation of consent or permit. The director of public works may revoke a temporary right-of-way
occupancy consent or permit by giving written notice to the holder. Said notice shall give the reason for the
revocation and may be delivered in person or by mail to the holder or an authorized representative. Said
revocation may be either for cause, or at will without cause.
(f) Appeals. A person directly and adversely affected by a decision made by the director of public works
pursuant to the provisions of this section may appeal the director of public works' decision by filing a written
notice of appeal with the city manager no later than seven (7) working days after receiving notice of the
director's decision. The notice of appeal shall set forth the name, mailing address and telephone number of the
person appealing. The notice of appeal shall include or attach a statement describing the action being appealed,
setting forth the grounds for the appeal, and describing the action requested of the city manager. The scope of the
appeal shall be limited to the grounds specified in the notice of appeal. No later than thirty (30) days after the
filing of a timely notice of appeal, the city manager shall render a decision on the appeal. The city manager's
decision may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed. A copy of the city manager's decision shall be
provided to the person appealing at the address shown on the notice of appeal. Said person may appeal the city
manager's decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal no later than ten (10) working days
after the city manager's decision is received by the person.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.013(c)(3))
Secs. 3.08.096–3.08.130 Reserved
Part III. Construction in Right-of-Way
Sec. 3.08.131 Generally
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation, or maintenance, which disturbs the
surface or blocks the roadway for more than two (2) hours, of facilities or structures within the right-of-way in
the city except as provided in this part. (1998 Code, sec. 91.014(a))
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/420
Sec. 3.08.132 Notification required
In order to protect the health, safety and welfare, all users of the right-of-way shall notify the city through its
director of public works and obtain permission before performing any construction, installation or maintenance
activities of facilities in the right-of-way. The director may require the notification to be in writing. If there is an
emergency necessitating response work or repair, a right-of-way user is authorized to begin that repair or
emergency response work or take any action required under the circumstances, provided that the right-of-way
user notifies the public works director as promptly as possible after beginning the work. (1998 Code, sec.
91.014(b))
Sec. 3.08.133 Construction standards
(a) The director of public works shall be notified at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance that construction
is ready to proceed by the right-of-way user, its contractor or representative.
(b) All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
(c) Persons performing construction activities in the right-of-way shall be responsible for the following:
(1) The workmanship or any damages caused by a contractor or subcontractor; provided however,
that the requirements are not intended to affect the relationship between the user of the right-of-way
and its contractors;
(2) Immediate notification of the director of public works or director of utilities of any damage to
other utilities, either city or privately owned;
(3) Prior approval from the director of public works of any street or sidewalk cut and the prompt
repair of any cut to the standards required by the city;
(4) Insuring that installed facilities do not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity
dependent facilities;
(5) Obtaining and verifying the location of all lines from all affected utilities prior to any
excavation or boring;
(6) Obtaining the approval of both the director of public works and the director of utilities prior to
the placement of manholes;
(7) Stormwater management and erosion control that complies with state and federal guidelines,
including:
(A) Erosion control measures, such as silt fences, must be in place before work begins;
(B) The person performing construction work may be required to show proof of EPA
approved plans relating to stormwater and erosion control when applicable or a letter stating
they are not required to obtain such plans;
(8) Ensuring that all traffic-control measures conform to acceptable standards set by the state
department of transportation;
(9) Clearance of wires above ground or rails within the city and also underground work shall
conform to the basic standards of the National Electrical Safety Code, National Bureau of Standards,
United States Department of Commerce, as promulgated at the time of erection thereof;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/420
(10) A transmission or distribution line owned by an electric utility provider must be constructed,
operated, and maintained, as to clearances, in the manner described by the National Electrical Safety
Code Standard ANSI (c)(2), as adopted by the American National Safety Institute and in effect at the
time of construction.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.014(c))
Sec. 3.08.134 Alteration of facilities to accommodate public improvements
Whenever by reason of widening or straightening streets, water or wastewater line projects, or any other public
works project it shall be deemed necessary by the city council to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the
underground or overhead facilities of a right-of-way user, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the
facilities at their expense within ninety (90) days from receipt of notice to make the alterations, unless a different
schedule has been approved by the city manager. This section shall not be construed to prevent the owner of the
facilities to recover the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for
relocation or removal. (1998 Code, sec. 91.014(d))
Sec. 3.08.135 Improperly installed facilities
(a) Any person performing work in the city right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain
such facilities.
(b) Facilities installed after the effective date of this division shall be considered to be improperly installed,
repaired, upgraded or maintained if:
(1) The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers persons or property;
(2) The facilities do not meet the applicable city, state or federal codes or regulations;
(3) The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices;
(4) The facilities are not located in the proper place in accordance with the directions of the
director of public works or the director of utilities; or
(5) The facilities are placed in an area that interferes with city-owned facilities, such as water or
wastewater lines or streets. Privately owned facilities shall be considered to interfere with city-owned
facilities if the privately owned facility is within three (3) feet horizontally or one (1) foot vertically
of city-owned facilities.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.014(e))
Sec. 3.08.136 Restoration of property
(a) Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is
equal to the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work.
(b) This includes, but is not limited to, replacing all ground cover with that equal to the type of ground cover
damaged during work or better either by sodding or seeding, as directed by the director of public works.
(c) Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the director of public works and the abutting property
owner. The restoration shall include, but is not limited to:
(1) Installation of all manholes and hand-holes, as required;
(2) All bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be filled daily, unless other safety
measures are approved by the director of public works;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/420
(3) Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines;
(4) Restoration of the excavation site to specifications required by the director of public works or
to standards as may be approved by the city council;
(5) Restoration of all landscaping.
(d) Restoration must be made in a timely manner as specified by and to the satisfaction of the director of
public works.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.014(f))
Sec. 3.08.137 Restoration of pavement
Unless otherwise specified, restoration of the asphalt pavement of any street, alley or other public place shall be
performed by the user of the right-of-way or by city forces in accordance with applicable city standards. Nothing
in this part shall relieve the person opening or tearing up any pavement from the responsibility of maintaining
the excavation or installation in a safe condition until it is repaved by city forces or otherwise restored. In
addition to all other applicable fees or charges, the person making the street cut, or otherwise damaging such
pavement, shall pay for repaving at a rate to be established by the city. (1998 Code, sec. 91.014(g))
Sec. 3.08.138 Repair of sunken pavement over excavation
In case the pavement or the surface of the street or alley over any excavation should become depressed or broken
at any time within two (2) years after the excavation has been completed and before complete resurfacing of the
street or alley, natural wear of the surface, and any fault of the city excepted, the right-of-way user shall, upon
written notice from the director of public works, immediately proceed to inspect the depressed or broken area
over the excavation to ascertain the cause of the failure and the right-of-way user shall make repairs to the
installation or backfill and have the pavement restored as specified by the director of public works within five
(5) days, or a longer time period as may be agreed upon by the director. If the pavement is not restored as
specified by the director of public works within five (5) days, or such longer time period as agreed upon by the
director, and unless delayed by conditions beyond the right-of-way user's control, the director may cause the
work to be done after giving the right-of-way user twenty-four (24) hours' second and final notice. The actual
reasonable cost thereof incurred by the city shall be assessed against the right-of-way user. After the cost is paid
to the city, the city shall be responsible for any future repairs of that portion of pavement over the excavation
that was repaired by the city, unless such future repairs are required through no fault of the city. (1998 Code, sec.
91.014(h))
Sec. 3.08.139 Liability of city
Neither the city nor any officer or employee thereof shall be held responsible for any damages caused by any
excavations in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place made by any person pursuant to the provisions of
this part. The right-of-way user shall be solely liable for any damage or loss occasioned by any act or omission
occurring in connection with the excavation, and shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its
officers and employees from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims,
expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its officers or
employees may be subjected. The city shall promptly notify a right-of-way user of any claim or suit served upon
the city alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the right-of-way user, unless otherwise provided by law.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.014(i))
Sec. 3.08.140 Insurance
(a) No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation, or operation of facilities within
the right-of-way in the city, unless waived by the city manager in advance for good cause, without providing
proof of general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) as approved by the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/420
director of public works, except as otherwise provided by city ordinance. Said proof shall be in the form of an
original certificate of insurance, acceptable evidence of self-insurance, or a certificate of self-insurance issued by
the state department of insurance, within ninety (90) days, and shall state:
(1) The policy number;
(2) The name of the insurance company;
(3) The name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company;
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the insured;
(5) The policy expiration date; and
(6) The specific coverage amounts.
(b) The coverage provided must be on an “occurrence” basis and must include coverage for personal injury,
contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, and underground, explosion and collapse hazards.
(c) Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance provider is required to notify the
city in writing not fewer than thirty days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits.
(d) The city shall be entitled, upon request and without incurring expense, to review the insurance policies (or
certified copies thereof), including endorsements thereto, which relate to the insurance requirements specified
herein and, at its discretion, to require proof of payment or policy premiums.
(e) The city shall not be responsible for paying the cost of insurance coverage required herein.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.014(j))
Sec. 3.08.141 As-built plans
Upon completion of underground or surface work permitted under this part and at the discretion of the director
of public works, the user of the right-of-way shall furnish, within ninety (90) days, to the director of public
works and to the director of utilities of the city, plans reflecting the actual installation of the improvements
showing a correct plan view to scale, details and a profile showing the locations of all elements of the
installation based on data obtained in the field during construction. (1998 Code, sec. 91.014(k))
Secs. 3.08.142–3.08.190 Reserved
Division 3. Damage and Obstructions
Sec. 3.08.191 Generally
Any person who shall willfully damage, injure or tear up any improvement, sidewalk, crosswalk, drain or sewer
or any part thereof in any street, pavement or sidewalk within the city, or who shall obstruct the making or
repairing of any sidewalk, crosswalk or pavement, or who shall hinder or obstruct the person employed to make
such public improvement or repair under the official action of the city council, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 91.021)
Sec. 3.08.192 Damaging public improvement
Any person who shall willfully destroy or assist in injuring or destroying any bridge or its appurtenances, or
signboard, or any culvert, causeway, gutter or other public improvement within the city, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 91.022)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/420
Sec. 3.08.193 Obstruction of passage
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any way or to prevent the free passage of
traffic on any street or sidewalk, to set up any awning post on any sidewalk or suspend or put up any awning,
sign, sample or any other article less than eight feet (8') above the sidewalk, or to place, throw or deposit or
cause to be placed, thrown or deposited any article whatever upon any street or sidewalk, so as to obstruct a full
and free passage over any part of the same.
(b) Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply:
(1) To any merchant or grocer, while actually receiving or sending away any package of
merchandise, if the same does not occupy more than one-third (1/3) of the width of the sidewalk or
remain thereon for more than six (6) hours;
(2) To prevent merchants, dealers and auctioneers from occupying with signs, samples or other
articles not exceeding two feet (2') from the inside of the sidewalk and adjoining their place of
business;
(3) To prevent carpenters or builders from occupying not exceeding one-half (1/2) of the sidewalk
adjacent to any improvement they may be engaged in erecting, nor from crossing or passing over
such sidewalk with material for said improvement or building; provided, however, that all scaffolding
erected over or on said sidewalk shall be put up in a good substantial manner so as not to endanger
the safety of others;
(4) (A) To any awning or canopy post set up on any sidewalk in a district zoned for
commercial use if the owner of the property applies for and obtains a permit from the city
council. The council may issue a permit for the placement of said awning posts if the following
conditions are met:
(i) The owner of the building to which the awning or canopy is to be attached applies
for a building permit from the building inspector for same;
(ii) The awning or canopy posts will not obstruct the free passage of traffic on said
sidewalk;
(iii) If the awning or canopy posts are to be no closer than two feet (2') behind the
curbline;
(iv) If no part of the awning or canopy is to extend beyond a point two feet (2') behind
the vertical plane passing through the nearest curbline;
(v) If the property owner signs an agreement to assume all liability for said awning or
canopy and to hold the city harmless from any action resulting from any injury or
damages caused by said awning; and
(vi) If the building owner pays a nonrefundable application fee of ten dollars ($10.00)
to cover the costs of inspections and notices to be sent out to all affected property owners.
(B) The city council shall hear and consider said application and hear any comments after a
written notice of the date and place of the hearing is given to the adjacent property owners at
least 10 days before the hearing is held. The building inspector and chief of police shall submit
reports to the city council attesting to the potential for obstruction of the free passage of traffic
on said sidewalk and shall address any other resulting conditions which may affect the public
safety and welfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/420
(C) Upon approval of the city council, the building inspector may issue a building permit for
the construction of the awning or canopy.
(D) Any permit granted under the provisions of this subsection shall be revocable by action
of the city council when the building inspector finds the awning to be unsafe and that it is in the
best interest of the city that such permit be revoked; or when it is necessary for the city or any
of its franchised utilities to perform repairs, modifications, or new construction within the
easement on which the awning or canopy is constructed.
(E) For the purposes of this section, a canopy or awning shall mean any roof-like structure of
a permanent fixed nature attached to or which projects from the wall of the main structure and
supported by posts, built and designed for the purpose of shielding from the elements, persons
or chattels.
(5) To any decorative planter box or trash bin set up on any sidewalk in a district zoned for
commercial use if the following conditions are met:
(A) The decorative planter box or trash bin will not obstruct the free passage of traffic on said
sidewalk;
(B) If the decorative planter box or trash bin is not to be closer than three feet (3') from the
center line of the sidewalk; and
(C) The property owner shall upon placement of said planter box or trash bin upon said
sidewalk assume all liability for said decorative planter box or trash bin and shall hold the city
harmless from any action resulting from any injury or damaged caused by said decorative
planter box or trash bin.
(c) Notice to remove. Any obstruction mentioned in this section not removed within ten (10) days after notice
by the chief of police to remove the same will subject the offender, on conviction thereof, to the penalty
provided in this code.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.023)
Sec. 3.08.194 View and passage obstructions
(a) Definitions.
Intersection visibility triangle. A triangle sight area, at all intersections, which shall include that portion of
public right-of-way and any corner lot within a triangle formed by a diagonal line extending through points on
the two curblines twenty-five (25) feet from the street corner intersection (of the property lines extended) and
intersecting the curblines.
Parkway area. That area between the curbline or grade line of any public street and the abutting private property
line.
(b) Prohibited within intersection visibility triangle. It shall be unlawful to set out, maintain or permit or cause
to be set out or maintained any tree, shrub, plant, sign or other structure having a height greater than two (2) feet
as measured from the top of the curb of the adjacent streets within the intersection visibility triangle. This
restriction shall not apply to permanent structures authorized by the zoning ordinance or to traffic-control signs
and signals, street signs or utility poles placed within such area by authority of the city council.
(c) Prohibited within parkway areas. It shall be unlawful to plant, set out or maintain, or permit or cause to be
planted, set out or maintained, any tree, shrub or plant within any parkway area, other than within the
intersection visibility triangle, which exceeds two (2) feet in height above curb level. This prohibition shall not
apply to trees located within a parkway which are trimmed and maintained at all times so that no tree branch or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/420
limb is less than fifteen (15) feet above curb level and which are planted no less than twenty-five (25) feet apart;
provided, however, such trees shall not interfere with the free passage of vehicles on the street or alley or
pedestrians on the sidewalk or obscure the view of motor vehicle operators of any traffic-control device or street
sign or otherwise create a traffic hazard.
(d) Prohibited extensions of limbs and branches. It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the branches or
limbs of any tree, shrub or plant to extend over any portion of a parkway area, street or alley which tree, shrub or
plant branches or limbs are less than fifteen (15) feet above curb level.
(e) Enforcement; performance of work by city. It shall be the duty of the building official to cause a written
notice to be served upon the owner or occupant of any property upon which any of the above violations occur to
correct such violation within ten (10) days after service of such notice. If such violation is not corrected within
the ten (10) day period, upon reasonable notice and hearing, the city manager or his or her designated
representative is hereby authorized and directed to cause the tree, plant, shrub or structure constituting such
violation to be trimmed, pruned, or removed to eliminate such prohibited condition, with the cost of such
trimming, pruning or removal to be assessed against the property owner or abutting property owner, as the case
may be. This shall be in addition to any other remedy provided in this section.
(f) Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ordinance O-22-16 adopted 10/28/16)
Secs. 3.08.195–3.08.220 Reserved
Division 4. Liability and Responsibilities*
Sec. 3.08.221 Liability for damage due to defective sidewalk, curb or driveway
The abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of any property abutting on a sidewalk, curb, or
driveway entrance that has become defective and has caused damage or injury as a result of such defective
condition shall be primarily liable in damages for any loss or damage sustained as a result of such defective
condition. The city shall not be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the approval or disapproval of
any access, facilities, surfacing, or appurtenances not made in accordance with standards or specifications of this
article. (1998 Code, sec. 91.041)
Sec. 3.08.222 Duty and liability of special users
It shall be the duty of any property owner, landlord, tenant, lessee, sublessee, person, firm, or corporation
making special use of any sidewalk, curb, or driveway entrance for the purpose of ingress or egress, for loading,
downspout drains, or any other special use whatsoever kind or character, whether recited herein or not, to keep
such sidewalk, parkway, curb, and driveway abutting such property in a good and safe condition and free from
any defects and hazards of whatsoever kind and character. Such special user shall be liable in damages for any
loss or damage sustained as a result of any defective condition of the sidewalk, driveway, curb, loading elevator,
downspout drain, or other special use or facility of whatsoever kind or character. (1998 Code, sec. 91.042)
Sec. 3.08.223 Duty of abutting property owner to repair defective sidewalk, driveway, etc.
When a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, or appurtenance becomes defective, unsafe, or hazardous, it shall be
the duty of the owner of the abutting property to reconstruct or repair same and the expense of such work shall
be borne by the abutting property owner. When a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, or appurtenance is found to
be defective, unsafe or hazardous, the building inspector shall notify the owner of the abutting property to
reconstruct or repair same. Any owner who fails to reconstruct or repair such defective, unsafe, or hazardous
condition within thirty (30) days from the date of the written notice from the building inspector to do so shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 91.043)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/420
ARTICLE 3.09 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Sec. 3.09.001 Definitions
Improved surface. A continuous surface for the movement, parking or storage of a vehicle, designed and
constructed for all weather conditions and graded for proper drainage. Materials used for an improved surface
include gravel, paving bricks, asphalt, concrete, or similar permanent hard surface materials sufficient to prevent
mud, dust, and loose material.
Recreational vehicle (RV). A vehicular type unit that is primarily designed as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping or seasonal use; has its own motive power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle;
is regulated by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration as a vehicle or vehicle equipment; does not
require a special highway use permit for operation on the highways; and can be easily transported and set up on
a daily basis by an individual.
Recreational vehicle park. Any parcel or tract of land under the control of any person, organization or
governmental entity wherein ten or more recreational vehicle, recreational park trailer, and/or other recreational
vehicle sites are offered for use for overnight stays.
Recreational vehicle site. A specific area within a recreational vehicle park that is set aside for use by a
recreational vehicle.
Sec. 3.09.002 Permit required for recreational vehicle park
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a recreational vehicle park within the corporate limits
of the city unless such person holds a valid permit issued by the city.
Sec. 3.09.003 Permit fees
The annual permit fee for each recreational vehicle park shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for ten (10)
spaces and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each additional ten (10) spaces.
Sec. 3.09.004 Application for permit
(a) Application for recreational park permits shall be filed with the city inspector and upon approval by
inspection shall be granted an annual permit.
(b) Applications shall be submitted by the applicant or their duly authorized agent and shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The name and address of the recreational vehicle park;
(3) A site plan of the recreational vehicle park;
(4) The name, address and phone number of the recreational vehicle park manager; and
(5) Such additional information as may be requested to determine if the recreational vehicle park
will comply with the requirements of this article.
Sec. 3.09.005 Hearing on denial
Any person whose application for permit is denied by the city inspector may request an appeal of the denial to
the zoning board of adjustment in writing, no later than ten (10) days after the denial. If the applicant does not
request an appeal within the ten-day period, the city inspector's decision shall be final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/420
Sec. 3.09.006 Permit renewal
An application for renewal of the permit shall be made by the permit holder on or before December 31st of each
year, and such application shall specify any changes in the information occurring after the original permit or the
latest renewal was issued.
Sec. 3.09.007 Approval of transfer
Every person holding a permit shall give notice in writing to the city inspector within ten (10) days after having
sold, transferred or otherwise conveyed or assigned an interest in or control of any recreational vehicle park.
Request for transfer of a permit shall be made within the ten (10) days. Within thirty (30) days of receiving the
request for transfer the city inspector shall approve the request, provided that the recreational vehicle park and
the applicant are in compliance with this article.
Sec. 3.09.008 Location of recreational vehicle parks
Recreational vehicle parks may be located only in an area zoned for such use under the provisions of the city's
zoning ordinance. Recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the provisions of NFPA Standard 1194, 2014
edition, as adopted by the city.
Sec. 3.09.009 Requirements for recreational vehicle parks
All recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Minimum recreational vehicle site. Each recreational vehicle park shall provide recreational
vehicle parking sites and each site shall be clearly defined and must provide convenient access for the
placement of a recreational vehicle. Only one (1) recreational vehicle is permitted per recreational
vehicle site. Each recreational vehicle site shall have an area of not less than one thousand two
hundred and fifty (1,250) square feet and be at least twenty-five (25) feet wide and fifty (50) feet in
depth.
(2) Separation of recreational vehicles. Pads for recreational vehicles shall be separated by a
minimum of ten (10) feet and each recreational vehicle shall be separated from each other and
accessory structures by ten (10) feet and shall be located no closer than five (5) feet to adjacent
property lines.
(3) Soil ground cover and drainage. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the park shall be
paved, covered with other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust. The park shall be located on a well-drained site,
properly equipped to ensure rapid drainage and to be free from stagnant pools of water.
(4) Park entrance. The entrance to the park shall be designed to minimize congestion and hazards
and allow the free movement of traffic on adjacent streets.
(5) Site pads. Recreational vehicle site pads shall be improved with compacted crushed road base
material, asphalt, or concrete adequate to support the weight of the recreational vehicle. The pad shall
not heave, shift, or settle unevenly under the weight of the recreational vehicle due to frost action,
inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting on the structure.
(6) Utilities provided. Each recreational vehicle site shall be equipped with water, sewer, and
electrical hookups which shall conform to this code and all ordinances of the city.
(7) Service buildings. Service buildings shall be permanent structures complying with all
applicable ordinances regulating building, electrical, plumbing, gas, and mechanical installations, and
shall be maintained in a clean, slightly condition and kept free of any condition that will menace the
health of any occupant or the public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/420
(8) Sewage disposal. An adequate and safe sewer system shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with city codes.
(9) Electricity. All electric service shall be underground and installed in accordance with city
codes.
(10) Garbage receptacles. Each recreational vehicle park shall provide adequate facilities for the
collection and removal of refuse and garbage.
(11) Fuel. Bottled gas for cooking and heating purposes shall be properly connected and stored and
shall comply with the provisions of NFPA Standard 58 as referenced in NFPA Standard 1194, 2014
edition.
(12) Access to spaces for firefighting. Approaches to all recreational vehicle spaces shall be kept
clear for firefighting personnel and equipment.
Sec. 3.09.010 Park supervision
(a) Each park shall have a park manager.
(b) The park manager shall operate the park in compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances
and shall provide adequate supervision to maintain the park, its facilities, and its equipment in good repair and in
a clean and sanitary condition.
(c) The park manager shall maintain a register of park occupancy.
Sec. 3.09.011 Inspection
The city inspector, fire chief, and chief of police are each hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as necessary to determine compliance with this article, and shall have the power to enter at
reasonable times upon the property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the
enforcement of this article.
Sec. 3.09.012 Notices, hearings, and orders of revocation of permits
(a) Notice of violation. Whenever it is determined that there are grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this article, the city inspector shall give notice of such alleged violation to the
permit holder. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reason for its issuance;
(3) Allow ten (10) days for compliance;
(4) Be served upon the permit holder or the permit holder's agent, provided that such notice or
order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such permit holder or agent when a copy
has been served upon such permit holder or agent or when a copy thereof has been served in person
or sent by certified mail to his or her last known address; and
(5) Specify the remedial action that, when taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this
article.
(b) Citations. If the provisions of this article are not complied with within the time period specified, citations
for violations may be issued.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/420
(c) Appeal from notice. Any person affected by any notice that has been issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provision of this article may request a hearing before the city council; provided that such
person shall file within ten (10) days after the notice was served, in the city secretary's office, with a copy to the
office of the city inspector, a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds thereof. If the person affected does not appeal within the ten-day period, the notice of violation shall be
final and the city [may] revoke the permit to operate the recreational vehicle park if the park remains in
noncompliance with this article.
(d) Issuance of order. After such hearing, the city council shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying,
or withdrawing the notice of violation, which order shall be served by certified mail upon the petitioner. Any
failure to comply with the order sustaining or modifying the finding of a violation shall constitute grounds for
immediate revocation of the permit to operate a recreational vehicle park.
(e) Revocation of permits. The city inspector may revoke any permit to maintain and operate a park when the
permit holder has been found by the city council to have violated the provisions of this article, or if the permit
holder received a notice of violation and did not appeal the notice to the city council and has not corrected the
violations in the notice, and/or if found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of
this article.
(f) Reinstatement. After such revocation, a new permit may be reissued if the circumstances leading to
revocation have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with this
article.
Sec. 3.09.013 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each provision violated, and each day there is a failure to comply with the terms of
any provision of this article is considered a separate offense.
Sec. 3.09.014 Occupancy of recreational vehicle
Recreational vehicles may be temporarily occupied under the following conditions:
(1) When located in a recreational vehicle park permitted by the city.
(2) When used as temporary living quarters for construction sites when approved by the city
inspector and the city manager.
(3) In conjunction with a recognized event sponsored by the city for the duration of the event.
(4) In any location where a permit is granted by the city inspector for a period up to 30 days. The
request for a permit shall be in written form, and signed by the property owner. The request shall be
accompanied by a site plan showing the proposed location of the recreational vehicle and other
structures on the property. The request must also address how utilities will be supplied to the
recreational vehicle. A permit will be issued at a cost of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars and may be
renewed twice.
(5) A recreational vehicle may be temporarily occupied for a period of no more than ten (10) days
in a twelve (12) month period, provided the recreational vehicle is located on the side or rear yard of
a property owner's residence or on an improved surface on the property.
(Ordinance O-02-15 adopted 1/20/15)
(6) When occupied by a person who is ill, convalescing or disabled requiring care from a relative
or friend occupying the permanent residence located on the property or when occupied by a person
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/420
providing required care to a relative or friend who is ill, convalescing or disabled occupying the
permanent residence located on the property, only for the duration of the illness, period of
convalescence or disability, subject to the following requirements:
(A) A permit is obtained from the city inspector;
(B) Documentation from the ill, convalescing or disabled person's physician is presented
documenting the illness, condition or disability requiring the care from the friend or relative;
(C) Connection of the recreational vehicle to electricity and city water and sewer utilities
specifically metered to the recreational vehicle; and
(D) Compliance with all area and setback requirements of the city.
(Ordinance O-15-16 adopted 8/30/16)
Sec. 3.09.015 Parking and storage of recreational vehicles
The parking and storage of recreational vehicles shall be permitted in any zoning district and shall comply with
the following:
(1) Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored on any city street or alley.
(2) Recreational vehicles may be parked and/or stored at a residence provided that:
(A) All slides, extensions, and pop-ups are in the stowed position (except when loading,
unloading, cleaning or repairing).
(B) No utilities (includes water and sewer) are connected to the recreational vehicle. Electric
service may be allowed to maintain systems on the recreational vehicle.
(C) Recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored only on improved surfaces or in side or
rear yards.
(3) The recreational vehicle is not occupied for personal or rental use.
(4) Exceptions:
(A) The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the loading, unloading, cleaning or
repairing of recreational vehicles by the owner of the recreational vehicle for a limited time
necessary to complete such actions, but not exceeding seventy-two (72) hours in a thirty-day
period.
(B) Where otherwise allowed by this section for temporary occupancy.
Sec. 3.09.016 Standards for recreational vehicle parks and recreational vehicles
The provisions of the National Fire Protection Association Standard 1194, 2014 edition, are hereby adopted as
code requirements for recreational vehicle parks located within the city to the extent such provisions do not
conflict with the provisions of this article. NFPA Standard 1194, 2014 edition, is hereby incorporated in this
article the same as if set forth at length herein.
(Ordinance O-02-15 adopted 1/20/15)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/420
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 AMUSEMENT CENTERS†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Definitions
Billiards. Any game played on a table with balls and cue sticks where the balls are struck by the sticks and the
balls strike against one another.
Business establishment. Any business, club, or other organization operated for profit or nonprofit in or upon
which there is located any coin-operated amusement device as defined herein.
Class A amusement center. A business establishment in which at least four coin-operated amusement devices or
at least one billiard table is operated.
Class B amusement center. A business establishment with three or less coin-operated amusement devices.
Coin-operated amusement device. A machine or device operated by insertion of a coin, token or similar object,
for the purpose of amusement or skill. The term does not include musical devices or machines designed
exclusively for children.
Licensee. The person in whose name a license to operate an amusement center has been issued, as well as
individual(s) listed as applicant(s) on the application for an amusement center license.
Operator. A person who manages or controls an amusement center.
Person. An individual, partnership, company, corporation, firm, organization, institution or similar entity.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.001)
Sec. 4.02.002 Amusement devices and billiard tables not in licensed amusement center declared
nuisance
Every coin-operated amusement device and billiard table subject to the provisions of this article and not within a
licensed amusement center is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be seized and destroyed by the
chief of police and his agents, as provided by law for the seizure and destruction of common nuisances. (1998
Code, sec. 41.002)
Sec. 4.02.003 Appeals
With respect to class A amusement centers and class B amusement centers, any person who is denied a license
or whose license has been suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions hereof shall have the right to appeal
the decision to the city council. Such appeal must be filed not later than ten (10) days from the date the license
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/420
application is denied or the license is suspended or revoked. No appeal shall be allowed after such ten (10) day
period. The city council shall hear the appeal at the first regular meeting after the appeal is filed and the decision
of the city council shall be final. (1998 Code, sec. 41.003)
Sec. 4.02.004 Due date for payment of license fees
The fees assessed pursuant to this article are annual fees and become due and payable on January 2nd of each
year. (1998 Code, sec. 41.004)
Secs. 4.02.005–4.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Class A Amusement Centers
Part I. In General
Sec. 4.02.031 Hours of operation
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) or (c) of this section, no licensee or his operator may operate the
amusement center between the hours of 12:01 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, and between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., Saturday and Sunday.
(b) If an amusement center is within five hundred feet (500') of a district restricted to residential use under the
zoning ordinance of the city, no licensee or his operator may operate the amusement center except between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00
midnight, Friday and Saturday. A variance to this subsection may be granted by the chief of police and must be
so noted upon the license. The variance may be withdrawn at any time for cause.
(c) If an amusement center is within five hundred feet (500') of a public or private elementary or secondary
school, no licensee or his operator may operate the amusement center between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. during the fall or spring term when students are required to attend school in the school district in which the
center is located.
(d) For purposes of this article, measurements shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest entry door in the portion of the building used as an amusement center to
the nearest point of a district restricted to residential use or nearest entry door of a school.
(e) If an amusement center's hours are restricted only by subsection (a) of this section, a licensee may obtain a
temporary permit to operate continuously. The chief of police shall issue a temporary permit for no longer than
thirty (30) days and only once a year.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.013)
Sec. 4.02.032 Responsibilities of licensee; prohibited activities
(a) A licensee or his operator may not permit any of the following activities within the amusement center:
(1) Violation of any possession, sale, or delivery provision of the Texas Controlled Substances Act;
(2) Violation of any provision of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
(3) Prostitution;
(4) Gambling; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/420
(5) Entry of a person younger than 17 years between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. during
the fall or spring term when students are required to attend school in the school district in which the
center is located.
(b) A licensee or his operator may not permit any of the following activities on the premises of the amusement
center:
(1) Violation of section 42.01 of the Penal Code;
(2) Throwing or depositing litter in or upon the sidewalk or adjacent streets or properties; or
(3) Any of the activities listed in subsections (a)(1) through (4) above.
(c) In subsection (b) of this section, “premises” means an area, other than the interior of an amusement center,
to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and which is under the control of an owner or
operator of an amusement center, such as a parking facility or private sidewalk.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.014)
Sec. 4.02.033 Inspection
Representatives of the health department, fire department, police department, and building inspector may inspect
the premises of an amusement center for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any time it is open
for business. (1998 Code, sec. 41.015)
Secs. 4.02.034–4.02.060 Reserved
Part II. License
Sec. 4.02.061 Required
(a) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. The applicant must be qualified
according to the provisions of this article and his premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state regarding public establishments, by the health department,
fire department and building inspector.
(b) If a person who wishes to operate an amusement center is an individual he must sign the application for a
license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate an amusement center is other than an individual, each
individual who has a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a
license as applicant. Each applicant must meet the requirements of section 4.02.063 and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.005)
Sec. 4.02.062 Application
(a) An applicant for a license shall file with the chief of police a written application on a form provided for
that purpose, which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner of the amusement center. Should an
applicant maintain an amusement center at more than one location, a separate application must be filed for each
location. The following information is required in the application:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant including the trade name by which the
applicant does business and the street address of the amusement center, and, if incorporated, the name
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/420
registered with the secretary of state;
(2) Name, address, and telephone number of the operator of the amusement center and proof that
the operator is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
(3) Whether the applicant, operator, and, if applicable, any corporate officer of the applicant,
within the preceding five (5) years, has been convicted of a felony or of an offense involving drugs,
gambling, prostitution, obscenity, or unlawfully carrying a weapon;
(4) The occupation of the applicant, operator, and, if applicable, all corporate officers of the
applicant for the preceding five (5) years;
(5) Whether a previous license of the applicant, or, if applicable, corporate officer of the applicant,
has been revoked within two (2) years of filing of the application;
(6) A statement that all the facts contained in the application are true.
(b) The chief of police may require additional information of any applicant for a license to clarify items on the
application.
(c) No applicant may maintain an amusement center in violation of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of
the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.006)
Sec. 4.02.063 Issuance
(a) The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after
receipt of an application unless he finds one or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is not of good moral character, and his reputation for
being peaceable and law-abiding in the community where he resides or does business is bad.
(3) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines,
or penalties or any other obligation assessed against him or imposed upon him.
(4) An applicant uses alcoholic beverages to excess.
(5) An applicant is physically or mentally incapacitated to an extent that he cannot operate an
amusement center.
(6) An applicant has failed to answer or has falsely answered a question or request for information
on the application form provided.
(7) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this
article within two years immediately preceding the filing of the application. The fact that a conviction
is being appealed shall have no effect.
(8) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a license by the city to operate an
amusement center within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person whose license to operate
an amusement center has been revoked within the preceding 12 months, or residing with a person
who does not meet the qualifications of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/420
(9) An applicant's premises have not been approved by the health department, the fire department,
or the building inspector.
(10) The license fee required by this article has not been paid.
(11) An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of:
(A) A felony; or
(B) A misdemeanor involving an offense of:
(i) Prostitution;
(ii) Promotion of prostitution;
(iii) Public lewdness;
(iv) Gambling;
(v) Violation of the Texas Controlled Substances and Dangerous Drugs Act, or the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code; or
(vi) Unlawfully carrying a weapon;
and five (5) years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole, or
probation. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.
(12) An applicant has been employed in an amusement center managerial capacity within the
preceding 12 months and has demonstrated that he is unable to operate or manage amusement center
premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner.
(b) When the conditions of this division have been complied with, an amusement center license shall be issued
by the city secretary and approved by the chief of police.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.007)
Sec. 4.02.064 Fee
The annual fee for a class A amusement center license is $100.00. The fee for issuing a replacement license for
one lost, destroyed, or mutilated is $2.00. The fees assessed hereunder are payable to the city secretary upon
approval of the license by the chief of police. No refund of fees will be made. New licenses issued after the first
day of October may be for a term not to exceed fifteen (15) months for a fee of $125.00. (1998 Code, sec.
41.008)
Sec. 4.02.065 Display; replacement; transfer
(a) Each license issued pursuant to this division must be posted and kept in a conspicuous place in an
amusement center and must state the number of coin-operated amusement devices and billiard tables for which
the license was issued.
(b) A replacement license may be issued for one lost, destroyed, or mutilated, upon application to the chief of
police and upon payment of the prescribed fee.
(c) An amusement center license is not assignable or transferable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/420
(d) A licensee shall notify the chief of police within 10 days of a change or partial change in the ownership or
management of the amusement center, or a change of address or trade name.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.009)
Sec. 4.02.066 Expiration and renewal
(a) Each license shall expire on the first day of January each year and may be renewed only by making
application as provided for an original application. A renewal application must be made at least 30 days before
the expiration date, and the center may not operate without a valid existing license.
(b) When the chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one
year from the date of denial unless the chief of police finds that the basis for denial of a renewal license has been
corrected or abated, in which case the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since
the date denial became effective.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.010)
Sec. 4.02.067 Suspension
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days if he determines that a
licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the amusement center premises;
(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the amusement center premises as authorized by section
4.02.033 of this article;
(3) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the amusement center premises;
(4) Knowingly permitted an intoxicated person to remain on the premises; or
(5) Demonstrated inability to operate or manage an amusement center premises in a peaceful and
law-abiding manner.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.011)
Sec. 4.02.068 Revocation
(a) The chief of police shall revoke an amusement center license for one or more of the following reasons:
(1) A false statement as to a material matter made in an application for a license, a license renewal
or a hearing concerning the license;
(2) Conviction of the licensee, his operator, or corporate officer of the licensee of:
(A) A felony; or
(B) A misdemeanor involving an offense of:
(i) Prostitution;
(ii) Promotion of prostitution;
(iii) Public lewdness;
(iv) Gambling;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/420
(v) Violation of the Texas Controlled Substances and Dangerous Drug Act, or Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code;
(vi) Unlawfully carrying a weapon;
and five (5) years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole, or
probation. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect;
(3) A licensee or an employee is unable to operate the amusement center because of physical or
mental impairment;
(4) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances or illegal alcoholic beverages on the premises;
(5) A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(6) Two or more violations within a one (1) year period by the operator of the hours of operation
provisions of this division;
(7) Employment by the licensee of an operator who is under 18 years of age; or
(8) Violation by the licensee or his operator of section 4.02.065(a) of this article.
(b) The chief of police shall send written notice of revocation to a licensee by certified mail, return receipt
requested, setting forth the reasons for the revocation.
(c) When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee
shall not be issued an amusement center license for one year from the date revocation became final. If,
subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation action has been corrected or
abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation
became final. If the license was revoked under subsection (a)(6) of this section, the applicant may not be granted
another license.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.012)
Secs. 4.02.069–4.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Class B Amusement Centers
Part I. In General
Sec. 4.02.101 Responsibilities of licensee; prohibited activities
A license may not permit any of the following activities within the amusement center:
(1) Violation of any possession, sale, or delivery provision of the Texas Controlled Substances Act;
(2) Violation of any provision of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code;
(3) Prostitution;
(4) Gambling; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/420
(5) The operation of any licensed coin-operated amusement device in the amusement center by a
person younger than 17 years between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. during the fall or spring
term when students are required to attend school in the school district in which the center is located.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.021)
Secs. 4.02.102–4.02.130 Reserved
Part II. License
Sec. 4.02.131 Required
(a) No person may operate a class B amusement center within the city limits without first obtaining a license
from the city.
(b) An application for a license must be made on a form to be provided by the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.016)
Sec. 4.02.132 Application
(a) An applicant for a class B license shall file with the city secretary a written application on a form provided
for that purpose, which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner or operator of the amusement
center. The following information is required in the application:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) Trade name, address, and telephone number of the amusement center.
(b) No applicant may maintain an amusement center in violation of the comprehensive zoning ordinance of
the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.17)
Sec. 4.02.133 Issuance
The city secretary shall issue a license to an applicant upon receipt of an application and the payment of the
license fee required by this article. (1998 Code, sec. 41.018)
Sec. 4.02.134 Fee
The annual fee for a class B amusement center is $25.00. The fee for issuing a replacement license for one lost,
destroyed, or mutilated is $2.00. The fee is payable to the city secretary upon receipt of the application. No
refund of license fees will be made. (1998 Code, sec. 41.019)
Sec. 4.02.135 Display; expiration
(a) Each license issued pursuant to this division must be posted and kept in a conspicuous place in the
amusement center and must state the number of coin-operated amusement devices for which the license was
issued.
(b) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.020)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/420
Sec. 4.02.136 Suspension or revocation
(a) The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not exceeding 30 days if he determines that a
licensee or an employee of a licensee has permitted any of the activities not permitted in section 4.02.101.
(b) The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period of at least three months and not more than six
months for any subsequent violations outlined in section 4.02.101.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.022)
ARTICLE 4.03 DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
As used in this article:
Public dance. Any dance or ball to which admission can be had by payment of a fee, or by the purchase,
possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or at which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other
property, or any other dance to which the public generally may gain admission, with or without the payment of a
fee.
Public dance hall. Any room, place or space, open or enclosed, in which a public dance or public ball is held, or
any room, place or space where dancing is permitted.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.031)
Sec. 4.03.002 Review of license and permit applications by chief of police
The chief of police shall examine all applications for dance hall licenses and dance permits and make
recommendations with reference to applications for dance hall licenses and dance permits. (1998 Code, sec.
41.032)
Sec. 4.03.003 Transfer of license or permit
No license or permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be transferred. (1998 Code, sec. 41.033)
Sec. 4.03.004 Enforcement
The chief of police, or other persons under his direction, shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
article and all rules, regulations and ordinances relating to public dances and public dance halls. In making
determinations as to proper cleanliness and sanitation conditions, fire safety requirements, building regulations,
uses and requirements, etc., the chief of police or other persons under his direction shall work with and seek the
aid of the proper city department administering such regulations for the city. (1998 Code, sec. 41.034)
Sec. 4.03.005 Remedies cumulative
Any remedy prescribed by this article for the enforcement of the same shall be nonexclusive and shall not
preclude resort to any other remedy provided by law. (1998 Code, sec. 41.035)
Secs. 4.03.006–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Dance Halls
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/420
Part I. In General
Sec. 4.03.031 Maintenance of premises
All public dance halls shall be kept at all times in a clean, healthful and sanitary condition and all rooms
connected thereto shall be kept open and the entire place shall be well lighted. (1998 Code, sec. 41.044)
Sec. 4.03.032 Authority to vacate premises
The chief of police, or other persons under his direction, shall have the power, and it shall be his duty, to cause
any place, hall or room where any public dance is held or given to be vacated whenever any provision of this
article is being violated or whenever any indecent act is committed, or when any disorder of a gross, violent or
vulgar character shall take place therein. (1998 Code, sec. 41.046)
Secs. 4.03.033–4.03.060 Reserved
Part II. License
Sec. 4.03.061 Required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or conduct any public dance within the city unless the dance
hall in which the same is held is licensed for such purpose.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to dance at any public dance hall that is not duly licensed, and
any person engaging in a dance or dancing at an unlicensed public dance shall be deemed guilty of disorderly
conduct and a misdemeanor. The owner, proprietor, manager, or person in charge of any unlicensed public dance
hall who permits or condones any person to engage in a dance shall also be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.036)
Sec. 4.03.062 Application
Any person desiring a license to operate a public dance hall shall file with the building inspector an application
for such license on a form furnished by the city, giving the information requested thereon, and it shall be
unlawful for an applicant to misrepresent any fact or make any false statement in such application, and any such
misrepresentation shall, in addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, be sufficient cause for denial,
suspension or revocation of the license. (1998 Code, sec. 41.037)
Sec. 4.03.063 Inspection of premises
No dance hall license shall be granted unless it shall appear, upon inspection and investigation by the chief of
police, the health officer, the fire marshal and the building inspector, that the premises desired to be used for the
purpose of conducting a dance hall comply with the laws of the state, the provisions of this article, the
ordinances of the city regulating zoning, health and sanitation, the fire regulations and the building code, and
that the proposed dance hall is properly ventilated and supplied with sufficient toilet conveniences, and is a safe
and proper place for the purpose for which it is used, as determined by regulations adopted by the city. The
officers named herein shall, in their respective capacities, note their approval or disapproval upon the application
for the license. (1998 Code, sec. 41.038)
Sec. 4.03.064 Fee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/420
An annual fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for each dance hall license, which fee shall be
paid prior to issuance of the license. (1998 Code, sec. 41.039)
Sec. 4.03.065 Issuance or denial
When the conditions of this article have been complied with, a dance hall license shall be issued by the city
secretary and certified to and approved by the chief of police. No such license shall be effective until it has been
so approved. In the event the chief of police refuses to approve a license, such action shall be final unless the
applicant shall, within ten (10) days after the refusal, file a written appeal with the city secretary, addressed to
the city council, requesting a hearing by the council upon the question as to whether or not his application shall
be granted. In the event such appeal is filed, the chief of police shall provide the council with a record of all
proceedings theretofore had with reference to the application in question, including the written application,
together with the action of the chief of police and the reasons for such action. The city council shall, within
thirty (30) days, grant a hearing thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the chief of police, at which
hearing the council may make such investigation as it may see fit, whether or not all the pertinent facts appear in
the application. It shall be discretionary with the city council as to whether or not the license shall be granted and
such action as the council may take thereon shall be final and conclusive. (1998 Code, sec. 41.040)
Sec. 4.03.066 Contents; posting
A dance hall license issued under this article shall state on its face to whom it is issued, the date of expiration,
and the address and location of such dance hall, and shall be signed by the city secretary and posted by the
licensee in a conspicuous place and in such a manner and position that it may be easily read at any time of the
day or night. (1998 Code, sec. 41.041)
Sec. 4.03.067 Expiration
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall terminate one (1) year from the date of such
issuance. (1998 Code, sec. 41.042)
Sec. 4.03.068 Suspension or revocation
(a) The granting of any dance hall license shall in no event be construed as the granting or conferring of any
vested right to the licensee or operator, but such license shall be subject to revocation or suspension as provided
for in this section.
(b) If a dance hall licensed under the provisions of this article is not being conducted in accordance with the
laws of the state or this code, or is being conducted in violation of the laws of the state or this code, the chief of
police may at any time give notice in writing to the operator, licensee, manager or other person in control of the
operation and maintenance of such dance hall that the license issued for the operation and maintenance of such
dance hall has been revoked or suspended. The notice of revocation or suspension shall become a final
revocation or suspension after the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of the service of same upon the
operator, licensee, manager or other person in charge, unless, on or before the expiration of such ten (10) days,
the licensee, operator, manager or other person in charge shall file with the city secretary a written appeal
addressed to the city council in which it is requested that the council grant him a hearing upon the question
whether or not the license shall be revoked or suspended. Such appeal, if made and filed as prescribed in this
section, shall operate as a stay or postponement of the revocation or suspension of the license until such time as
the city council shall grant a hearing and make a final adjudication. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30)
days after the date of the filing of such appeal, and such action and judgment of the council, after hearing all the
evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.043)
Secs. 4.03.069–4.03.100 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/420
Division 3. Dance Permit
Sec. 4.03.101 Required
In addition to the public dance hall license required herein, there shall be required a public dance permit, and no
person shall hold a public dance until a permit is issued therefor by the chief of police. (1998 Code, sec. 41.047)
Sec. 4.03.102 Application
Application for a public dance permit shall be made upon a form furnished by the city and shall be filed with the
chief of police at least forty-eight (48) hours before the dance is to begin. (1998 Code, sec. 41.048)
Sec. 4.03.103 Issuance
A public dance permit shall be issued by the chief of police when all the provisions of this article and other
ordinances in reference thereto are complied with. (1998 Code, sec. 41.049)
Sec. 4.03.104 Revocation or suspension
The chief of police may revoke or suspend any dance permit at any time when the provisions of this article are
being violated. (1998 Code, sec. 41.050)
ARTICLE 4.04 CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, MEDICINE SHOWS,
AMUSEMENT RIDES AND TENT SHOWS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.04.001 Policing; authority to revoke permit or order closure
(a) The chief of police or his designee shall have supervision of the policing of carnivals, circuses, medicine
shows, amusement riding devices and/or tent shows.
(b) Should the carnival or circus be issued a permit and conduct itself, or should any permittee's agents,
servants or employees conduct themselves, in any unlawful manner, the chief of police may revoke the permit,
and the fees be forfeited, upon notice to the applicant and after an opportunity for hearing concerning such
activity.
(c) In the event any activity of the applicant or the applicant's agents, servants or employees constitutes a
violation of the penal laws of the city or of the state, and such activity endangers the life, health, safety, morals
or general welfare of the public, the chief of police shall have authority to order the carnival or circus closed
immediately, but shall concurrently therewith advise the permit holder of such violation and give such holder an
opportunity for hearing to explain or correct such activity.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.065)
Secs. 4.04.002–4.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.04.031 Required
(a) It shall be unlawful to hereafter hold, sponsor or run a carnival, circus, medicine show, amusement riding
device and/or tent show within the city unless a permit to hold such enterprise is obtained in accordance with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/420
this article. This section shall not apply to shows or exhibitions held in established theaters, auditoriums or other
permanent buildings in this city.
(b) A permit issued under this section shall cover one appearance in the city and shall be valid only for as
many days as the carnival or circus remains continuously in the city, and a new permit shall be required each
time the carnival or circus returns to the city.
(c) The term “carnival” shall apply to any show offering amusement rides or devices for public use.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.061)
Sec. 4.04.032 Application; approval
A permit shall be issued by the city secretary to hold such carnival, circus, medicine show, amusement riding
device and/or tent show when and only when a proper application in writing is submitted to him. Such
application shall include:
(1) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons applying for such a permit,
including the name, residence address, telephone number, and driver's license number of the manager
or other individual to be principally in charge of the operation of the carnival or circus;
(2) The exact location where it is to be operated;
(3) The component parts of the enterprise, including:
(A) All concessions, shows, amusements, rides and other businesses;
(B) A description of the toilet facilities to be provided; and
(C) A description of the security to be provided;
(4) The dates and the hours during which such activity is to be kept open to the public;
(5) The names and addresses of local persons connected therewith;
(6) A copy of the current state or federal license issued to the circus or carnival under the
provisions of chapter 824 of the Health and Safety Code of the state or the federal Animal Welfare
Act;
(7) Certificates of insurance in an amount not less than five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) for bodily injuries, including accidental death, per occurrence, and one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage;
(8) A description of the security services to be provided during the hours of operation to insure the
safety of the people attending and in surrounding property;
(9) Proof that the operator is in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Amusement Ride
Safety Inspection and Insurance Act of the state (section 21.60, Insurance Code). A copy of the
current affidavit required by section 5 of that act shall be deemed sufficient;
(10) The applicant's state sales and use tax permit number and a copy of the applicant's state sales
and use tax permit; and
(11) A signed approval by the chief of police or his designee.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.062)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/420
Sec. 4.04.033 Fee
The fee for a permit issued under this article shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). (1998 Code, sec. 41.063)
Sec. 4.04.034 Denial
(a) The chief of police may deny a circus or carnival a permit to operate upon a finding of any of the
following:
(1) The application contains false or misleading information or required information is omitted;
(2) The location selected for the circus or carnival is inadequate for the purposes for which it is to
be used;
(3) The circus or carnival does not have adequate toilet facilities on the premises where the circus
or carnival is to be held;
(4) The circus or carnival has not provided for adequate security services in order to protect the
persons in attendance and in surrounding property;
(5) The description of the circus or carnival does not assure that minimum standards of sanitation,
health or safety will be provided, or that the circus or carnival will be conducted in an orderly
fashion;
(6) No proof of liability insurance policy has been provided; or
(7) The failure to provide any other certificate, license or permit required by this article.
(b) If a circus or carnival permit is denied, the chief of police shall give a statement in writing giving the
reasons for denial.
(1998 Code, sec. 41.064)
ARTICLE 4.05 ITINERANT BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.05.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms have the meanings ascribed to them by this
section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Agents and employees. Any person who represents and acts for another person who is licensed and authorized to
transact business in the occupation of a solicitor or peddler.
Agriculture products. Fruits, vegetables, or other foodstuffs grown by the seller.
Bill. A written or printed advertisement posted or otherwise distributed to announce an event of interest to the
public.
Canvasser. Means the same as “solicitor.”
Charitable purpose. The use of money or property for the benefit of:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/420
(1) Charity or philanthropy, or poor, impoverished, destitute, underprivileged, needy, refugee,
diseased, injured, crippled, disabled, or handicapped persons, or persons in need of rehabilitation;
(2) Patriotism, that is, for the teaching of patriotism or the relief or assistance of veterans or
veterans' organizations;
(3) Existing educational institutions or for the establishment or endowment of educational
institutions or in aid of the education of a group of persons; or
(4) Any chartered fraternal or social organization.
Charitable solicitation. Conduct whereby a person, organization, society, corporation, or its agent, member, or
representative:
(1) Solicits property, financial aid, gifts in money, or any article representing monetary value, for a
charitable purpose;
(2) Sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service, publication, ticket, advertisement, or
subscription, for a charitable purpose; or
(3) Holds, promotes, or participates in an entertainment, sports event, benefit dance, fair, bazaar, or
other type of organized social entertainment, on the plea or representation, whether express or
implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation, sale, or entertainment are for a charitable purpose.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city.
Circular. Has the same meaning as “handbill.”
City attorney. The city attorney or legal counsel of the city.
Civic organization. An organization within the city in which citizens cooperate to promote the common good
and general welfare of the people of the city.
Commercial traveler. A person who is employed by or who represents a manufacturer, wholesaler, or importer
who sells or exhibits goods to parties who engage in the business of purchasing such goods for the purpose of
resale to the general public.
Flea market. A market or place of business designated for the sale of secondhand merchandise or antiques, at
which persons rent or otherwise obtain a booth, cubicle, or space on a short-term basis for the exhibit and sale of
such merchandise.
Garage sale. An occasional sale, as defined in this article.
Goods. Tangible chattels of every kind and character.
Handbill. A written or printed notice displayed, handed out, or posted, to inform those concerned of something
to be done or some event or some goods offered for sale.
Hawker. Has the same meaning as “peddler.”
Interstate commerce. The soliciting or taking orders for or offering to take orders for goods which, at the time
the order is taken, are in another state or will be produced in another state and shipped or introduced into this
city in the fulfillment of such orders and are not subject to the sales and use tax of the state.
Itinerant. Traveling from place to place as applied to a person engaged in transient businesses either in one
locality or in traveling from one locality to another.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/420
Itinerant trader. Any such business transacted or conducted in the city upon, through or from any private
premises or space upon any private property for which no definite arrangement for the legal right of occupancy
thereof for the purpose of conducting such business therein or thereon for a period of at least one month has
been made; or any such business not having a building, room, structure or enclosure within the city. Said
definition shall include any such business as may be operated or conducted by any person or his agents or
employees who resides or is domiciled away from the city, or who has a fixed place of business or business
headquarters outside the city, or who moves stocks of goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property or
samples thereof into the city with the purpose of or intention of removing them or the unused portion thereof
from the city before the expiration of one month.
License. A license or permit issued by the city granting permission to a person, firm, or corporation to pursue the
occupation of a solicitor, peddler, or itinerant trader subject to the regulation of the city under the police power,
which without said license would be illegal. Said license is not a contract between the city and the licensee, but
is a mere personal permit and is neither property nor a property right.
Occasional sales. One or two sales of taxable items at retail during any twelve-month period by a person who
does not hold himself out as engaging (or does not habitually engage) in the business of selling taxable items at
retail, to include such sales described by the seller as a “garage sale.”
Peddler. All persons, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in business in the city, by selling or
offering for sale, in person, any goods or merchandise, and who carry goods or merchandise upon or from a
truck or other vehicle, on the streets of the city, or who go from door to door of residences, offices or places of
business to display, exhibit, sell or offer for sale such goods or merchandise. Said definition shall include all
sales of goods or services for which payment is made upon the immediate delivery of the goods or completion of
said services.
Permit. Has the same meaning as “license.”
Person. An individual natural person, whether residing within or without the city limits, and does not include
any corporation, firm, association, partnership or joint venture.
Poster. A bill or placard for posting in a public place.
Prepared food. Any cooked or otherwise prepared foodstuffs, such as snow cones, tamales, candy, cakes or
cookies.
Public place. Any property open or devoted to public use.
Raw food. Any uncooked or otherwise; [sic] fruit, vegetable, fish, grains, or other foodstuffs.
Religious purpose. The use of money or property for the support of a church, religious society, or other religious
sect, group, or order.
Religious solicitation. Conduct whereby a person, organization, society, corporation, or its agent, member, or
representative:
(1) Solicits property, financial aid, gifts in money, or any article representing monetary value, for a
religious purpose; or
(2) Sells or offers to sell a product, article, tag, service, or printed material, on the plea or
representation, whether express or implied, that the proceeds from the solicitation or sale are for a
religious purpose.
Solicitor. All persons, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in business in the city by selling or
offering for sale, in person, any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting the same for sale, or exhibiting the same
through brochures as well as literature, or price list, for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/420
future delivery or for services to be furnished immediately or performed in the future, and who for the purpose
of carrying on such business conducts such business upon or from a truck or other vehicle, on the streets of the
city, or who goes from door to door of residences, offices or places of business to display, exhibit, sell or offer
for sale such goods or merchandise for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future
delivery. Such definition shall include all sales that require an immediate payment conditional upon future
delivery of goods or services.
Street vendor. Means the same as “peddler.”
Telephone solicitation. A telephone call to or from a person, initiated by a seller, salesperson, automatic dialing
machine, or recorded message device for the purpose of inducing the person to purchase, rent, claim, or receive
an item, and includes a call made by a purchaser in response to a solicitation sent by mail or made by any other
means.
Temporary or transient business. Any business conducted by an itinerant trader as defined under the provisions
of this article.
Trader. A person who has goods for sale and sells them in a fixed place of business.
Zoning district. A section of the city for which the regulations governing land uses are uniform. For the purposes
of this article, R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts shall be referred to as residential districts and C-1, I-1, and I-2 districts
shall be referred to as retail and industrial districts as outlined in the zoning ordinance.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.016)
Sec. 4.05.002 Scope
This article covers all aspects of the regulation of persons engaging in the itinerant business of a solicitor,
peddler or trader and the distribution of handbills, circulars, posters and similar advertising under the authority
of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 43.001)
Sec. 4.05.003 Applicability of article
The provisions of this article shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the city and to any and all
territory subsequently annexed into said corporate limits, and shall apply to any individual, corporation,
organization, business trust, partnership or association involved in such activities as may be regulated by this
article. For the purposes of this article, any person shall be deemed to be in business and thus subject to the
requirements of this article when he or she does one act of selling or soliciting any goods or services as
described in this article. (1998 Code, sec. 43.002)
Sec. 4.05.004 Applicability of Home Solicitation Act
The provisions of the Texas Home Solicitation Act (Texas Business and Commerce Code, ch. 39) shall apply to
any individual, corporation, organization, business trust, partnership or association involved in such activities as
may be regulated by this article, and any violation of said statute shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.003)
Sec. 4.05.005 Violations; penalty
Any person, firm or individual who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article, or
failing to perform any act which this article imposes a duty to perform, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each and
every sale or act of solicitation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall result in the automatic
revocation of such convicted person's license. (1998 Code, sec. 43.004)
Sec. 4.05.006 Provisions of article deemed incorporated in license
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/420
All of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in every license issued by the city under
the provisions of this article, and each person issued a license shall be charged with knowledge of the provisions
of this article and, by applying and/or accepting said license, to have assented to the provisions hereof. (1998
Code, sec. 43.005)
Sec. 4.05.007 Enforcement
The police department of the city shall enforce this article and it shall be the duty of the police officers of the
city to require any person seen soliciting, canvassing, peddling, or set up as a trader without a fixed place of
business, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce such license and to enforce the
provisions of this article against any person found to be in violation of same. (1998 Code, sec. 43.006)
Sec. 4.05.008 Exemption for persons engaged in interstate commerce
Any person may apply to the city secretary for a partial exemption to the provisions of this article and such
partial exemption may be granted if it is found that the person conducting solicitations, as defined in this article,
is engaged in interstate commerce as that term is herein defined; provided, however:
(1) It shall be unlawful for persons engaged in interstate commerce to go from house to house or
place to place in the city without completing an application for and obtaining a solicitor's license with
said exemption;
(2) Said persons shall be exempt from all fees, except for a ten dollar ($10.00) registration fee, and
bonding requirements as provided in this article;
(3) The applicant is charged with the burden of proof to gain benefit of said partial exemption and
it must be shown that said goods are irretrievably committed to interstate commerce under usual and
appropriate documents, and the city attorney is entitled to receive more proof than affidavits and oral
testimony from said applicant to establish that said goods are moved in interstate commerce and
entitled to said partial exemption; and
(4) If said goods are subject to collection of the sales and use tax of the state they are deemed not
to be in interstate commerce.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.007; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.05.009 Loud noises and speaking devices
No solicitor, peddler, or itinerant trader, nor any person acting on his behalf, shall shout, make any cry out, blow
a horn or use any sound device where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable
of producing a sound that is unreasonably loud, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of
audibility. This shall include the use of any loud-speaking radio or sound-amplifying system upon any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city. In the event that
citizen complaints are received by the city from persons within the privacy of their homes, the police department
shall take the name and address of such complaining persons and shall advise the license holder to reduce the
volume of the loudspeaker or device. The receipt of two (2) or more complaints from reasonable persons within
seven (7) days shall be sufficient reason for suspension or revocation of any license or permit issued under the
provisions of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 43.008)
Sec. 4.05.010 Use of streets
(a) Manner of use. No solicitor, peddler, or itinerant trader shall have any exclusive right to any location in the
public streets, nor shall any solicitor, peddler, or itinerant trader be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he
be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/420
For the purpose of this section, the judgment of the police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed
conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
(b) Sale of goods from vehicle. Any person engaged in the selling of goods from a vehicle upon the streets of
the city, in addition to a license as required by this article, shall:
(1) Have a valid Texas vehicle registration and inspection sticker for the vehicle;
(2) Have a valid Texas motor vehicle operator's license for the type of vehicle being operated; and
(3) Have proof of liability insurance for the vehicle being operated.
(c) Operation of vehicles. Any person engaging in the selling of goods from a vehicle upon the streets of the
city shall:
(1) Operate such vehicle in accordance with the traffic regulations of the city and state;
(2) Equip such vehicle with the necessary warning and safety devices as required by state law; and
(3) Operate such vehicle in accordance with the noise regulations of section 4.05.009 of this
article.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.009)
Sec. 4.05.011 Operation at public park, swimming pool area, or other city-owned property
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or exhibit for sale any goods, wares, merchandise or other
commodities on or at any public park or swimming pool area or upon any other property owned by the city, or to
go on or into or remain on any public park, swimming pool area of the city or other property owned by the city
for the purpose of selling goods, wares, merchandise or any other commodity, or to use any street, alley or other
public property abutting or adjacent to any public park, swimming pool or other property owned by the city for
the purpose of making such sales to persons in a public park or swimming pool area or other property owned by
the city, unless such person has previously applied to the city council for a permit to do so. Provided, however,
that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person or his employee duly operating under a
concession contract between such concessionaire and the city, or at events sponsored by a civic organization
within the city and approved by the city council or city manager. (1998 Code, sec. 43.010)
Sec. 4.05.012 Charitable and religious solicitations
(a) Identification. A person who engages in a charitable or religious solicitation in a public place shall identify
themselves by one of the following means:
(1) Wear and conspicuously display an easily readable identification badge identifying the name of
the soliciting organization and containing the statement “religious solicitation” or “charitable
solicitation”; or
(2) Verbally identify themselves to the persons being solicited by stating the they are engaged in a
charitable or religious solicitation and stating the name of the soliciting organization.
(b) Proof of compliance. A person engaged in charitable or religious solicitation in a public place may be
required to show proof that such solicitation is in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(c) Prohibited conduct. A person engaged in charitable or religious solicitation in a public place shall not:
(1) Obstruct or impede the passage of a pedestrian or a vehicle;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/420
(2) Make physical contact with the person being solicited unless the person's permission is
obtained;
(3) Misrepresent the charitable or religious purpose of the solicitation; or
(4) Misrepresent the charitable or religious affiliation or those engaged in the solicitation.
(d) Solicitations on church property. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any solicitations
made on property owned by any religious organization within the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.011)
Sec. 4.05.013 Other permits
(a) If state statute requires that sales and use tax must be paid upon the purchases of such goods as a person
proposes to offer for sale under the provisions of this article, said person shall hold a valid sales tax permit
issued by the office of the comptroller of public accounts of the state.
(b) If any state or federal statute requires that a person possess a permit for the sale of such goods as a person
proposes to offer for sale under the provisions of this article, said person shall hold said permit before applying
for a permit from the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.013)
Sec. 4.05.014 Food sanitation standards
Each person who proposes to sell or offer for sale, under the provisions of this article, goods consisting of any
raw, cooked, prepared or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use or for
sale in whole or in part for human consumption shall secure, on a form to be provided, the signature of the health
officer or sanitarian of the city indicating that such goods meet minimum food sanitation standards of the city
and state. Such approval may be revoked upon inspection by the health officer or sanitarian of the city. This
section shall not apply to a person who sells only non-refrigerated food items packaged and sealed in individual
servings, such as candies and similar confectioneries. (1998 Code, sec. 43.014)
Sec. 4.05.015 Agents and employees
(a) Registration and fee. Any person obtaining a license under the provisions of this article to engage in the
occupation of a solicitor or peddler as defined in this article shall register and pay the prescribed fee for all
agents and employees of said person engaging in said occupation within the city limits.
(b) Responsibility for acts of agents and employees. Any person obtaining a license under the provisions of
this article to engage in the occupation of a solicitor or peddler, as defined in this article, shall be responsible for
all actions and transactions of all agents and employees engaging in said occupation within the city limits.
(c) Minors as agents and employees. No person shall employ any person who is a minor under the age of
sixteen (16) years as an agent or employee in the occupation of a solicitor or peddler, as defined in this article,
without the written consent of the parent or guardian of said minor, unless the applicant is the parent or legal
guardian of said minor.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.015)
Secs. 4.05.016–4.05.050 Reserved
Division 2. Licenses
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/420
Sec. 4.05.051 Required; classes
(a) License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of a solicitor, peddler, or
itinerant trader as defined in this article, within the city limits, without a license to engage in such occupation.
(b) Classes of licenses. The following classes of licenses may be issued under the provisions of this article:
(1) Solicitor's license. Shall be issued for the purpose of conducting the occupation of solicitor as
defined in this article.
(2) Peddler's license. Shall be issued for the purpose of conducting the occupation of peddler as
defined in this article.
(3) Itinerant trader's license. Shall be issued for the purpose of conducting the occupation of an
itinerant trader as defined in this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.021)
Sec. 4.05.052 Application
(a) Information required. Applicants for a license under this article must file with the chief of police a sworn
application in writing on a form to be furnished by the chief of police, which shall provide the following
information:
(1) Name and description of the applicant, to include positive identification of the applicant.
(2) Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant.
(3) A description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold, including a copy of all
literature and product information to be supplied to customers.
(4) A description of the method of payment required by the applicant.
(5) If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the
exact relationship. Said credentials may include a company identification card or certificate or a letter
or certificate from an officer of said company stating that the applicant is an employee and/or agent
of such company.
(6) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has:
(A) Been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or misdemeanor involving an
alleged violation of any provision of this code, or narcotics, dangerous drugs, or crimes with
dangerous weapons; or a felony offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another; fraud, theft, embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, misappropriation of property,
burglary, crimes against children or senior citizens, or any sex-related offense;
(B) Entered a final judgment or order in a civil or administrative action, including a
stipulated judgment or order, in which the complaint or petition alleged acts constituting a
violation of this article, fraud, theft, embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, or misappropriation
of property, the use of untrue or misleading representations in an attempt to sell or dispose of
real or personal property, or the use of unfair, unlawful, or deceptive trade practices; or
(C) Been subject to an injunction or restrictive court order relating to business activity as the
result of an action brought by a federal, state, or local public agency, including an action
affecting any vocational license.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/420
Said statement shall identify the court or administrative agency rendering the conviction,
judgment, or other order, the docket number of the matter, the date of the conviction,
judgment or order, and the name of the governmental agency, if any, that brought the
action resulting in the conviction, judgment or order.
(7) The sales tax permit number issued by the office of the comptroller of public accounts of the
state.
(8) The names of the immediate last preceding three (3) cities in which the applicant worked or
engaged in the business of a solicitor, peddler or itinerant trader or in the distribution of handbills,
circulars, posters and similar advertising.
(9) If the applicant is applying for an itinerant trader's license, the following shall be supplied:
(A) The address or location of the place the business will be conducted.
(B) The name, address, and telephone number of the property owner of the place the business
will be located.
(C) Certification that the applicant has permission to use the property at the place the
business will be located.
(10) The applicant shall also furnish the following information about any and all vehicles used in
the course of any activity regulated in this article:
(A) A description of the vehicle;
(B) The name of the registered owner of said vehicle; and
(C) The license number of said vehicle.
(b) Application for agents and employees of solicitors and peddlers.
(1) Separate application required. A separate application, on a form to be provided by the chief of
police and including the information required in subsection (a) of this section, shall be required for
each agent or employee engaged in the occupation of solicitor or peddler as defined in this article.
(2) Written consent for minors. If said agent or employee is a minor under the age of sixteen (16)
years old, written consent of the parent or guardian of said minor to engage in said occupation under
the direction of the licensee is required, unless the applicant is the parent or legal guardian of said
minor. The chief of police may require proof of the relationship before approving any license.
(c) Certification required. Such license application shall be accompanied by all certificates of approval as may
be required by this article.
(d) Attachments required. Such license application shall be accompanied by the following documents as
required by this article:
(1) A bond, if required;
(2) A copy of a valid sales tax permit issued by the office of the comptroller of public accounts of
the state;
(3) If the applicant proposes to sell or offer for sale goods consisting of any raw, cooked, prepared
or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in
whole or in part for human consumption, a certificate with the signature of the health officer or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/420
sanitarian of the city indicating that such goods meet minimum food sanitation standards of the city
and state;
(4) If said agent or employee is a minor under the age of sixteen (16) years old, written consent of
the parent or guardian of said minor to engage in said occupation under the direction of the licensee;
and
(5) If the applicant is applying for an itinerant trader's permit and if the applicant proposes to
display goods to the public or to offer such goods for sale from a designated location, such applicant's
application form shall be accompanied by certification that the owner or the duly authorized agent of
the owner of the property at the location at which the applicant proposes to display or offer for sale
any goods consents that the applicant may use and occupy such property for the purpose of selling or
offering for sale such goods.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.022)
Sec. 4.05.053 Denial
The following reasons shall be grounds for denial of a license required by this division:
(1) The applicant does not present a valid state driver's license or other positive proof of
identification;
(2) The applicant does not complete the application form or procedure;
(3) The applicant or the proposed activity of the applicant does not comply with the applicable city
ordinances and codes, including the zoning ordinance, building codes and health codes;
(4) The applicant makes false or fraudulent statements on the application form;
(5) The applicant has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to an offense involving
narcotics, dangerous drugs, or crimes with dangerous weapons; or a felony offense involving the use
of force and violence upon the person of another; or an offense of fraud, misrepresentation,
embezzlement, forgery, burglary or theft, fraudulent conversion, misappropriation of property,
burglary, crimes against children or senior citizens, or any sex-related offense when such offense is
designated as a felony, at any time within the preceding five-year period;
(6) The applicant has entered a final judgment or order in a civil or administrative action, including
a stipulated judgment or order, in which the complaint or petition alleged acts constituting a violation
of this article, fraud, theft, embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, or misappropriation of property, the
use of untrue or misleading representations in an attempt to sell or dispose of real or personal
property, or the use of unfair, unlawful, or deceptive trade practices;
(7) The applicant has been subject to an injunction or restrictive court order relating to business
activity as the result of an action brought by a federal, state, or local public agency, including an
action affecting any vocational license;
(8) The applicant or licensee has been convicted in a court of proper jurisdiction of violating any
provision of this article within the preceding five (5) year period;
(9) The applicant or licensee has been convicted in a court of proper jurisdiction of violating any
provision of an ordinance regulating solicitors, itinerant vendors, or transient vendors in the state
within the preceding five (5) year period; or
(10) The applicant has failed to pay or report sales tax on sales made within the city to the
comptroller of public accounts of the state as required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/420
(1998 Code, sec. 43.023)
Sec. 4.05.054 Issuance
Upon submission of a license application approved by the chief of police, and payment of any and all required
license or registration fees, the city secretary shall issue a license. (1998 Code, sec. 43.024)
Sec. 4.05.055 Fees
Any person, firm, company, partnership, association, or corporation engaging in the occupation of a solicitor,
peddler, or itinerant trader shall pay a license or registration fee as specified in this article. The fee shall be
payable upon issuance of the license, and shall not be prorated or otherwise modified for reason of duration of
additional licenses issued, or otherwise. (1998 Code, sec. 43.025)
Sec. 4.05.056 Exhibition
Any person issued a license under the provisions of this article is required to exhibit such license upon request.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.026)
Sec. 4.05.057 Transfer
Licenses issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable from one person to another and no such
license shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. (1998 Code, sec.
43.027)
Sec. 4.05.058 Term; expiration
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for one (1) year and shall expire on the date
specified on the license. All additional licenses issued to agents or employees shall expire on the same date as
the original license, regardless of the date issued. The term of a license may not be extended beyond one (1)
year. (1998 Code, sec. 43.028)
Sec. 4.05.059 Renewal
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be considered for renewal upon submission of a new
application for a license. All conditions and requirements for a renewal of a license shall be the same as an initial
application. No license shall be issued with the expectation or implied promise that it will be renewed and no
property or reliance interest shall be vested in any license issued under the provisions of this article. (1998 Code,
sec. 43.029)
Sec. 4.05.060 Suspension or revocation; hearings
(a) Suspension authorized. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be temporarily
suspended by the chief of police after an opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance and notice has been
provided. A license may be suspended if complaints are received from two (2) or more reasonable persons that
the license holder has committed a willful violation of any of the requirements of this article, or if the chief of
police has reason to believe that the public health, interest or safety requires that said licensee not be permitted
to continue activities permitted under said license. Said suspension shall not be for a period of more than five (5)
days unless a hearing has been convened as provided herein.
(b) Revocation authorized. For serious or repeated willful violation of any of the requirements of this article,
or for reasons contained herein, a permit or license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by
the chief of police after an opportunity to demonstrate or achieve compliance and notice for a hearing has been
provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/420
(c) Reasons for suspension or revocation. In addition to any other penalty provided by this code, licenses
issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police after notice and
hearing for any of the following cases:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license;
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on of business as
defined in this article;
(3) Any violation of the provisions of this article;
(4) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
(5) Conducting business as defined in this article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public;
(6) Failure to remit sales tax receipts to the office of the state comptroller of public accounts as
required by state law;
(7) Failure to maintain minimum food sanitation standards as required in this article; or
(8) Any violation of any of the provisions of the Texas Home Solicitation Act (Texas Business and
Commerce Code, ch. 39).
(d) Hearing for suspension or revocation of license. If the chief of police has reason to suspend or revoke a
license issued herein, the chief of police shall convene a hearing to provide an opportunity for the person holding
the license to present reasons why the license should not be suspended or revoked. Notice of the hearing for
suspension or revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known
address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. Failure to appear at said hearing, or respond in
writing to said notice before the time of same, shall be sufficient reason to immediately revoke said license or
permit and said license shall be automatically revoked.
(e) Hearing for denial of license. If the chief of police has reason to deny the issuance of a license, a hearing
shall be convened, upon request of the applicant, to provide an opportunity for the person denied the license to
present reasons why the license should not be issued. Notice of the hearing shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds for the denial and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing.
Failure to appear at said hearing, or respond in writing to said notice before the time of same, shall be sufficient
reason to continue the denial of a license and said license shall be automatically denied.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.030)
Sec. 4.05.061 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police in the denial of an application for a license as provided
in this article or in the decision with reference to the suspension or revocation of a license shall have the right of
appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city secretary, within fourteen (14) days
after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city secretary shall set a time and place for a hearing on such
appeal at the next council meeting, as allowed by law, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant
in the same manner as provided in this article for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the
council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. (1998 Code, sec. 43.031)
Sec. 4.05.062 Limitations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/420
(a) License not a franchise. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article are not a franchise and will not
grant unto any licensee any property right, exclusive area or class of service and do not create a contractual
relationship between the city and the licensee or the consumer purchasing goods from said licensee.
(b) License not a warranty; no liability assumed. The city does not accept any responsibility for any acts or
omissions of the licensee or agents and employees of the licensee and does not warrant or guarantee or assume
any liability for any goods or services offered or sold by such licensee.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.032)
Secs. 4.05.063–4.05.090 Reserved
Division 3. Solicitors and Peddlers
Sec. 4.05.091 License required; classes of licenses
(a) License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of a solicitor or peddler,
as defined in this article, within the city limits, without a license to engage in such occupation.
(b) Classes of licenses. The following classes of licenses may be issued under the provisions of this division:
(1) Solicitor's license. Shall be issued for the purpose of conducting the occupation of solicitor as
defined in this article.
(2) Peddler's license. Shall be issued for the purpose of conducting the occupation of peddler as
defined in this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.041)
Sec. 4.05.092 License fees
The license fee for a solicitor or peddler, as defined in this article, shall be one hundred and fifty dollars
($150.00); provided, however, when any person, firm, company, partnership, association or corporation engages
in the occupation of a solicitor or peddler through two (2) or more agents or employees, such person, firm,
company, partnership, corporation or association shall, in addition to said one hundred and fifty dollars
($150.00) above mentioned, pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each agent or employee so engaged, in
excess of one. The fee shall be payable upon issuance of the license, and shall not be prorated or otherwise
modified for reason of duration of additional licenses issued, or otherwise. (1998 Code, sec. 43.042; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 4.05.093 Solicitor's bond
(a) Required. The application for a solicitor's license required in this article shall be accompanied by a signed
and sealed original bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), signed by the applicant, and
signed as surety by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned on the final delivery
of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines or newspapers, in accordance with the terms of
any order obtained prior to delivery; and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers and customers for
any and all defects in material and workmanship which may exist in the article sold by the principal of said bond
at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within thirty (30) days after
delivery; and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons which may make any purchase or give
any order to the principal of said bond, or to an agent or employee of the principal.
(b) Action to recover against security. A person who is injured by the actions of a person bonded under the
provisions of this article may bring and maintain an action to recover against the bond.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/420
(1998 Code, sec. 43.043)
Sec. 4.05.094 Approval of license by chief of police
Each application for a license required in this division shall be approved by the chief of police before such
license is granted. The chief of police shall have a reasonable time to conduct an investigation of an applicant for
such license, but such an investigation shall be completed within five (5) business days. After inspection or
investigation, the chief of police shall either approve or disapprove the application for license. (1998 Code, sec.
43.044)
Sec. 4.05.095 Hours of operation; exhibition of card prohibiting solicitors
(a) Hours of operation. No person engaging in the occupation of a solicitor or peddler and required to obtain a
license under the provisions of this article shall commence operations and go from place to place, or door to
door, in a residential area without prior invitation or appointment with the occupant of the premises, before nine
o'clock (9:00) a.m. or thirty minutes after sundown on any day. Violation of this section shall constitute another
cause for revocation of any license in addition to those enumerated in this article, and in the manner as
prescribed in said section.
(b) Exhibition of card prohibiting solicitors.
(1) A person desiring that no peddler, solicitor, or other person engage in a home solicitation at his
residence shall exhibit in a conspicuous place, upon or near the main entrance to the residence, a
weatherproof card or sign, not less than three inches by four inches in size, containing the words,
“NO SOLICITORS.” The letters shall be not less than two-thirds of an inch in height.
(2) Every peddler or solicitor going onto any premises upon which a residence is located shall first
examine the residence to determine if any notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited upon or near the
main entrance to the residence. If notice prohibiting soliciting is exhibited, the peddler or solicitor
shall immediately depart the premises without disturbing the occupant, unless the visit is the result of
a request made by the occupant.
(3) No person shall go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon
the door or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to
engage in a home solicitation transaction, if a card or sign as described in subsection (1) above is
exhibited in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the residence, unless the visit is
the result of a request made by the occupant.
(4) No person, other than the occupant of the residence, shall remove, deface, or render illegible a
card or sign placed by the occupant pursuant to subsection (1) above.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.045)
Sec. 4.05.096 Departure from premises upon request of occupant
Any solicitor or peddler who has gained entrance to a residence, or audience with the occupant, whether invited
or not, shall immediately depart the premises without disturbing the occupant further, when requested to leave
by the occupant. (1998 Code, sec. 43.046)
Sec. 4.05.097 Exemptions
Except for the provisions of this article dealing with minimum food standards, loud noises and speaking devices,
the use of streets, hours of operations in residential districts, exhibiting cards or signs prohibiting solicitors,
conduct of telephone solicitations, and solicitations on or at city-owned property, public parks, or swimming
pools, the provisions of this division shall not apply to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/420
(1) Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to
persons, firms or corporations engaged in the business of selling, buying and dealing in goods or
merchandise;
(2) Persons engaged in charitable or religious solicitations as defined in this article;
(3) Newspaper delivery persons;
(4) Telephone solicitations as defined and regulated in this article;
(5) Solicitations made at the request of a person, solicitations made in connection with an existing
debt or contract, or solicitations from a solicitor with whom the person has an existing business
relationship;
(6) A person licensed under the Insurance Code, if the solicited transaction is governed by the
Insurance Code;
(7) A person who periodically delivers catalogs to potential purchasers if the catalog:
(A) Includes at least 24 pages of written material or illustrations; and
(B) Is circulated in more than one state;
(8) A person selling merchandise under an arrangement in which the seller periodically ships or
delivers the merchandise to a consumer who has consented in advance to receive the merchandise on
a periodic basis; or
(9) A person who has for at least one year been operating under the same name as that used in
connection with its soliciting operations a retail establishment where consumer goods are displayed
and offered for sale on a continuing basis and involves the buyers obtaining services or products at
the person's retail establishment.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.047)
Secs. 4.05.098–4.05.130 Reserved
Division 4. Itinerant Traders
Sec. 4.05.131 License required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of an itinerant trader, as defined in this article, in
the city without obtaining a license to engage in such occupation. (1998 Code, sec. 43.061)
Sec. 4.05.132 License fee
The license fee for an itinerant trader, as defined in this article, shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The fee
shall be payable upon issuance of the license. (1998 Code, sec. 43.062; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.05.133 Approval of license by chief of police
Each application for a license required in this division shall be approved by the chief of police before such
license is granted. The chief of police shall have a reasonable time to conduct an investigation of an applicant for
such license, but such an investigation shall be completed within five (5) business days. After inspection or
investigation, the chief of police shall either approve or disapprove the application for license. (1998 Code, sec.
43.063)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/420
Sec. 4.05.134 Permission of property owner required
If the applicant proposes to display goods to the public or to offer such goods for sale from a designated
location, such applicant shall have permission from the owner or the duly authorized agent of the owner of the
property at the location at which the applicant proposes to display or offer for sale any goods. (1998 Code, sec.
43.064)
Sec. 4.05.135 Location restrictions; compliance with zoning ordinance
(a) Residential districts. No permit under this article shall be issued for the operation of any temporary or
transient business by an itinerant trader, as defined in this article, in a residential district as defined in this article.
(b) Retail and industrial districts. Any person wishing to operate a temporary or transient business as an
itinerant trader, as defined in this article, in a retail or industrial district, as defined in this article, shall comply
with all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.065)
Sec. 4.05.136 Flea markets
(a) Operator to be licensed. Every promoter or operator of a flea market shall be considered as engaging in the
operation of an itinerant trader and shall obtain a license as required in this division.
(b) Sales by participants exempt from license. Sales by individual sellers or participants at a licensed flea
market are exempt from the provisions of the individual licensing requirements of this division.
(c) Responsibilities of operator. The promoter or operator of a flea market shall comply with all other
provisions of this article and state law, and shall keep a register or record of such sellers or participants which
shall give all of the following information:
(1) Name of the person renting the space;
(2) Permanent home address and full local address of such person;
(3) A brief description of the nature of the goods to be sold; and
(4) A state sales tax permit number, if state statute requires that sales tax must be paid upon the
purchases of such goods that the seller or participant proposes to offer for sale.
The operator or promoter of a licensed flea market shall be responsible for retention of the register of
participants as required by this article for one (1) year.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.066)
Sec. 4.05.137 Exemptions
Except for the provisions of this article dealing with minimum food sanitary standards, loud noises and speaking
devices, the use of streets, and solicitations on or at city-owned property, public parks, or swimming pools, the
provisions of this division shall not apply to:
(1) Sales or exhibits at fairs, rodeos, conventions, or city civic organizations, church, or chamber of
commerce sponsored events.
(2) The sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds of
which are to be used and applied to charitable, religious, or philanthropic purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/420
(3) Occasional sales as defined in this article, to include garage sales.
(4) Persons selling agricultural products grown in the county by the seller or members of the
seller's immediate family.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.067)
Secs. 4.05.138–4.05.170 Reserved
Division 5. Handbills, Circulars, Posters and Similar Advertising
Sec. 4.05.171 Distribution of handbills or circulars
(a) Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, permit, keep or otherwise scatter, place,
deliver, or distribute any circular, handbill, paper, announcement, advertisement, printed matter or other
advertising matter on any street, alley, gutter, sidewalk, drain, public building, public ground or other place,
public or private, or any other place immediately adjacent to such premises, or in any vehicle of any kind, within
the city.
(b) Exceptions. The provisions of this division shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States
post office, nor to the circulation and distribution of regularly circulated and distributed newspapers, magazines,
periodicals, and religious and educational literature, and shall not apply to handbills or circulars personally
handed to another individual person.
(1998 Code, sec. 43.081)
Sec. 4.05.172 Posting on private property
Any person who shall, without first having obtained permission from the owner, stick, paint, or stamp upon any
house, fence, wall, pavement, utility pole or other object not his own, within the corporate limits of this city, any
written, printed or other notice, bill, sign, circular, poster or advertisement, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 43.082)
ARTICLE 4.06 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Alarm system. Any devices used to detect or prevent burglary, theft, robbery, or other similar illegal activity on
private property.
Automatic dialing device. An alarm system device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is
programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an
emergency message indicating a need for emergency response.
Central alarm installation. A device, or collection of devices, located within the police department building, that
indicates activation of alarm systems.
False alarm. The activation of an alarm system which is not the result of an illegal activity or threat of illegal
activity for which the system was designed to give notice; for the purposes hereof, false alarm shall not include
any activation of an alarm system caused by an act of God.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.061; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/420
Sec. 4.06.002 Requirements for connection to central alarm system
(a) Permission required. No person shall connect or cause or permit the connection of any alarm system to the
central alarm location without the express permission of the chief of police.
(b) Factors to be considered. In determining whether to authorize such a connection, the chief of police shall
consider the following factors and requirements:
(1) The alarm system shall be installed by a security services contractor licensed by the state;
(2) The premises served by the alarm system shall be provided with reasonable security measures
other than the alarm system to prevent illegal activity;
(3) The proposed connection circuit in the central alarm installation shall not exceed the space
requirements established by the chief of police;
(4) The alarm system equipment and installation shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
chief of police or an authorized representative;
(5) The premises served by the alarm system shall not be equipped with an audible alarm.
(c) Required information. The chief of police shall require information to be provided by the owner or person
in control of the premises served by such an alarm system, including but not limited to the following:
(1) The name and address of the owner or person in control of the premises;
(2) The type of alarm system being installed;
(3) The name of the person who will install the alarm system;
(4) The names and addresses of all persons who will receive notice of activation of the alarm
system;
(5) The name, address and telephone number of at least two (2) persons acceptable to the chief of
police who have agreed:
(A) To receive notice of activation of the system at any time;
(B) To come to the premises served by the system within thirty (30) minutes after receiving a
request from the police department to do so; and
(C) To grant access to the premises and to deactivate the alarm system if necessary.
(d) Automatic dialing devices; audible alarm cutoff.
(1) No owner or person in control of premises shall use an automatic dialing device leading to the
police department.
(2) All audible alarms shall be equipped to automatically shut off no more than fifteen (15) minutes
after activation.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.062)
Sec. 4.06.003 Disconnection from central alarm system
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/420
(a) Reasons for disconnection. The chief of police may cause disconnection of an alarm from the central alarm
installation for failure to pay the appropriate fee as provided in this article.
(b) Notice of disconnection. The chief of police shall give at least thirty (30) days' notice of such
disconnection to the owner or person in control of the premises.
(c) Reconnection.
(1) The chief of police may require an inspection or reinspection to be made of an alarm system
disconnected because of a failure to pay false alarm fees as a condition for reconnection.
(2) An alarm system disconnected from the central alarm installation shall not be reconnected until
the system is certified in writing to be operating properly by a security service contractor licensed by
the state.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.063)
Sec. 4.06.004 False alarms
The following provisions shall apply to all false alarms to which a response is made by the police department,
regardless of whether the alarm system involved is connected to the central alarm installation:
(1) The chief of police shall notify the owner or person in control of the premises served by an
alarm system of all false alarms generated by such system and shall keep a record of all such false
alarms.
(2) Additional fees shall be charged for false alarms as provided for in this article.
(3) A false alarm is not considered to have occurred unless a response is made by the city or other
law enforcement agency within thirty (30) minutes of the alarm notification and the city determines
from an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.064)
Sec. 4.06.005 Connection of systems outside city to central alarm system
Alarm systems serving premises outside of the city limits may be connected to the central alarm installation
subject to the following provisions:
(1) The only responsibility of the city police department in connection with such alarms shall be to
notify the appropriate law enforcement agency in the jurisdiction in which the alarm system is
located. No response shall be made by any officer of the city police department unless there exists an
interlocal assistance agreement with said jurisdiction approved by the city council in accordance with
the provisions of state law.
(2) Such additional fees may be charged as provided for in this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.065)
Sec. 4.06.006 Fees
(a) Annual fee for connection to central alarm system. An annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be
paid on or before December thirty-first for connection of an alarm system to the central alarm installation for the
following year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/420
(b) False alarms. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid by the owner or person in control of the
premises served by an alarm system for each false alarm in excess of eight (8) false alarms during the preceding
twelve (12) month period and less than sixteen (16) false alarms; an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall
be paid for each false alarm in excess of fifteen (15) false alarms generated from such system during the
preceding twelve (12) month period.
(c) Fees not refundable. Fees paid according to this section shall not be refundable.
(d) Alarm systems outside city limits. All fees for alarm systems serving premises outside of the city limits
shall be double those provided in this article, with no exceptions, except the fee may not exceed fifty dollars
($50.00) per alarm.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.066)
ARTICLE 4.07 AMBULANCES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.07.001 Definitions
As used herein, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
Ambulance. Every motor vehicle used, designed or redesigned for the transportation of sick or injured persons.
Ambulance operator. Any person, partnership or corporation holding a permit from the city to operate an
ambulance.
Driver's permit. A city ambulance driver's permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.001)
Sec. 4.07.002 Penalty
A person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for
such offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. (1998 Code, sec. 42.005)
Sec. 4.07.003 Supplies
The city manager may, from time to time, with the advice of the city health officer, make a list of supplies to be
carried at all times in any emergency ambulance, and notification shall be given to the operators of all such
vehicles as to such requirements. The failure of any permit holder to comply with the requirements so
established and published shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of this permit. (1998 Code, sec.
42.002)
Sec. 4.07.004 Refusal to transport person on account of inability to pay
It shall be unlawful for an ambulance operator to refuse to carry or transport any sick or injured person at the
place of an emergency on account of the apparent indigence of such person or the inability of such person to pay
for emergency ambulance service. The operator shall not be required to furnish ambulance service of a nonemergency
nature unless the recipient of such service shall make satisfactory financial arrangements with such
operator. (1998 Code, sec. 42.003)
Sec. 4.07.005 Exemption of governmental bodies
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/420
This article shall not apply to any ambulance service whole or partially owned, operated, or controlled by any
governmental body. (1998 Code, sec. 42.004)
Secs. 4.07.006–4.07.040 Reserved
Division 2. Operator's Permit
Sec. 4.07.041 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in furnishing ambulance service by operating
or driving or causing to be operated or driven an ambulance upon the public streets of the city without having
first obtained a city ambulance operator's permit. (1998 Code, sec. 42.006)
Sec. 4.07.042 Application; notice of hearing
(a) Application for an ambulance operator's permit shall be filed with the secretary of the city. Such
application shall be in a form acceptable to the city secretary, shall be sworn to before a notary public or other
officer authorized to take oaths and shall contain proof of the following matters:
(1) That the applicant or applicants have not been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years from the date of filing such application.
(2) A statement that the applicant has obtained or will obtain liability insurance in accordance with
the requirements hereinafter provided before commencing ambulance service in the event the city
council determines an ambulance operator's permit should be granted to such applicant. No
ambulance operator's permit shall be issued until such insurance is in effect, and until satisfactory
proof of such fact is made to the city secretary.
(3) A statement that the applicant has been issued a permit by the state board of health pursuant to
the terms and provisions of the Emergency Medical Services Act (section 773.041, Health & Safety
Code). No ambulance permit will be issued unless the applicant has obtained such a permit.
(b) Upon receipt of the application in due form and containing all information required by the city secretary,
the city secretary shall cause a notice to be published in the city's newspaper one (1) time at least ten (10) days
and not more than fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular meeting of the city council, and such notice shall
state that the application has been received by the city secretary. In addition to the public notice set forth above,
the city secretary shall notify in writing each holder of a current ambulance operator's permit of the receipt of
such application and such notice shall indicate that a public hearing will be had at the next regular council
meeting, giving the date of such meeting. The applicant shall pay to the city secretary upon the filing of his
application the cost of publication of such notice as is required by this article.
(c) Any person operating an ambulance service within the city as of the effective date of this article shall be
issued a permit without notice and hearing upon such person making application within ten (10) days after the
effective date of this article and upon such persons furnishing the certificate of insurance as herein provided.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.007)
Sec. 4.07.043 Determination of public convenience and necessity
(a) The city council shall hold a public hearing at the time and place specified in the published notice.
(b) The applicant shall not be granted an ambulance operator's permit unless the city council finds and
determines that the public convenience and necessity will be served by the issuance of such permit. The city
council shall hear all of the relevant and material evidence presented by the applicant and his witnesses, and by
persons who appear in opposition to the application. The council shall also have the right to call any other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/420
witnesses that it may deem necessary or appropriate. In all such hearings the burden of proof shall be upon the
applicant to establish by clear and convincing evidence that the public convenience and necessity will be served
by the granting of the ambulance operator's permit.
(c) Public convenience and necessity shall mean that:
(1) The existing ambulance service within the city will not be adversely affected so as to lower the
standards of existing services within the city.
(2) There is a need for additional ambulance service within the city.
(3) Existing ambulance service is inadequate to serve the needs of the public, whether such
inadequacy is caused by the lack of equipment, the lack of competent personnel, mismanagement, or
any other cause whatsoever.
(4) The financial responsibility of the applicant to furnish the service for which he has made
application.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.008)
Sec. 4.07.044 Granting or denial
The city council shall make a determination as to the existence or nonexistence of public convenience and
necessity within fifteen (15) days of the date of the conclusion of such hearing and it shall notify the applicant
and all other parties who appeared at such hearing as a party of interest of the decision of the city council.
Unless such application is granted within fifteen (15) days of the conclusion of the public hearing, it will be
deemed to have been denied. (1998 Code, sec. 42.009)
Sec. 4.07.045 Liability insurance
(a) Before an ambulance operator's permit is granted to an applicant, or before any renewal thereof, the
applicant or the operator seeking renewal shall provide evidence to the city secretary that he has in full force and
effect a public liability insurance policy on each ambulance, such insurance policy to be issued by an insurance
company licensed to do business in the state. Such insurance policy or policies shall provide liability insurance
in the amount of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for any one accident and not less
than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to any one person. Such insurance policy shall not
contain a passenger liability exclusion.
(b) Evidence of such insurance shall be in the form of a certificate of insurance stating fully the nature and
extent of coverage provided, and such certificate shall contain a provision to the effect written notice will be
given to the city secretary at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of any cancellation of such insurance
policy or policies.
(c) Failure of the operator to maintain at all times a currently effective certificate of insurance shall be grounds
for the cancellation of this permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.010)
Sec. 4.07.046 Duration
An ambulance operator's permit issued pursuant to this article shall remain valid so long as all terms and
provisions of this article are complied with and so long as ambulance service is provided by the holder of such
permit. Should the holder of any such permit cease doing business, or cease furnishing adequate ambulance
service, or should he permit or suffer his liability insurance to lapse, after notice and hearing, such permit shall
be automatically forfeited and canceled, and may be reinstated only upon submission of a new application.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.011)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/420
Sec. 4.07.047 Changes in organization or ownership of permit holder
All changes in the organization or ownership of any partnership or corporation shall be promptly reported to the
city secretary within ten (10) days after such change occurs, and any individual becoming connected with the
operation of such ambulance shall file his individual application with the city secretary certifying to the
qualifications set forth in section 4.07.042 above. (1998 Code, sec. 42.012)
Sec. 4.07.048 Inspection of books and records
The books and records of the holder of any ambulance operator's permit shall be open for inspection by the city
manager or personnel under his direction. (1998 Code, sec. 42.013)
Secs. 4.07.049–4.07.080 Reserved
Division 3. Driver's Permit
Sec. 4.07.081 Required; application; issuance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate an ambulance unless such person has obtained from
the city an ambulance driver's permit. The application for an ambulance driver's permit shall be made to the city
secretary, and such sworn application shall contain the following information:
(1) That the applicant is twenty-one (21) years of age or older; and
(2) That the applicant has not been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude within the last ten (10) years.
(b) Upon receipt of such application, the city secretary shall cause an investigation to be made of the driving
record of such applicant, and if such driving record appears satisfactory, and if all other provisions of this article
have been complied with, the city secretary shall issue the ambulance driver's permit.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.014)
Sec. 4.07.082 Suspension or revocation
The city council may, after notice and hearing, suspend or revoke the permit issued to any driver under this
article if such driver has violated the terms of this article or any other ordinance regulating traffic in the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.015)
ARTICLE 4.08 WRECKER SERVICES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.08.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them:
Certificate. Authorization granted by the chief of police of the city, under the provisions of this article, to use a
designated vehicle as a wrecker.
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or a person designated by him to act in his stead for the purposes
of this article.
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle which is self-propelled, except motor-assisted bicycles as defined by the laws of the
state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/420
Owner. Any person who holds the legal title to a motor vehicle or who has the legal right to possession thereof.
Permit. Authorization granted by the city under the provisions of this article to engage in the wrecker business in
the city.
Permit holder. Any person possessing a current, valid permit to engage in the wrecker business in the city.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture or association. This does not include a
governmental agency.
Point of origin. The point where a vehicle is picked up for towing.
Private parking lot. Any private property used for restricted and/or paid parking of vehicles.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
public highway, but not including devices moved solely by human power, or used exclusively upon stationary
tracks or rails.
Vehicle depository. The site to which a permit holder tows and/or stores vehicles.
Wrecker. Any motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing or removing vehicles.
Wrecker business. The business of towing vehicles not belonging to the towing person on a public street within
the incorporated limits of the city for compensation, or with the expectation of compensation and/or repair,
including the operation of a wrecker or wreckers in connection with some other business. It does not include the
operation of wreckers by any governmental entity or tows into or out of the city at the owner's request, except as
otherwise provided in this article.
Wrecker rotation lists. Lists prepared by the city police department in accordance with the provisions of this
article of wrecker businesses which have requested and qualified for placement upon such lists.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.061)
Sec. 4.08.002 Penalty
Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to such administrative action as set out herein in
addition to being guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, subject to a fine not to exceed two
hundred dollars ($200.00). (1998 Code, sec. 42.062)
Sec. 4.08.003 Maximum charges
The following maximum fees may be charged by permit holders under this article for the use of designated
capacity wreckers and no additional charges may be made.
(1) Towing fees.
(A) Collision haul - anytime day or night: $100.00.
(B) Clean up and labor, per hour minimum: $80.00.
(C) Recovery charge - winching for vehicle/per hr. min.: $150.00.
(D) Storage of towed vehicles, per day: $20.00.
(E) Storage of towed tractor/trailer rig, per day: $35.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/420
(F) Fuel surcharge: $10.00.
(Ordinance O-01-11 adopted 1/18/11)
Secs. 4.08.004–4.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Business Permit and Wrecker Certificate
Sec. 4.08.031 Required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the wrecker business within the city unless such person
possesses a valid permit therefor.
(b) It shall be unlawful to drive or cause to be driven in the wrecker business a wrecker for which no valid
certificate is possessed.
(c) The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to a wrecker tow which originates
outside the limits of the city.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, in any circumstance in which a vehicle or other object
is so located on a public street as to constitute a hazard or obstacle, or to interfere with traffic, or in the event a
stolen vehicle is found, or in any other circumstance in which a police officer in the course of his duty deems it
necessary, he may require such a vehicle or object to be removed at the owner's expense by any practical means,
including use of the wrecker rotation lists in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.071)
Sec. 4.08.032 Application for permit; fee; display
(a) Applications for permits shall be made upon forms supplied by the city secretary, shall be verified and
shall contain the following information:
(1) The true name, trade name, address and telephone number of the wrecker business.
(2) The number and category of wreckers proposed to be operated.
(3) The names and addresses of the true owners of the wrecker business and, if the business is a
corporation, the names and addresses of the corporate officers.
(4) The true owners of the wreckers to be used, if different from the true owners of the business.
(5) A statement from the appropriate taxing authority that all city taxes on the permit applicant's
property, both real and personal, to be used in the business are current.
(6) A certificate of public liability and property damage insurance issued by a casualty insurance
company authorized to do business in the state, in the standard form approved by the state department
of insurance, containing a provision that at least ten (10) days' prior notice of cancellation of said
insurance shall be given to the city secretary by the insurance company and with the city expressly
named as an additional insured and the coverage provision of such policy insuring members of the
public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of
the permit holder's wrecker business and providing that the amount of coverage shall comply with the
limits set forth in this article.
(b) The annual fee for a permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and shall entitle the holder to operate a wrecker
business in compliance with this article for one year from the date of the issuance of the permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/420
(c) Permits shall be prominently displayed at the permit holder's place of business.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.072)
Sec. 4.08.033 Issuance of certificate
(a) A permit holder desiring to have a wrecker certified shall do the following:
(1) Submit a copy of the manufacturer's certificate of title to the police chief or his designated
representative along with a request for certification on a form provided by the city secretary.
(2) Submit such wrecker for inspection by the chief of police or his designated representative.
(b) Following a determination that such wrecker complies with applicable state laws and the provisions of this
article, the chief of police or his designated representative shall issue a certificate of compliance to the permit
holder and cause to be affixed to the vehicle windshield a sticker or other device as the chief of police shall
deem to be of assistance in identifying properly certified wreckers.
(c) The permit holder shall pay a nonrefundable fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each wrecker for which
certification is sought.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.073)
Sec. 4.08.034 Wrecker requirements
(a) Wreckers shall be classified as class I or class II and shall meet the following equipment requirements for
class I certification:
(1) Shall not be less than one (1) ton in capacity, as reflected on the manufacturer's certificate, title
or by certification by a mechanical engineer licensed as a professional engineer in the state.
(2) Shall be equipped with booster brakes.
(3) Shall be equipped with a power-operated winch, winch line and boom with a rated or tested
lifting capacity of not less than six thousand (6,000) pounds single line capacity.
(4) Shall carry as standard equipment at least one of each of the following: tow bar, safety chain
and fire extinguisher. If such wrecker is to be used in collision hauls, it shall also carry a wrecker bar,
broom, ax, shovel and dolly.
(5) Shall display the permit number of the permit holder as reflected on the permit in letters at least
three (3) inches high on each side of the wrecker. Such numbers shall be permanently attached,
legible, and on a contrasting background. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the display
of the name of the wrecker business upon the wrecker.
(6) Shall be in such a condition that it can safely and reliably be used as a wrecker.
(7) Shall comply with the motor vehicle equipment laws of the state.
(b) Class II wreckers shall meet the following additional requirements:
(1) Shall not be less than three (3) tons in capacity, as reflected on the manufacturer's certificate,
title or by certification by a mechanical engineer licensed as a professional engineer in the state.
(2) Shall be equipped with air brakes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/420
(3) Shall be equipped with a power-operated winch, winch line and boom with a rated or tested
lifting capacity of not less than twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds capacity.
(4) Shall carry at least two (2) snatch blocks and two (2) scotch blocks.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.074)
Sec. 4.08.035 Insurance
All permit holders shall maintain public liability and property damage insurance in the following minimum
amounts:
(1) Class I wreckers.
(A) For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one collision:
$100,000.00.
(B) For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one
collision: $300,000.00.
(C) For damage to or destruction of property in one collision: $100,000.00.
(D) For general garage liability: $100,000.00.
(2) Class II wreckers. Requirements shall be the same as for class I wreckers, except that cargo
insurance shall be in an amount of at least $75,000.00.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.075)
Sec. 4.08.036 Equipment requirements
All wreckers must be equipped as follows:
(1) Shall display atop the highest part of the wrecker a revolving amber or amber and blue light.
(2) Two white floodlights projecting to the rear of the wrecker, mounted in such a manner as to
light up the vehicle being loaded or unloaded, which lights shall be extinguished while towing is in
progress.
(3) Shall have a cradle sling or bar to provide rigid spacing between the wrecker and the towed
vehicle and which is capable of lifting the front or rear of a towed vehicle clear of the roadway.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.076)
Sec. 4.08.037 Grounds for suspension or revocation
The city secretary shall issue a permit to those persons complying with the requirements of this article. The
police chief shall issue a certificate for any permitted wrecker complying with the requirements of this article.
Since the proper and safe functioning of wreckers has critical impact on the health, safety and welfare of the
public, and involves use of the public streets of the city, often in conditions necessitating the prompt and safe
removal of dangerous obstructions to traffic and said streets, the privilege of operating a wrecker within the city
shall be subject to strict regulation in order to protect the public, including the following administrative actions
in lieu of or in addition to any permitted criminal or civil remedy at law:
(1) Suspension of permit. Grounds for suspension of permit include the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/420
(A) Failure to meet the requirements of this article for a permit at any time.
(B) Operating a wrecker in such a manner as to endanger any person or property.
(C) Collecting or charging any fees in excess of those set out in this article.
(D) Violation of state law or city ordinance by a permit holder or his employee in connection
with the operation of the wrecker business.
(2) Revocation of permit. Grounds for revocation shall be the repeated violation of those items
listed for suspension, but revocation shall not be done unless the permit holder has been suspended at
least twice within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the revocation.
(3) Suspension of certificate. The certificate of any wrecker may be suspended and the evidence of
certification removed from the wrecker following:
(A) Operating a wrecker in such a condition that it cannot safely tow a vehicle.
(B) Operating a wrecker not covered by insurance as required by this article.
(C) Operating a wrecker that does not meet the requirements for certification set out in this
article.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.077)
Sec. 4.08.038 Procedure for suspension or revocation
(a) Suspension or revocation of permit. Suspension or revocation of a permit may be accomplished by the
chief of police until such time as the deficiency under section 4.08.037(1)(A) is corrected or not more than
fifteen (15) days for a violation of section 4.08.037(1)(B), (C) or (D). Notice of the hearing, the administrative
action proposed to be taken and the grounds therefor shall be given to the permit holder ten (10) days prior to the
hearing. Mailing such notice by certified mail to the last known business address of the permit holder not less
than ten (10) days prior to the hearing shall constitute adequate notice. Suspension of a permit shall be
accomplished by a notice in writing to the permit holder within ten (10) days of the hearing. Said notice shall set
out the date of the suspension and the date of reinstatement and shall advise the permit holder that he may appeal
such decision to the city manager. Revocation of a permit may be accomplished in the same manner. Following
revocation, no new permit shall be given to that former permit holder for a period of at least six (6) months from
the date of revocation.
(b) Suspension of certificate. Suspension of a certificate may be accomplished by the chief of police or by any
police officer who shall discover a wrecker in operation in violation of the provisions of section 4.08.037(3).
Suspension will be accomplished by the removal of the device signifying certification from the wrecker. Such
certificate shall be reissued when the condition is corrected and the vehicle reinspected by the chief of police or
his authorized representative. Cost for such reinspection shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). Such suspension may
be appealed by giving written notice of such appeal to the chief of police within ten (10) days of the suspension
of such certificate. Such hearing shall [be] before the chief of police within ten (10) days of the receipt of the
written notice. The chief of police shall notify the certificate holder of his decision in writing within ten (10)
days of the hearing. If such suspension is upheld, the notice of decision shall state what action will be necessary
to have the certificate reissued and that such decision may be appealed to the city manager.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.078)
Secs. 4.08.039–4.08.070 Reserved
Division 3. Operational Regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/420
Sec. 4.08.071 Driving wrecker to scene of collision
No person shall drive, or cause to be driven, a wrecker to the scene of a collision on a public street in the city
unless such person has been called to the scene by the city police department or by a party involved in the
collision; provided that when a wrecker is involved in a collision it shall not be a violation of this section. (1998
Code, sec. 42.091)
Sec. 4.08.072 Solicitation of business on public streets
No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, on the public streets of the city, wrecker business
involving a vehicle wrecked on such streets. This prohibition applies regardless of whether the solicitation is for
the business of towing, removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading, selling or purchasing such wrecked
vehicle. The presence of a wrecker at the scene of a collision, which wrecker was not called by the city police
department or a party to the collision, shall be prima facie proof of such solicitation as is herein prohibited.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.092)
Sec. 4.08.073 Interception of police calls
No person, for the purpose of facilitating violation of this article or of any other law or ordinance, shall intercept
any message emanating on city police department radio frequencies or frequencies that may be assigned the city
police department, nor shall the contents of any such intercepted message be divulged to another person for
purposes of facilitating violation of this article or any other law or ordinance. (1998 Code, sec. 42.093)
Sec. 4.08.074 Private parking hauls
(a) No permit holder shall tow a vehicle parked on a private parking lot within the city onto a public street
within the city unless the parking lot has signs readable day and night prominently placed at all entrances
specifying those persons who may park in the lot and prohibiting all others from parking there.
(b) Whenever it becomes necessary under this section for the permit holder to disassemble parts of a vehicle
in order to tow such vehicle, the permit holder shall reassemble such parts upon reaching his place of business.
(c) No permit holder shall give any form of compensation to the owner or operator of a private parking lot
from which the permit holder has towed a vehicle.
(d) No permit holder shall have the owner of a vehicle which has been towed from a private parking lot sign a
release from liability until the owner has inspected the vehicle. Any such release shall contain a notation of such
inspection as well as an enumeration of any damages alleged by the owner to be the responsibility of the permit
holder. The release shall be a full release except as to specifically enumerated damages.
(e) A permit holder removing a vehicle from private property shall immediately upon completion of the tow
notify the city police department of such removal. Such notification shall include the following:
(1) The physical description and license number or vehicle identification number, if there are no
license plates, of the vehicle removed;
(2) The name of the permit holder removing the vehicle; and
(3) The location of storage of the vehicle.
(f) The maximum fee which may be charged by a permit holder for the removal and impoundment of a
vehicle from a private parking lot under this section is thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for removal and five dollars
($5.00) per day storage, not including the first twenty-four (24) hours.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.094)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/420
Sec. 4.08.075 Police rotation lists
(a) The city police department shall establish and maintain class I and class II wrecker rotation lists. Wrecker
businesses upon such lists shall be rotated upon the basis of one week of service at a time. A wrecker business is
qualified to be listed upon the class I list if:
(1) At least one certified wrecker of at least 7,500 pounds gross vehicle weight is maintained ready
for use.
(2) A 24-hour wrecker business with continuous phone service is maintained seven days a week
during weeks when the business is on wrecker rotation call.
(3) A vehicle depository with a capacity of at least twenty (20) automobiles upon a single site is
maintained within the city's police jurisdiction. If such storage is outside, the storage area must be
completely enclosed by a fence of not less than six feet (6') in height, topped with barbed wire or
safety wire, and lighted by not less than two mercury vapor lights not less than two feet apart and
arranged to accommodate safe and prompt removal upon request. In lieu of a fence, the wrecking
business may, in addition to all other required insurance, furnish proof to the city secretary of garage
liability insurance with an endorsement for extra legal liability with physical damage coverage in an
amount not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).
A wrecker business is qualified to be listed upon the class II list, if in addition to meeting the requirements of
subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section, at least one certified wrecker of at least 28,500 pounds gross vehicle
weight is maintained ready for use.
(b) When the police officer investigating a collision determines that any vehicle involved in such collision is
unable to safely proceed under its own power, or when the police officer determines that the driver of the vehicle
involved in a collision is unable to safely move the vehicle involved to a location where it will not create a
traffic hazard, the officer shall request the driver to designate a person, wrecker business, auto repair shop, auto
dealer or auto club to remove the vehicle. When such designation has been made, the officer shall communicate
the designation to the police department, which shall cause the designated party to be called and directed to the
scene of the collision.
(c) If the driver of a vehicle involved in a collision which must be removed by a wrecker is unable, fails, or
refuses to designate the person, wrecker business, auto repair shop, auto dealer or auto club to remove the
vehicle, the officer shall notify the police department, which shall call the wrecker business on call on the
appropriate wrecker rotation list to remove the damaged vehicle.
(d) Failure of the wrecker business called to respond with an appropriate class wrecker at the scene of the
collision within thirty (30) minutes of notification without justification acceptable to the police department shall
cause the permit holder to forfeit that call to the next wrecker business upon the approved wrecker rotation list.
Failure to respond two (2) times during a week of wrecker rotation list duty without justification acceptable to
the police department shall be cause for the wrecker business to be passed over for its next turn at wrecker
rotation list duty. A wrecker business which has been passed over two (2) times within a one-year period shall be
removed from the list for a period of six (6) months upon the next occurrence of two failures to respond during a
week of wrecker rotation list duty.
(e) It shall be unlawful for a police officer at the scene of a collision to directly or indirectly recommend to
any person the name of any person, wrecker business, auto repair shop, auto dealer, or auto club as wrecker, or
to influence in any manner the decision of any person choosing or selecting a wrecker.
(f) A wrecker business desiring to be placed upon either wrecker rotation list shall be required to make a
written application to the police department of the city and shall execute an agreement to hold the city harmless
from any and all claims arising from performance of wrecker services in connection with such listing upon a
wrecker rotation list.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/420
(g) In the event that a police officer initiates the tow of a vehicle without the knowledge of the owner of the
vehicle, the police department shall as soon as possible attempt to determine the owner of such vehicle and
notify such person by the fastest available means of the impoundment of the vehicle.
(h) The owner of a vehicle impounded as a result of a police-initiated tow may obtain the immediate release of
his vehicle and challenge the impounding decision by paying the amount of towing and storage charges against
the vehicle to the city police department as a cash bond. Upon receipt of the cash bond, the police department
shall require the wrecker business holding the vehicle to release it to the owner and shall schedule an
administrative hearing on the matter by the chief of police or his designated representative within ten (10) days.
If the decision to impound the vehicle is ruled to have been proper and no appeal is taken, the cash bond shall be
forwarded to the wrecker business that impounded the vehicle. If the decision to impound the vehicle is found
not to have been proper, the cash bond will be returned to the owner and the city shall be responsible for the tow
and storage charges. The city shall not be responsible for damages to the towed vehicle or loss of property from
such vehicle. Such claims shall be the responsibility of the wrecker business conducting the tow and storage of
the vehicle. If an owner is not satisfied with the decision resulting from the impoundment hearing, an appeal of
said decision may be made to the city manager. In the event that the property owner fails to appear at a
scheduled hearing, and the city manager upholds the initial decision, the cash bond shall be forwarded to the
wrecker business that conducted the tow and storage of the vehicle. This section shall not apply to vehicles held
by the city police department under authority of state or federal laws.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.095)
Sec. 4.08.076 Duties of permit holders
(a) It shall be the obligation of all permit holders under this article to operate wreckers so as to provide safe
and prompt removal of wrecked or disabled vehicles from public streets of the city when properly called upon to
do so in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(b) The duty to provide safe and prompt wrecker service upon call includes, but is not limited to, the
following specific services:
(1) Upon receiving a call from the police department, the permit holder shall immediately dispatch
the requested capacity wrecker to the desired location, or, if the permit holder does not wish to
respond or cannot respond for some reason, then he shall so inform the police department at once.
(2) Upon arriving at the scene of a collision or of a vehicle to be towed within the city, the permit
holder shall take direction from the police officer in charge at the scene, in accordance with state law.
Failure of the permit holder to take direction from the police officer in charge at the scene shall cause
the permit holder to be removed from the wrecker rotation list for a period of six (6) months.
(3) The personnel of a permit holder towing a vehicle from the scene of a collision within the city
shall remove all debris of the collision from the street. This duty specifically includes removing the
broken glass and metal fragments and the spilled load of any vehicle. Such debris should be disposed
of in a manner which will keep it out of gutters, storm sewers, streams, public right-of-way, and
property not belonging to the wrecker without consent of the property owner. The officer on the
scene may assist in locating a place for disposal of such debris.
(4) If a permit holder is requested to tow a vehicle to a particular place of repair and such repair
business is not open at the time of the tow, then the permit holder shall complete the tow to the
designated place at the earliest possible time and shall not charge for storage until such time as the
repair business is open.
(5) No permit holder shall store any vehicles or wrecker on public streets or public right-of-way in
the city. Permit holders shall use reasonable care in the towing and storage of vehicles so as to
minimize the possibility of further damage or theft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/420
(6) All permit holders shall comply with all state laws and city ordinances, including zoning, health
and fire prevention ordinances.
(1998 Code, sec. 42.096)
ARTICLE 4.09 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.09.001 Purpose and intent; statutory authority
(a) Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city, and to prevent the
location of such businesses in proximity to residential uses, schools, places of worship, places of public
assembly, public parks and child care facilities. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually
oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent or effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to
sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of lawfully presented sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. The regulation of
obscene material (not protected by the First Amendment) is enforceable through separate criminal sanctions
under the Penal Code.
(b) Statutory authority. It is the intent of the city that the locational regulations of this article are promulgated
pursuant to section 243.001 et seq., Texas Local Government Code, as they apply to sexually oriented
businesses.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.001), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.002 Definitions
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings hereinafter defined:
Applicant. An owner or operator, including any spouse of an individual owner, or any other entity required to
submit any documentation for applying for a sexually oriented business license.
Cabaret or theater, sexually oriented. An establishment which provides or allows the provision of sexually
oriented live entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where
sexually oriented live entertainment is available. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including
verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or references to “adult entertainment,”
“strippers,” “showgirls,” “exotic dancers,” “gentleman's club,” “XXX” or similar terms shall be considered
evidence that an establishment holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented live
entertainment is available.
Child care facility. A building used as a day nursery, children's boarding home, child placing agency or other
place for the care or custody of children under fifteen years (15) of age.
Customer. Any person who:
(1) Is allowed to enter a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form
of consideration or gratuity;
(2) Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise,
goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/420
(3) Enters a business other than as an owner, employee, entertainer, vendor, service person, or
delivery person; or
(4) Receives a service by a business regulated under this article.
Display. The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether
public or private, an item in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished
by normal unaided vision viewing it from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others,
or from any portion of the premises where items and material other than sexually oriented media are offered for
sale or rent to the public.
Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever for or to the customers of an establishment subject
to this article or who works in or about an establishment subject to this article.
Encounter center, sexually oriented. A business or enterprise that, as one of its principal purposes, offers
physical contact between two or more persons when one or more of the persons is nude or semi-nude or in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activity or touching specified
anatomical areas.
Entertainer, sexually oriented. A person who receives any type of remuneration or payment either directly or
indirectly to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment may consist of
dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers.
Entertainment, off-site sexually oriented. Sexually oriented entertainment that is offered for consumption off the
premises of an establishment. Off-site sexually oriented entertainment includes sexually oriented media stores
and sexually oriented novelty stores.
Entertainment, on-site sexually oriented. Sexually oriented entertainment that is offered to customers for their
consumption while on the premises of the sexually oriented establishment, including dancing, singing, modeling,
acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers, or viewing of sexually oriented
media. “Entertainment, on-site sexually oriented” does not include the perusal of sexually oriented media or
other merchandise covers for the purpose of purchase or rental. On-site sexually oriented entertainment
includessexually oriented cabarets or theaters, sexually oriented motion picture theaters, sexually oriented
motion picture video viewing arcades, sexually oriented encounter centers, massage parlors, and sexually
oriented modeling studios.
Entertainment, sexually oriented live. Any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented
entertainer at a sexually oriented business: dancing, singing, talking, touching, modeling (including lingerie or
photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers or
sexually oriented media.
Escort. A person who is held out to the public to be available for hire for monetary consideration in the form of a
fee, commission, or salary, and who for said consideration consorts with or accompanies, or offers to consort
with or accompany, another or others to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement or within
any place of public resort or within any private quarters. For purposes of this article, escort shall not include any
person who would be understood by a reasonable person as providing “babysitting” services or working as an
assisted living companion to the elderly, infirm, disabled, or handicapped, and shall further not include licensed
health professionals.
Escort customer. A customer or any person who contracts with or employs or, for monetary consideration, hires
an escort, individually or through an escort service.
Escort service, sexually oriented. An escort service that operates in any of the following manners:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/420
(1) Collects money (whether paid in advance or paid after the promised proscribed act) for the
promise of sexually oriented entertainment or specified sexual activities or prostitution services by its
escorts;
(2) Employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a customer a
sexually oriented escort;
(3) Engages in fraudulent, misleading, or deceptive advertising that is designed to make the
prospective customer believe that sexually oriented entertainment or specified sexual activities or
prostitution services will be provided;
(4) Uses as escorts persons known to have violated the law regarding prostitution, and refuses to
cease the use of such a person;
(5) Operates a sexually oriented escort service as a “call girl” operation; or
(6) Advertises, solicits or offers that sexually oriented entertainment or specified sexual activities
will be provided to a customer, or that such escorts will be provided, referred, or introduced to a
customer.
Escort, sexually oriented. An escort who:
(1) Works for (either as an agent, employee, or independent contractor), or is referred to a customer
by a sexually oriented escort service;
(2) Either advertises that sexual conduct will be provided, or works for (either as an employee,
agent, or independent contractor) or is referred to a customer by a sexually oriented escort service
that so advertises; or
(3) Offers to provide or does provide acts of sexual conduct to an escort customer, or accepts an
offer or solicitation to provide acts of sexual conduct for a fee from an escort customer or a
prospective escort customer.
Establishment. Any business regulated by this article.
Gross floor area. The total area of the building accessible or visible to the public, including showrooms, motion
picture theaters, motion picture video viewing arcades, service areas, behind-counter areas, areas used for
storage of sexually oriented media, restrooms (whether or not labeled “public”), stage areas, and aisles,
hallways, and entryways serving such areas.
Licensee. The owner in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued.
Massage. Touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding,
positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body
(excluding an osseous tissue manipulation or adjustment).
Massage parlor. Any business in which massages are offered as one of the business's primary services by a
person who is not registered as a “massage therapist” under the state Massage Therapy Registration Act or
which provides massages by touching specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities.
Massage therapist. A person who is registered under the state Massage Therapy Registration Act.
Massage therapy. The profession in which a registered massage therapist applies massage techniques with the
intent of positively affecting the health and well-being of the customer in accordance with the standards of the
state Massage Therapy Registration Act, Texas Occupations Code, chapter 455.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/420
Media. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape
production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be
used as a means of communication. Media includes, but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers,
magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped
pictures.
Media, sexually oriented. Magazines, books, videotapes, movies, slides, CDs, DVDs, or other devices used to
record computer images, or other media, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Media store, sexually oriented. An establishment that rents and/or sells sexually oriented media, and that meets
any of the following three tests:
(1) More than forty percent (40%) of the gross floor area is devoted to sexually oriented media;
(2) More than forty percent (40%) of the stock in trade consists of sexually oriented media: or
(3) The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a “XXX,” “adult” or “sex” business,
or otherwise as a sexually oriented business, other than sexually oriented media outlet, sexually
oriented motion picture theater, or sexually oriented cabaret.
Modeling studio, sexually oriented. Any place where a person appears nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity
or semi-nudity and is to be observed for purposes of sketching, drawing, painting, sculpturing, photographing, or
similar depiction by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration, or an establishment or business
that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples,
or small groups with the purpose or result of providing sexually oriented entertainment. “Modeling studio,
sexually oriented” shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; or a private college or university that maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation.
Motel, sexually oriented. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that meets any of the following
criteria:
(1) Provides, as its main business, accommodations to the public for any form of consideration for
the purpose of viewing sexually oriented transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides,
or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”;
(2) Marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” “couples,” or “sexually oriented”; or
(3) Offers a sleeping room for a period of less than 10 hours or allows a tenant or occupant to rent
the room for a period of time less than 10 hours.
Motion picture theater, sexually oriented. A commercial theater establishment where, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are frequently
shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” or that are marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” or sexually oriented. Frequently shown
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other similar photographic reproductions as characterized herein
do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of
expression. This definition does not include any type of facility that would meet the definition of a sexually
oriented motion picture video viewing arcade.
Motion picture video viewing arcade, sexually oriented. A building or portion of a building wherein coinoperated,
slug-operated, or, for any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/420
controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing
devices are maintained to show images of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Motion picture video viewing area, sexually oriented. Any area designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat
customers and is used for presenting motion pictures or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic,
magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser
disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” for observation by customers therein. This definition does not include any building
that would meet the definition of a sexually oriented motion picture theater.
Novelty store, sexually oriented. An establishment offering goods for sale or rent and that meets any of the
following tests:
(1) It offers for sale items from any two (2) of the following categories: sexually oriented media,
lingerie, leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic
practices, and the combination of such items constitute more than ten percent (10%) of its stock in
trade or occupy more than ten percent (10%) of its floor area;
(2) More than five percent (5%) of its stock in trade consists of sexually oriented toys or novelties;
or
(3) More than five percent (5%) of its gross floor area is devoted to the display of sexually oriented
toys or novelties.
Nudity or state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal
cleft with less than fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
Operator. A person or entity designated by the owner to be responsible for the operation of a business regulated
under this article at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other principal in the
business is present, such person may be considered the operator.
Owner. The individual owner of an establishment, or, if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited
liability company, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten
percent (10%) or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial
interest of ten percent (10%) or more. “Owner” includes the spouse of any of the above individuals, as well as
any lessee of the premises.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, independent contractor, corporation
(domestic of foreign), limited liability company, trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
Place of public assembly. An auditorium, civic center, city hall or courthouse.
Place of worship. A building in which persons regularly assemble for worship, intended primarily for purposes
connected with faith, or for propagating a particular form of belief.
Police chief. The chief of the city police department or his designee.
Premises. The physical location at which a business operates; as used in this article, the term shall include all
parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business,
through ownership, lease or other arrangement.
Primary entertainment. Entertainment that characterizes the establishment, as determined (if necessary) from a
pattern of advertising as well as actual performances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/420
Public park. A tract of land maintained by the federal, state, or a local government for the recreation and
enjoyment of the general public.
Residential use. A structure designed or intended for human habitation, including a single-family dwelling,
duplex, townhouse unit or complex, apartment or multiple-family dwelling unit or complex, mobile home park,
or recreational vehicle site.
Sadomasochistic practices. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of
being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked.
School. Any public or private learning center, elementary school, secondary school, junior college, community
college, university or other center for post-secondary education.
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity. The showing of the female areola or nipple with less than fully opaque
covering. Showing of any other part of the anatomy defined under “nude or state of nudity” shall constitute
being nude or in a state of nudity.
Sensitive use. A place of worship, school, public park, place of public assembly, residential use or child care
facility.
Sexually oriented business. Any of the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or theater, sexually
oriented encounter center, massage parlor, sexually oriented media store, sexually oriented motel, sexually
oriented motion picture theater, sexually oriented motion picture video viewing arcade, sexually oriented
modeling studio, sexually oriented novelty store, or any other similar business establishment whose primary
purpose is to offer sexually oriented entertainment or materials. This generic term does not describe a specific
land use and shall not be considered a single use category for purposes of any applicable ordinances; however,
each such business shall be considered a separate business for purposes of licensing.
Sexually oriented business license. Any license applied for under this article.
Sexually oriented toys or novelties. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of
human genital organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital
organs.
Sheriff. The county sheriff or his designated agent.
Specified anatomical areas. Any of the following:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva,
anus, or anal cleft or the human female areola or nipple; or
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified criminal act. Any sexual offense, prostitution, rape, statutory rape or other sexually related offense or
as defined by criminal statutes in other states or by federal laws addressing similar or related offenses; or an
offense as defined in chapters 21, 22, 25 and 43 of the Texas Penal Code; or an offense involving controlled
substances, illegal drugs or narcotics, or gambling as defined in federal or state laws in any of the states.
“Specified criminal act” also includes any criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the
enumerated offenses.
Specified sexual activities. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. Specified sexual
activities include, but are not limited to, the following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or
mechanical devices, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism,
sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, or sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any
of the activities set forth above, with any person on the premises. This term shall include apparent sexual
stimulation of another person's genitals, whether clothed or unclothed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/420
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. The increase in floor area occupied by the business by
more than twenty percent (20%), as the floor area existed on the effective date of this article.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by
sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of the law upon the death of
the person possessing the ownership or control.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.002), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.003 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Class I sexually oriented business. Establishments offering for sale or rent off-site sexually
oriented entertainment, including the following uses, shall be classified as class I sexually oriented
businesses:
(A) Sexually oriented media store; and
(B) Sexually oriented novelty store.
(2) Class II sexually oriented business. Establishments offering for consumption on-site sexually
oriented entertainment that, when lawfully conducted, does not involve physical contact or other
sexually oriented activities between customers and entertainers, or between customers, including the
following uses, shall be classified as class II sexually oriented businesses:
(A) Sexually oriented cabaret or theater;
(B) Sexually oriented motion picture theater; and
(C) Sexually oriented modeling studio.
(3) Class III sexually oriented business. Establishments offering for consumption on-site sexually
oriented entertainment that has the potential for customers to be engaged in specified sexual activities
or physical contact with specified anatomical areas, including the following uses, shall be classified
as class III sexually oriented businesses:
(A) Sexually oriented motel; and
(B) Sexually oriented motion picture video viewing arcade or video area.
(4) Prohibited businesses.
(A) Sexually oriented escort service;
(B) Sexually oriented encounter center; and
(C) Massage parlor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/420
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.003), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.004 Location
(a) Sensitive uses defined. The following uses shall be considered sensitive uses for purposes of determining
the location of a sexually oriented business:
(1) A place of worship;
(2) A school;
(3) A public park;
(4) A place of public assembly;
(5) A residential use.
(b) Separation distance from sensitive uses.
(1) No class I sexually oriented business shall be located within one thousand five hundred (1500)
feet of a sensitive use.
(2) No class II sexually oriented business shall be located within two thousand (2000) feet of a
sensitive use.
(3) No class III sexually oriented business shall be located within two thousand five hundred
(2500) feet of a sensitive use.
(c) Distance between businesses. No sexually oriented business shall be located closer than the distance
prescribed by this section for separation from sensitive uses from another sexually oriented business of the same
class. The separation requirement for sexually oriented businesses of different classes shall be the greater of the
distances prescribed by this section for separation from sensitive uses.
(d) Multiple businesses prohibited. Any establishment containing or constituting more than one defined
sexually oriented business of any class shall be prohibited.
(e) Measurement of distances. Measurement of the distances prescribed by this section shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property
line of the premises of a place of worship, school, or public park, place of public assembly, child care facility, or
a residential use situated on a platted and recorded lot 1.5 acres or less in area, or a proposed lot that has
received final plat approval for residential use of 1.5 acres or less. If the residential use is located on a lot or
parcel which exceeds 1.5 acres in size, the distances prescribed by this section shall be measured from a point
fifty (50) feet from the closest exterior wall of the residential use. The distance between any two (2) sexually
oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest property line of the premises on which each business is located.
(f) Pre-established businesses. A lawfully operating sexually oriented business shall not be rendered unlawful
by the location of a sensitive use, subsequent to the grant or renewal of a sexually oriented business license,
closer to the business than the separation requirements prescribed by this section. This provision applies only to
the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a sexually oriented business license is
submitted after the license or period of authorized nonconformity has expired, the license has been revoked, or
the licensed sexually oriented business has been abandoned.
(g) Abandonment defined. A licensed sexually oriented business shall be considered abandoned when its
operation has been discontinued voluntarily for a period exceeding sixty (60) days.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/420
(h) Nonconforming businesses. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of any amendment
to this article that is rendered nonconforming with respect to the separation requirements established by such
amendment thereafter shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such use will be permitted to continue for a period
not to exceed one (1) year, unless sooner destroyed, abandoned or terminated for any reason. Such
nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered within such period. If two sexually
oriented businesses are within prescribed separation requirements on the effective date of an amendatory
ordinance that increases such distance requirements, the sexually oriented business which was first established
and continually operating at a particular location shall be deemed the conforming use and the later-established
business shall be deemed nonconforming.
(i) Roadway frontage. All sexually oriented businesses must be located on a lot fronting on a paved, publicly
dedicated roadway.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.004), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.005 Design of premises; display of sexually oriented media
(a) Exterior design.
(1) The premises of all sexually oriented businesses will be so constructed as to ensure that the
interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building.
(2) In addition, all windows will be covered to prevent viewing of the interior of the building from
the outside and all doorways not constructed with an anteroom or foyer will be covered so as to
prevent observation of the interior of the premises from the exterior of the building.
(3) Light sources shall be oriented toward the center of the site or shielded so as to not be visible
from the property line. This applies to refractory lenses which extend beyond the lighting fixture and
are designed to redirect the lighting source horizontally. This does not apply to neon or internally lit
signs, or to decorative lighting with 15 watts or less per bulb.
(4) The minimum average intensity of lighting for on-site parking and walkway areas shall be 1.5
footcandles.
(5) Signage shall conform to any applicable regulations of the extraterritorial jurisdiction of a
municipality.
(6) Parking areas shall not be obscured by an opaque fence, wall, obscuring vegetation or other
barrier from view from the public roadway where the business takes access.
(b) Design of entertainment area. The premises of a class II or class III sexually oriented business shall be
designed so that all entertainment on the premises takes place only in a location and manner meeting all of the
following conditions:
(1) In an open room of at least six hundred (600) square feet unobstructed by any interior walls or
other structures that shield the view of activities occurring within the room; however, a sexually
oriented motel may provide entertainment in rooms having at least two hundred fifty (250) square
feet per room.
(2) On a stage elevated at least thirty-six (36) inches above the level on which customers sit or
stand.
(3) On a stage with a horizontal separation of at least thirty-six (36) inches between the edge of the
stage or platform and the nearest space to which customers shall have access; the horizontal
separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail or other physical barrier, which may be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/420
located either on the stage (to keep the entertainers back from the edge) or on the floor (to keep
customers back from the stage).
(c) Interior design for sexually oriented cabarets or theaters, motion picture theaters and motion picture video
viewing arcades. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. The premises shall be equipped with overhead
lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an
illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle, as measured at the floor level.
(d) Design of sexually oriented motion picture video viewing areas. The sexually oriented motion picture
video viewing area must be located in an area of the building unobstructed by any interior walls or partitions that
shield the view of activities occurring within the video area.
(e) Sexually oriented media display.
(1) This subsection shall apply to any establishment in which sexually oriented media at any time
constitutes or occupies more than ten percent (10%) but not more than forty percent (40%) of the
store's inventory or merchandise displayed for sale or rental (not including storerooms, stock areas,
bathrooms, or any portion of the business not open to the public) at any time.
(2) Sexually oriented media in an establishment to which this subsection applies shall be kept in a
separate room or section of the store, which room or section shall:
(A) Be physically and visually separated from the rest of the store by an opaque wall of
durable material reaching at least eight (8) feet high or to the ceiling, whichever is less;
(B) Be located so that the entrance to it is as far as reasonably practicable from media or
other inventory in the store likely to be of particular interest to children; and
(C) Have access controlled by electronic or other means to provide assurance that persons
under age eighteen (18) will not gain admission and that the general public will not accidentally
enter such room or section.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.005), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.006 Standards of operation
It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, or operator, entertainer or employee of a sexually
oriented business, or any customer of any sexually oriented business, while on or about the premises of the
business, to knowingly fail to adhere to the following standards of operation, as applicable:
(1) Sexually oriented entertainment. A sexually oriented business offering sexually oriented
entertainment shall comply with the following standards:
(A) A sexually oriented cabaret or modeling studio shall assure that no person other than an
entertainer may occupy a stage constructed in accordance with section 4.09.005 for purposes of
providing sexually oriented entertainment during the course of any performance;
(B) Entertainment at a sexually oriented cabaret or modeling studio is restricted to the
elevated stage area as prescribed in section 4.09.005;
(C) Tips for entertainers shall be collected only in containers that are accessible to customers
and not located on the stage; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/420
(D) Sexually oriented entertainment shall take place in an open room in accordance with
section 4.09.005.
(2) Posting of license. A sexually oriented business shall post the license issued under this article
in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, in the portion of the business that is
frequented by its customers and that is well lighted.
(3) Age restriction. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years, whether an employee or
customer of the establishment, shall be permitted on the premises of any sexually oriented business,
or in any area reserved for the display of sexually oriented media in an establishment subject to
section 4.09.005(e).
(4) On-site attire. The operator of any sexually oriented business shall not permit any entertainer,
server or other employee to appear nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity on the
premises.
(5) Exterior display. No sexually oriented business will be conducted in any manner that permits
the observation of live performers engaged in an erotic depiction or dance or media or any other
material or persons depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, or persons in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, to be observed from any exterior
location by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
(6) Specified criminal acts and specified sexual activities prohibited. No operator shall permit any
employee, server, entertainer or customer of a sexually oriented business to engage in any specified
criminal act or any specified sexual activity on the premises of the business.
(7) Compliance with terms of license. It shall be the duty of the owners and operators to ensure
that all of the terms of the sexually oriented business license, including the standards in section
4.09.005 of this article, are continuously maintained, and to ensure that no customer is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which customers will not
be permitted pursuant to the terms of the license and the standards of this article.
(8) Manager to be on duty. It is the duty of the operator of the premises to ensure that a manager is
on duty at all times that any customer is present inside the premises.
(9) Sexually oriented modeling studios. No bed, sofa, or mattress may be placed in any room
within a sexually oriented modeling studio, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room
open to the public.
(10) Sexually oriented motels. A sexually oriented motel may not permit a room to be occupied for
any form of consideration for two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten (10)
hours.
(11) Interior and exterior building standards. All sexually oriented businesses shall maintain the
required standards of interior and exterior design prescribed in section 4.09.005. No alteration of a
building's exterior or interior design or premises shall be undertaken without written authorization
from the police chief.
(12) Inspections. Any sexually oriented business shall be deemed to have consented to periodic
entry into and inspection of the business premises by the police department for the limited purpose of
determining whether such business enterprise is in compliance with this section. Such entry and
inspection shall take place during hours when such business is open to the public; provided, however,
that the owner may request a different time for inspection. A person who operates a sexually oriented
business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of
the premises by a representative of the police department any time it is occupied or open for business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/420
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.011), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.007 Violations
The following acts shall be class A misdemeanors, pursuant to Texas Local Government Code section 243.010,
and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided under state law. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs:
(1) Operation of a sexually oriented business prohibited under section 4.09.003(4);
(2) Sexually oriented entertainment taking place in violation of design standards set forth in
section 4.09.005;
(3) Operation of multiple sexually oriented businesses on licensed premises, in violation of section
4.09.004(d) or section 4.09.041(d);
(4) Transfer of ownership in violation of section 4.09.041(f);
(5) The owner/operator gave false or fraudulent information in the application required under
section 4.09.042 or otherwise acquired the license under false pretenses;
(6) Operating with an expired license, in violation of section 4.09.043(d);
(7) The commission of any act or omission in conducting a sexually oriented business which
would constitute grounds for denying a license application for a sexually oriented business pursuant
to section 4.09.045(1), (2), (3) or (4);
(8) Others occupying a stage, in violation of section 4.09.006(1)(A);
(9) Entertainment taking place in a cabaret or modeling studio other than on a stage, in violation of
section 4.09.006(1)(B);
(10) Tips collected in violation of section 4.09.006(1)(C);
(11) Establishment license not posted, in violation of section 4.09.006(2);
(12) Persons under 18 years of age on premises, in violation of section 4.09.006(3);
(13) Entertainer, server or employee being nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity,
in violation of section 4.09.006(4);
(14) Exterior display of live performances, or media or material depicting specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, in violation of section 4.09.006(5);
(15) The owner/operator knowingly allowing occurrence of specified criminal acts or specified
sexual activities, in violation of section 4.09.006(6);
(16) Customers in an area of the premises which is not permitted, in violation of section
4.09.006(7);
(17) Manager not on duty during the time the business is open, in violation of section 4.09.006(8);
(18) Bed, sofa, or mattress in modeling studio, in violation of section 4.09.006(9);
(19) Sexually oriented motel room occupied two (2) or more times in less than 10 hours, in
violation of section 4.09.006(10);
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/420
(20) Not maintaining the building's interior or exterior design standards, or altering the building's
exterior or interior design or premises, without written authorization from the police chief, in
violation of section 4.09.006(11);
(21) Prohibition of inspections by the police department, in violation of section 4.09.006(12);
(22) Operation of a sexually oriented business during a period of suspension imposed under
section 4.09.046;
(23) Suspension of a sexually oriented business license at least two (2) times in the preceding 12-
month period;
(24) Operation of a sexually oriented business during a period of suspension or revocation imposed
under section 4.09.046; and
(25) An establishment open to persons under the age of eighteen (18) years that is not subject to
section 4.09.005(e) makes available sexually oriented media in such a manner that:
(A) It is available to the general public for handling and inspection without assistance from
an employee of the business; or
(B) The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.013), adopted 6/17/08)
Secs. 4.09.008–4.09.040 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 4.09.041 Generally
(a) License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a sexually oriented business in
the city unless the owner, operator or lessee thereof has obtained a sexually oriented business license from the
city, or to operate such business after such license has expired or has been revoked or suspended by the city, or
following abandonment of the business.
(b) Employment in unlicensed business prohibited. It is unlawful for any entertainer, server, employee,
operator or owner to knowingly perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of
an unlicensed sexually oriented business.
(c) Presumptions. The failure to post a sexually oriented business license in the manner required herein shall
be prima facie evidence that such business has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie
evidence that any entertainer, employee, or owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in a
sexually oriented business in which a sexually oriented business license is not posted in the manner required
herein had knowledge that such business is not licensed.
(d) Separate license required for each business; change in use; multiple businesses in same building. A
separate license is required for each sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business license shall be
issued only for the sexually oriented business use listed on the application and only for single described
premises. Any change in the type of sexually oriented business use shall invalidate the outstanding sexually
oriented business license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use. The
establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or
portion thereof is prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/420
(e) Term of license. All sexually oriented business licenses shall be issued for a period of one year, subject to
annual renewal.
(f) Transfer of license. A licensee shall not transfer his license to other persons or entities, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address
designated in the application.
(g) License format. Each sexually oriented business license shall identify the class and type of business, state
the street address and legal description of the premises at which the business is to be operated, state that the
license is not transferable to other persons or entities, and identify the calendar year and month for which it is
issued.
(h) Additions to license. A person or other entity controlling more than ten percent (10%) of the sexually
oriented business may be added to an existing license by providing the required licensing background
information and successfully passing the required background checks. If such addition is interpreted by the
police chief to be a license transfer, it shall be prohibited.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.006), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.042 Application requirements
(a) Contents. All persons desiring to secure a license to operate a sexually oriented business shall make a
verified application with the city police chief. All applications shall be submitted in the name of an owner of the
sexually oriented business, who shall be deemed the applicant. The application shall be signed by the applicant
and notarized. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by it president. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall be signed by a partner. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the
application shall be signed by the manager or a managing member. In all other instances where the owner is not
an individual, the application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the owner. The city police chief
shall require proof of authorization before accepting an application. All applications shall be submitted on a
form supplied by the city police chief and shall require all of the following information:
(1) The name of the sexually oriented business and the class and type of sexually oriented business
to be operated on the licensed premises.
(2) The street address and legal description of the premises at which the sexually oriented business
is to be operated.
(3) The name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address and telephone
number, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and fingerprints of each
individual owner and each operator of the premises. If the owner is a partnership, this information
shall be supplied for each general or limited partner. If the owner is a corporation or limited liability
company, the same information shall be supplied for all stockholders or members who own more
than a ten percent (10%) interest in the company.
(4) The tax identification number and registered agent if the owner is required to have a tax
identification number or registered agent, or designation of an owner or operator for purposes of
notice and service of process. It shall be the duty of the applicant to update such information during
the term of the license.
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises, if different from above,
where the sexually oriented business will be located.
(6) A statement from the applicant whether the applicant, and each person required to be identified
in the application pursuant to this section, is previously operating in this or another city, county or
state, has had a sexually oriented business license of any type, and if that license has ever been
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/420
revoked or suspended, and, if so, the reason for the suspension or revocation and the business activity
subject to the suspension or revocation.
(7) A statement from the applicant and each person required to be identified in the application
pursuant to this section that each such person has not been convicted of, or released from
confinement for conviction of, or received an order of deferred adjudication on, any felony,
whichever is later, within five (5) years immediately preceding the application, or has not been
convicted or not received an order of deferred adjudication, a misdemeanor or municipal or county
ordinance violation, or released from confinement for conviction for a misdemeanor or municipal or
county ordinance violation, whichever event is later, within two (2) years immediately preceding the
application, where such felony, misdemeanor or municipal or county ordinance violation constitutes a
specified criminal act.
(8) The applicant and each person required to be identified in the application pursuant to this
section shall attach two copies of a recent photo to his or her application form.
(9) A statement signed under oath that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information
contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct and that the
applicant has read the provisions of the city ordinance regulating sexually oriented businesses.
(b) Schematic diagram required. Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application
shall be accompanied by a schematic diagram of the interior premises showing a plan thereof specifying the
location of one or more operator's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any
portion of the premises in which customers will not be permitted. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. The diagram shall also provide exterior information to
identify points of egress and ingress, parking, loading, fencing, lighting and signage. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale
or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The police chief may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the
internal and external configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(c) Incomplete applications. Failure to provide the information and documentation required herein shall
constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed by the city. The city police chief shall notify the
applicant whether or not the application is complete within ten (10) calendar days of the date the application is
received by the city police chief. In the event the city police chief has determined that the application is
incomplete, the notification sent by first class certified mail to the applicant shall include a written explanation
of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.007), adopted 6/17/08)
(d) Application fee. An application fee of $1,000.00 shall be submitted with each initial or renewal application
for a sexually oriented business. The city council may change the application fees by amending ordinance from
time to time.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 4.09.043 Notice of application; processing of application; decision
(a) Posting of notice. Each applicant for an initial sexually oriented business license shall, at least sixty (60)
days prior to the filing of the application for the license, place a sign of the size and lettering as required by the
police chief, but in no event less than 24 inches by 36 inches (24" x 36") and in two-inch lettering, which
provides notification and information specifically stating “A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE
APPLICATION IS PROPOSED TO BE FILED WITH THE CITY OF LAMESA,” and the date on which the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/420
application is proposed to be filed. This notice must also be written in the Spanish language in the same manner.
The applicant shall erect the sign along the property's public road frontage so as to be clearly visible and legible
from the public road. One sign shall be erected for each five hundred (500) foot increment of each public road
frontage on said property existing or any part thereof. The sign(s) shall remain on the premises until a decision is
rendered on the application.
(b) Application processing. Upon receipt of a complete application and the required filing fee for a sexually
oriented business license, the police chief shall investigate such application to determine whether the
information contained in the application is accurate and whether the application meets the requirements herein
regarding the absence of specified criminal acts. The applicant shall be required to contact the fire marshal for
the city volunteer fire department, who shall determine whether the structure where the sexually oriented
business will be conducted complies with the requirements and meets the standards of the applicable fire code.
The fire marshal shall report the results of his investigation to the police chief not later than fourteen (14)
calendar days from the date the application is deemed complete by the police chief. The police chief shall
investigate and determine whether the application meets all other requirements of this article.
(c) Decision. The police chief shall approve or disapprove the application based upon his own investigation
and the report of the fire marshal within sixty (60) days from the date the application is deemed complete by the
police chief, in accordance with the criteria in section 4.09.042. The police chief shall approve the issuance of a
license only if the appropriate license fee has been paid, the applicant is qualified and all the applicable
requirements set forth herein are met. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the police chief's decision
within ten (10) calendar days thereof.
(d) Renewal. A license issued under this division may be renewed by making application to the police chief
on application forms provided for that purpose. Licenses shall expire on the last day of the calendar month
during which the license was issued or renewed during the previous year. Renewal applications for such licenses
shall be submitted no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the license. Upon timely application
therefor, a license issued under the provisions of this division shall be renewed by issuance of a new license
upon demonstration that the criteria for issuance of the original license have been met at the time the application
is submitted for renewal.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.008), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.044 Appeal of denial
(a) Appeals board. The city council shall serve as the appeals board for licenses issued under this article.
(b) Processing. An applicant may appeal an unfavorable decision of the police chief by filing a written
petition with the city secretary requesting a hearing on the denial of the application within ten (10) calendar days
of the date the applicant receives notification of the police chief's decision. The appeal shall be scheduled to be
heard within twenty (20) calendar days of the date the petition is received in the office of the city secretary. The
city secretary shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place for the hearing on the appeal.
(c) Decision. The city council shall issue a decision with findings within ten (10) calendar days after any
hearing held in accordance with this section in accordance with the criteria in section 4.09.045. The minutes of
the city council meeting shall show the action taken on the application, and, if the license is granted, the
commissioners court [city council] shall direct the police chief to issue the proper license.
(d) Notification of disapproval. If the application for a license is disapproved on appeal, the applicant shall be
sent a letter of notification by registered or certified mail within five (5) calendar days to the applicant's last
known mailing address, and the letter of notification shall state the basis for such disapproval. Any applicant
aggrieved by the decision may seek judicial review in the appropriate court.
(e) Judicial review. An applicant may seek judicial review of the denial of a license by the police chief, or
following the decision of the city council on his appeal, at his election.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/420
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.009), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.045 Criteria for denial
No license for a sexually oriented business shall be issued or renewed if one or more of the following conditions
exist:
(1) The applicant knowingly failed to supply all of the information requested on the application;
(2) The applicant knowingly gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the
application;
(3) The applicant, any other owner, the spouse of any owner, or any operator has been convicted,
or released from incarceration for conviction, or has received an order of deferred adjudication on
any specified criminal act during the time period set forth herein;
(4) The applicant or any other owner has had a sexually oriented business license or comparable
license revoked or suspended during the past five (5) years;
(5) The proposed business does not meet locational standards of section 4.09.004;
(6) The proposed business does not meet the design standards for the particular type of business
required by section 4.09.005;
(7) For renewal applications, a suspension or revocation proceeding is pending, in which case the
decision on the application shall be rendered following the outcome of the suspension or revocation
proceeding.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.010), adopted 6/17/08)
Sec. 4.09.046 Suspension or revocation
(a) Review of compliance. When the police chief has information that there has been a violation of any
provision of this article by a licensee or at a licensed premises, or any of the conditions required for the issuance
of a license have changed, or that anything on the application for the license may have been untrue or
incomplete, then the police chief shall schedule a hearing before the city council in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(b) Hearing. Where a hearing is required under this section, written notice shall be sent to the licensee within
five (5) calendar days of the complaint. The date of the hearing shall occur no less than ten (10) and no more
than thirty (30) calendar days after written notice has been sent to the licensee that a complaint has been filed
with the police chief. The hearing shall be to make findings of fact in the matter.
(1) Notice of such hearing shall be in writing, and shall set forth the reason for the hearing or the
complaint against the licensee, and shall be served upon the licensee in person or by registered or
certified mail to the address listed in the license application. If the police chief is not able to serve
notice upon the licensee in person, and any notice sent by mail is returned by the postal service, the
police chief shall cause such notice to be posted at the principal entrance of the sexually oriented
business, and such posting shall be a valid means of service.
(2) An applicant, licensee, or complainant shall have full right to be represented by counsel and to
produce witnesses and other evidence, and to pose questions to all witnesses who appear before him.
Oral evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation. All proceedings in such hearings shall be
recorded and transcribed as required by law. The city council may receive evidence relevant to the
issues from the applicant or licensee or from other sources.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/420
(c) Decision; notice of decision. The city council shall issue findings of fact and an order within ten (10)
calendar days of the close of the hearing. The city council may dismiss the complaint, or suspend or revoke a
license previously issued, or renew or refuse to renew a license previously issued. The city council's order shall
be served upon the applicant, licensee or complainant in person or by registered or certified mail to the
applicant's, licensee's or complainant's last known address. If the police chief is not able to serve such order upon
the licensee, or applicant, in the manner stated in this subsection, the police chief shall cause such order to be
posted at the principal entrance of the regulated use, and such posting shall be a valid means of service. If the
city council finds and concludes from the evidence that the applicant or licensee has violated any of the
provisions listed in this article, the council may suspend or revoke the license in accordance with the standards
in subsection (e) or (f), as the case may be, or, in the case of a renewal application, refuse to renew such license,
in accordance with the provisions of license renewal.
(d) License to remain in effect pending decision. Until a decision has been reached by the city council in the
proceedings under this section, the license of the sexually oriented business shall remain in effect.
(e) Criteria for suspension. Upon a finding by the city council of a violation of any of the following provisions
of this article, the sexually oriented business license shall be suspended:
(1) Sexually oriented entertainment taking place in violation of design standards in section
4.09.005;
(2) Operating with an expired license, in violation of section 4.09.043(d);
(3) Others occupying a stage, in violation of section 4.09.006(1)(A);
(4) Entertainment taking place in a cabaret or modeling studio other than on a stage, in violation of
section 4.09.006(1)(B);
(5) Tips collected in violation of section 4.09.006(1)(C);
(6) Establishment license not posted, in violation of section 4.09.006(2);
(7) Persons under 18 years old on premises, in violation of section 4.09.006(3);
(8) Entertainer, server or employee nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, in
violation of section 4.09.006(4);
(9) Exterior display of live performances, or media or material depicting specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, in violation of section 4.09.006(5);
(10) Customers in area of the premises which is not permitted, in violation of section 4.09.006(7);
(11) Manager not on duty during the time the business is open, in violation of section 4.09.006(8);
(12) Bed, sofa, or mattress in modeling studio, in violation of section 4.09.006(9);
(13) Sexually oriented motel room occupied two (2) or more times in less than ten (10) hours, in
violation of section 4.09.006(10);
(14) Not maintaining the building's interior or exterior design standards, or altering the building's
exterior or interior design or premises without written authorization from the police chief, in violation
of section 4.09.006(11);
(15) Prohibition of inspections by the police department, in violation of section 4.09.006(12).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/420
(f) Criteria for revocation. Upon a finding by the city council of a violation of any of the following provisions
of this article, the sexually oriented business license shall be revoked:
(1) Operation of a sexually oriented business prohibited under section 4.09.003(4);
(2) Operation of multiple sexually oriented business on licensed premises, in violation of section
4.09.004(d) or section 4.09.041(d);
(3) Transfer of ownership in violation of section 4.09.041(f);
(4) The owner/operator gave false or fraudulent information in the application required under
section 4.09.042 or otherwise acquired the license under false pretenses;
(5) Any grounds for denying a license application for a sexually oriented business pursuant to
section 4.09.045(1), (2), (3) or (4);
(6) The owner/operator knowingly allowed occurrence of a specified criminal act or specified
sexual activity, in violation of section 4.09.006(6);
(7) Operation of sexually oriented business during a period of suspension imposed under this
section; or
(8) A sexually oriented business license shall be revoked automatically upon a finding by the city
council that the license has been suspended at least two times in the preceding 12-month period.
(g) Duration of suspension or revocation. A suspension of a sexually oriented business license shall remain in
effect for a period of sixty (60) days, during which time the licensee shall not be issued a license for any other
sexually oriented business. A revocation of a sexually oriented business license shall remain in effect for a
period of one (1) year, during which time the licensee shall not be issued a license for any other sexually
oriented business.
(h) Judicial review. Any license holder aggrieved by the decision of the city council to suspend or revoke such
license under the provisions of this section may seek judicial review in a manner provided by law. The police
chief may stay the suspension or revocation of the order pending judicial review for a period of not more than
thirty (30) calendar days, upon petition of an owner of the sexually oriented business.
(Ordinance O-06-08, sec. 1 (48.012), adopted 6/17/08)
ARTICLE 4.10 OIL AND GAS WELLS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.10.001 Title
The title of this article and the name by which it shall be known is the city oil and gas well ordinance. (1998
Code, sec. 45.001)
Sec. 4.10.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms, wherever and whenever used or appearing herein,
shall have the scope and meaning hereafter defined and set out in connection with each:
Curbline. The line established by the city for the particular street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/420
Lease. Any tract of land subject to an oil, gas and mineral lease or other oil and gas development contract, or any
unit composed of several tracts and leases but operated as one lease, and any tract of land in which the minerals
are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him, but which, due to the fee royalty ownership, is
developed and operated as a separate tract, but it shall not mean any tract heretofore to hereafter conveyed or
used for pipeline right-of-way.
Permittee. The person to whom is issued a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of a well and/or the
construction, installation and operation of any pipeline facility under this article, and his heirs, legal
representatives, successors and assigns.
Person. One or more individuals, firms, companies or corporations.
Right-of-way. Is expressly limited to all public right-of-way or streets or other public property within the city.
Street. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area, or other public right-of-way,
including the entire right-of-way.
Technical words. All technical or oil and gas industry words or phrases used herein and not specifically defined
shall have that meaning customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry.
Titles. When the title of any city official is used herein such shall include any duly authorized representative.
Trunkline pipeline. Common carrier pipelines and other main pipelines not included in the definition of
gathering lines, expressly including their right-of-way as defined and established by instruments of record in the
office of the county clerk; the phrase “gathering lines” as used herein shall mean all pipelines operated as an
incident to the development and operation of oil and/or gas fields and secondary recovery projects, and the word
“pipelines” whenever and wherever used herein but not as a part of the preceding phrases shall mean trunkline
pipelines and gathering lines as hereinabove defined.
Well. Any hole or holes, bore or bores, to any sand, formation, strata or depth, for the purpose of producing any
oil, gas or liquid hydrocarbon or any of them.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.002)
Sec. 4.10.003 Oil and gas inspector
(a) The office of oil and gas inspector in and for the city is hereby created.
(b) The oil and gas inspector shall be appointed by the city manager, with the approval of the city council, and
said inspector may have other duties as designated by the city council.
(c) It shall be the duty of the oil and gas inspector to enforce the provisions of this article.
(d) Any person who may be aggrieved by any ruling, order and/or decision of the oil and gas inspector shall
have the right of appeal to the city council from such ruling, order and/or decision; provided, however, that any
such appeal must be taken, if at all, within ten (10) days immediately following the filing of such rule, order
and/or decision in the records of the office of the oil and gas inspector.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.003)
Sec. 4.10.004 Exceptions
(a) Work done in new developments of the city by utility and street contractors under and in conformity with
the city's subdivision policy is exempt from the provisions of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/420
(b) Work done by the city under city contract and under directions of the city is exempt from the provisions of
this article.
(c) Work done by public utility companies who operate under a current franchise from the city is exempt from
the bond and insurance provisions of this article when doing such work with their own personnel, but this
exemption does not apply to contractors doing work for said public utility company.
(d) Work done by plumbers who are qualified and bonded with a valid permit from the city inspection
department is exempt from the bond and insurance provisions of this article but must comply with the balance of
this article.
(e) No permit for construction within a public right-of-way shall be issued unless the written application is
accompanied by such plans submitted to the oil and gas inspector and are approved by the city manager.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.004)
Sec. 4.10.005 Violation of state or federal law or regulations
Any violation of law of the state or any rules, regulations or requirements of any state or federal regulatory body
having jurisdiction in reference to drilling, completing, equipping, operating, producing, installing, maintaining
or abandoning any oil and/or gas well, pipelines or related appurtenances, equipment or facilities, or in reference
to firewalls, fire port blow-out protection, safety protection or convenience of persons or property, shall be a
violation of this article and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions hereof. (1998 Code, sec.
45.005)
Sec. 4.10.006 Penalties
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision hereof,
irrespective of whether or not the verbiage of each section hereof contains the specific language that such
violation or failure to comply is unlawful and is an offense. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article or any of the provisions of a permit issued pursuant hereto, or who shall fail to comply with the
terms hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, on conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and the violation of each separate provision of this article, and of such
permit, shall be considered a separate offense, and each day's violation of each separate provision thereof shall
be considered a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, it is further provided that the city council
may, at a regular or special session or meeting thereof, provided ten (10) days' notice has been given to the
permittee that revocation is to be considered at such meeting, revoke or suspend any permit issued under this
article and under which operations are being conducted, in the event the permittee thereof has violated any
provisions of such permit or this article. In the event the permit is revoked, the permittee may make application
to the city council for a reissuance of such permit. (1998 Code, sec. 45.006)
Sec. 4.10.007 Codes, tests and standards of performance
All references in this article to ASA's or USA's codes, tests or standards of performance are hereby eliminated,
and there is hereby substituted for all such references ANSI codes, tests and standards of performance. (1998
Code, sec. 45.007)
Secs. 4.10.008–4.10.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.10.041 Required
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee,
independent contractor or servant for any other person to drill or commence to drill any well or to install any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/420
trunkline or pipeline facility within the city limits without a permit having first been issued by the authority of
the city council in accordance with the terms of this article, and it shall be illegal and unlawful for any person
acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor or servant for any other person to
inject water, gas or other substances for repressuring or water flood purposes within or under the city limits.
(b) When a permit has been issued for the drilling of a well, such permit shall constitute sufficient authority
for drilling, operation, production, gathering of production, maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging
and abandonment of the well, and for the construction and use of all facilities reasonably necessary or
convenient in connection therewith, including gathering lines and discharge lines, by the permittee and its
employees, agents and contractors, provided that such activities are not in conflict with any of the conditions and
provisions contained in such permit. However, a new or supplemental permit shall be obtained before such a
well may be deepened below the geological formation in which it was originally completed and no well may be
used for repressurizing or injection (except during fracture operations) of water, gas or other substances within
or under the city limits.
(c) When a permit has been issued for the installation of any trunkline or pipeline, such permit shall constitute
authority for the construction, operation and maintenance of such well, but shall not constitute authority for the
conversion of such wells for injection of water or gas for water flood or repressuring purposes. Such permit,
however, shall constitute authority for repair and abandonment of such facility, and for all facilities reasonably
necessary or convenient in connection therewith (including gathering lines), by the permittee and its employees,
agents and contractors, provided that such authorized activities are in compliance with all of the provisions of
this article and provided that such activities are not in conflict with any of the conditions and provisions
contained in such permit.
(d) No one permit shall authorize the drilling of more than one well or the installation of more than one
trunkline or pipeline.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.021)
Sec. 4.10.042 Application; filing fee
(a) Every application for a permit to drill a well, trunkline or pipeline shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant or by some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and it shall be filed with the city secretary. In
case the permit is requested for the purpose of drilling a well or re-entering and drilling to a deeper formation,
the application shall be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) in cash, and
said filing fee shall be paid by cashier's check or certified check made payable to the city.
(b) A separate application shall be required for each well, trunkline or pipeline. The application shall include
the following information:
(1) The date of the application.
(2) Name of the applicant.
(3) Address of the applicant.
(4) Proposed site of the well (including proposed location of gathering lines or trunklines or
pipelines), including the following:
(A) Name of the lease owner (where applicable).
(B) Accurate description of the land and a detail plat of all equipment and facility
installations.
(C) Location with respect to property lines, right-of-way boundaries and grades (where
applicable).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/420
(5) Type of derrick (if any) to be used.
(6) The proposed depth of the well.
(7) Detailed explanation of operating pressures of all pipelines of facilities.
(8) Location of compressor, pressure control, or safety devices with explanation of operating
characteristics of each.
(9) The name of the person or persons to be notified in case of emergency.
(10) The application to install any pipeline with pressures in excess of 250 psi should include
details and specifications of the safety provisions and equipment.
(11) If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall contain the name of its registered agent
and address of its registered office.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.022)
Sec. 4.10.043 Issuance or denial
(a) The city council, within sixty (60) days after the filing of the application for a permit to drill a well or
install a trunkline or pipeline or any primary system for the production of oil, gas and condensate, shall
determine whether or not the application complies in all respects with the provisions of this article, and if it does
so comply the city council shall then fix the amount of the bond and insurance provided for herein, and shall
issue a permit for the drilling of a well or the installation of the facilities for which application has been made.
Each permit shall:
(1) By reference have incorporated therein all the provisions of this article with the same force and
effect as if this article were copied verbatim in such permit;
(2) Specify the location of the proposed well and all pipelines with particularity to lot number,
block number, name of addition or subdivision, section line or other available correct legal
description;
(3) Contain and specify that the term of the permit shall be for a period of one (1) year from the
date of the permit and until such time as the permittee has permanently abandoned the operation of
such well or facility for which the permit was issued;
(4) Contain and specify such other terms and provisions as may be necessary in a particular case to
accomplish the purposes of this article;
(5) Specify the total depth to which the well (if any) may be drilled, not exceeding the proposed
depth;
(6) Specify that no actual operations shall be commenced until the permittee shall file and have
approved an indemnity bond in the designated principal amount as so determined by the city council
or has complied with section 4.10.047 herein.
(b) Such permit, in duplicate originals, shall be signed by the oil and gas inspector and, prior to delivery to the
permittee, shall be signed by the permittee (with one original to be retained by the city and one by the
permittee), and, when so signed, said permit shall constitute the permittee's drilling and installation license, as
well as the contractual obligation of the permittee to comply with the terms of such permit and bond and of this
article. The issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article constitutes a contract between the city
and the permittee in that the permittee shall be liable and must pay the reasonable attorney's fees and costs
incurred by the city in a successful enforcement of the provisions of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/420
(c) (1) In determining whether to grant or deny any application for a permit required by this
article and in determining the conditions and provisions to be contained in any such permit, the city
council shall include in its consideration the following facts:
(A) Whether the proposed facility will comply with all provisions of this article.
(B) Whether the proposed facility will conflict with the comprehensive plan for physical
development of the city.
(C) Whether specific sites have been designated or plats of the property in the area concerned
for such oil and gas facilities as are the subject of the application.
(D) Whether, for any reason, the proposed facility will constitute a hazard to property or
persons.
In acting on any such application, the city council shall determine whether the application
complies with or is consistent with the above-listed criteria as of the time of the granting
or denying of the permit and not as of the time of the making of the application for such
permit.
(2) Once a permit has been granted by the city council, any subsequent change of conditions not
under the control of the permittee shall not require any action on the part of the permittee to improve
or change his existing facilities if such existing facilities complied with the provisions of this article
before said change of conditions. However, the preceding sentence does not apply to facilities which
are actually abandoned or relocated for whatever reason, in which case such relocated facilities must
comply with all provisions of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.023)
Sec. 4.10.044 Suspension or cancellation
In the event of the failure of the permittee to comply with any provision of this article, the oil and gas inspector
shall issue a written notice to the permittee of the nature of the noncompliance and stating such reasonable time
necessary to gain compliance. After the lapse of such reasonable time, the city council may suspend the permit
for a period of time or cancel the permit. (1998 Code, sec. 45.024)
Sec. 4.10.045 Supplemental permit for deeper drilling
(a) Once any well has either been completed as a producer or abandoned as a dry hole, it shall be unlawful
and an offense for any person to drill such well to a deeper geological formation than that reached in the prior
drilling operations without the permittee as to such well obtaining a supplemental permit after filing a
supplemental application with the city secretary specifying:
(1) The condition of the well and the casing therein.
(2) The depth to which it is proposed such well be deepened.
(3) The proposed casing program to be used in connection with proposed deepening operations.
(b) In the event the oil and gas inspector is satisfied that such well may be deepened with the same degree of
safety as existing in the original well, a supplemental permit may be issued without additional filing fee to the
permittee authorizing the deepening and operation of the well to such specified depth as applied for, provided
the derrick and drilling equipment have not been removed from the drill site. In any deeper drilling or any
deeper production operations, the permittee shall comply with all provisions contained in this article and
applicable to the drilling, completion and operation of a well or wells.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/420
(c) If the operator has removed the derrick and drilling equipment from the location, the supplemental permit
shall comply with the requirements specified for a permit in section 4.10.042 of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.025)
Sec. 4.10.046 Conduits on streets and alleys
(a) No permittee shall make any excavation for any purpose or construct any lines for conveyance of fuel,
water or minerals on, under or through the streets and alleys of the city without express permission of the oil and
gas inspector in writing, and then only in strict compliance with the ordinances of the city; provided, however,
that emergency repairs may be made without such permission when in the good faith opinion of the permittee
the delay required to obtain written permission would involve a hazard to person or to property, but the permittee
shall notify the city as soon as possible thereafter.
(b) The gathering lines and flow lines hereafter installed in the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of
transporting oil, gas and/or water in conjunction with the operation of any well, tank or tank battery or injection
or gathering system are hereby limited to a maximum operating gauge pressure of 250 psi (pounds per square
inch) unless otherwise specifically approved by the oil and gas inspector. The location of any such gathering
lines and flow lines, if not specified in the permit, must be specifically approved by the oil and gas inspector.
(c) The pipeline shall be tested prior to being placed in service to 150% of expected operating pressure, but
not less than 100 psi.
(d) The companies responsible for any and all pipelines now in existence or hereafter installed within the city
limits are hereby required to furnish the city with an “as built” plot plan showing the location of all their
facilities for permanent record with the city.
(e) All pipelines within the city limits, other then the utility lines of the city and the franchised distribution
system of electric light and power, designed or utilized to transport oil, gas or water in connection with the
production and transportation of oil and/or gas shall hereafter be installed with the minimum of cover or backfill
specified by the then-applicable ANSI code for such pipelines. The oil and gas inspector is authorized to
approve a lesser cover or specify a greater cover or backfill in special cases when in the opinion of the oil and
gas inspector such variation is advisable and/or will not increase the degree of hazard.
(f) The requirements for construction in public right-of-way must conform to such ordinances of the city
regulating such construction.
(g) The digging up, breaking, excavating, tunneling, undermining, breaking up or damaging of any street as
herein defined, or the leaving upon any street of any earth or other material or obstruction, shall not be permitted
unless such persons shall first have obtained written permission from the city manager; provided, however,
emergency repairs may be made without such permission when in the good faith opinion of the permittee the
delay required to obtain such written permission would involve a hazard to person or property, but the permittee
shall notify the city as soon as possible thereafter and shall be liable for any damages occurring.
(h) The oil and gas inspector is authorized to determine placement location and depth and separation of lines
requirements in accordance with accepted industry standards.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.026)
Sec. 4.10.047 Bond and insurance requirements
In the event a permit or certificate of compliance shall be issued by the city council or the oil and gas inspector
under the terms of this article for the operation or drilling of a well or the installation of a trunkline pipeline, no
actual operations shall be commenced or continued until the permittee shall file with the city secretary a bond
and certificate of insurance as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/420
(1) Bond.
(A) A bond in the principal sum of such amount as has been determined by the city council,
but not to be less than $25,000.00, and the bond shall be executed by a reliable insurance
company authorized to do business in the state as surety and the applicant as principal, running
in the city for the benefit of the city and all persons concerned, conditioned that the permittee
will comply with the terms and conditions of this article in the drilling and/or operation of the
well or operation of any pipeline.
(B) Such bond shall become effective on or before the date it is filed with the city secretary
and will remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months subsequent to the
expiration of the term of the permit issued, and, in addition, the bond will be conditioned that
the permittee will promptly pay all legally imposed fines, penalties other assessments imposed
upon the permittee by reason of his breach of any of the terms, provisions and conditions of this
article and that the permittee will promptly restore the streets and sidewalks and other public
property of the city which may be disturbed or damaged in the operations to their former
conditions, and that the permittee will promptly clear all premises of all litter, trash, waste and
other substances used, allowed or occurring in the operations and will, after abandonment or
completion, grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as
possible to those which existed when operations were first commenced, and that the permittee
will indemnify and hold the city harmless from any and all liability growing out of or
attributable to the granting of such permit. If at any time the city council shall deem any
permittee's bond to be insufficient for any reason, it may require the permittee to file a new
bond.
(C) If after completion of a producing well or any facility or pipeline for which a bond is
required by this article and if the permittee has complied with all the provisions of this article,
such as removing derricks, clearing premises, erection of fences, etc., he may apply to the city
council to have the bond reduced to a sum of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) on
each well or facility for the remainder of the time the well produces or the facility is operated
without reworking. During major well workover or in-hole remedial operations requiring the
use of a rotary rig and/or high pressure injection equipment (such as deepening, cementing,
fracing, reperforating, etc.), the amount of the bond shall be increased to the original amount. A
trunkline pipeline installation shall not be considered as completed for a period of thirty (30)
days.
(2) Insurance.
(A) In addition to the bond required in subsection (1) of this section, the permittee shall carry
a policy or policies of standard comprehensive public liability insurance, including contractual
liability covering bodily injuries and property damages, naming the permittee and the city, with
an insurance company authorized to do business with the state. Such policy or policies in the
aggregate shall provide for the following minimum coverages:
(i) Bodily injuries: $100,000.00 one person; $300,000.00 one accident.
(ii) Property damage: $200,000.00.
The permittee shall file with the city secretary duplicate original copies of policies of
insurance as above stated and shall obtain the written approval thereof by the oil and gas
inspector, who shall act thereon within ten (10) days from the date of such filing. The
insurance policy or policies shall not be canceled without written notice to the city
secretary at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of such cancellation. In the event
such insurance policy or policies are canceled, the permit granted shall terminate and the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/420
permittee's right to operate under such permit shall cease until the permittee files
additional insurance as provided herein.
(B) If, after completion of a well or pipeline, the permittee has complied with all the
provisions of this article, such as removing derricks, completion of the pipeline, clearing
premises, etc., he may apply to the oil and gas inspector to have such policies reduced as
follows:
(i) Bodily injuries: $50,000.00 one person; $100,000.00 one accident.
(ii) Property damage: $50,000.00 for the remainder of the time such well produces
without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of the insurance policy or
policies shall be increased to the original amount.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.027)
Sec. 4.10.048 Exceptions to bond and insurance requirements
The city council may elect to make an exception to the requirements of this article when in their opinion the
intent and purposes for the requirements of the bonds and insurance can be assured by any of the following
means:
(1) Acceptance of a guaranty of indemnity to the city in lieu of bond and a plan of self-insurance in
the case of financially responsible operators.
(2) Acceptance of a blanket bond and a single policy of insurance to cover all operations of the
permittee within the city limits.
(3) Application of bond and insurance requirements acceptable to the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.028)
Sec. 4.10.049 Liability for attorney's fees
The issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article constitutes a contract between the city and the
permittee that the permittee shall be liable and must pay reasonable attorney's fees and costs incurred by the city
in a successful enforcement of the provisions of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 45.029)
Secs. 4.10.050–4.10.080 Reserved
Division 3. Operational Regulations
Sec. 4.10.081 Proximity of facilities to streets and alleys
No oil or gas well, separator or tank battery covered by this article shall be located closer than 150 feet to any
street, road, highway or alley, whether same is existing, platted or dedicated, without the written permission of
the city council. (1998 Code, sec. 45.041)
Sec. 4.10.082 Additional location restrictions
(a) No well shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled at any location nor for any
storage tank to be located nearer than 400 feet to any residence or commercial building without the applicant
having first secured the written permission of the city council and the landowner.
(b) No high pressure gas injection well or compressor shall be allowed or used within or under the city limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/420
(c) No residential, commercial or industrial structure other than structures necessary to operate the pipeline
shall be erected or moved to a location nearer than thirty (30) feet to any pipeline transporting gas when the
pipeline operating pressure is greater than 250 psi unless a greater or lesser distance is recommended by the
then-applicable ANSI code.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.042)
Sec. 4.10.083 Derrick and rig
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to use or operate in connection with the drilling or reworking
of any well within the city limits any wooden derrick or any steam-powered rig, and all engines shall be
equipped with adequate mufflers approved by the oil and gas inspector. No person shall permit any drilling rig or
derrick to remain on the premises or drilling site for a period longer than sixty (60) days after completion or
abandonment of the well. At all times from the start of erection of a derrick, mast, or ginpole until the well is
abandoned and plugged or completed as a producer, [the well] shall be enclosed with a fence as herein provided
at all times when workmen or the permittee are not on such premises. (1998 Code, sec. 45.043)
Sec. 4.10.084 Slush pits
Steel slush pits shall be used in connection with all drilling and reworking operations. Such pits and contents
shall be removed from the premises and drilling site within thirty (30) days after completion of the well, either
as a dry hole or producer. No earthen slush pits shall be used. (1998 Code, sec. 45.044)
Sec. 4.10.085 Operations and equipment generally
(a) All drilling and other mineral operations at any well performed by a permittee under this article shall be
conducted in accordance with the practices of a reasonable and prudent operator in the county area. All casing,
valves and blow-out preventers, drilling fluid, tubing, bradenheads, Christmas trees and wellhead connections
shall be of a type and quality consistent with the practices of a reasonable and prudent operator. Each permittee
under this article shall observe and follow the regulations of the state railroad commission.
(b) All operations relative to the design, installation, maintenance and operation of pipelines shall conform to
the requirements of this article and the applicable ANSI codes and the standards of performance of the
reasonable and prudent operators of the trades involved.
(c) All pipelines hereafter constructed shall be of all new pipe and shall comply with ANSI specifications.
(d) Valves shall be installed on all pipelines at such locations and spacing to safely and adequately control the
operation of the line and to minimize the quantity of gas, oil or water that would be released from the line in case
of line failure or rupture. The types and locations of all valves shall be indicated on a plan layout and approved
by the oil and gas inspector.
(e) Electric motors shall be used to drive all gas compressors, pumps or pumping units in the oil and gas
operations, and all electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the ordinances of the city and the
appropriate national codes.
(f) Pipeline location markers shall be approved as to type and location by the oil and gas inspector, and the
removal of any pipeline marker without the express permission of the oil and gas inspector shall constitute a
violation of the provisions of this article.
(g) The pipeline crossing thoroughfares designated by the oil and gas inspector, even though cased by conduit,
shall be cased, vented and marked in accordance with accepted practice of the pipeline industry.
(h) The delivery to or the removal of equipment or material from the drill site shall be limited to the hours
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., except in cases of emergency. No pipe racking outside the derrick will be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/420
permitted during the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except in cases of emergency. All lighting shall be
shielded and directed so as to confine the direct rays to the drill site.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.045)
Sec. 4.10.086 Cleanliness and sanitation
The premises shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition satisfactory to the health officer and the oil and gas
inspector of the city. The permittee shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any mud, waste water, oil, slush
or other waste matter from flowing into the alleys, streets, lots or leases within the city limits. (1998 Code, sec.
45.046)
Sec. 4.10.087 Motive power for operations
Electric motors shall be used to drive all pumping units, pumps or compressors and all transfer operations. No
electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall conform to the
ordinances of the city and the appropriate national codes. (1998 Code, sec. 45.047)
Sec. 4.10.088 Storage tanks and separators
(a) A permittee shall use, construct and operate a steel conventional separator and such other approved tanks
and appurtenances as are necessary for treating oil and/or water, with each of such facilities to be so constructed
and maintained as to be vapor tight and equipped with a vapor recovery unit. Each oil/gas separator shall be
equipped with both a regulation pressure relief safety valve and a bursting head which shall be vented into a tank
to eliminate spraying. All such tanks shall be placed aboveground, and tanks shall be placed upon a suitable
earthen or concrete pad.
(b) The use of a central tank battery is permitted.
(c) The tank or tanks shall be enclosed within a conventional type firewall constructed of compacted earth,
and sufficient water shall be used during the firewall construction to assure adequate compaction.
(d) The firewall enclosing the tanks shall have a minimum capacity equal to two (2) times the volume of the
tanks enclosed, with provision to pump out and keep clean.
(e) The top or crown of the firewall shall have a normal height of three (3) feet above normal ground
elevation. The location of the tank site shall be approved by the city oil and gas inspector.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.048)
Sec. 4.10.089 Fences
(a) Any person who completes or operates any producing well shall have the obligation to enclose such well,
together with its surface facilities, by a substantial fence six (6) feet high and properly built so as to keep persons
and/or animals out of the enclosure. All gates and exitways shall be kept locked at all times, except when the
permittee or his employees are within the enclosure. In a developed residential area, the permittee will be
obligated to landscape and maintain the appearance of the site to conform to the surrounding residential area. In
noncongested residential areas, the oil and gas inspector may designate the type of fencing to be erected.
However, if the surrounding area subsequently develops into a residential neighborhood, the permittee will be
obligated to conform to the residential landscaping, fencing and appearance.
(b) The well site, tank site, and tank battery site shall not be used for the storage of pipe, equipment or
materials except during the drilling or servicing of the well, pipelines, and tanks, unless the site is located in an
industrial or manufacturing zone.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.049)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/420
Sec. 4.10.090 Nuisances
All oil operations, drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to eliminate, as far
as practicable, dust, noise, vibration and noxious odors and shall be conducted in accordance with the reasonable
and prudent practices incident to exploration for, drilling for, and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon
substances. (1998 Code, sec. 45.050)
Sec. 4.10.091 Fire prevention
(a) Any permittee engaged in the drilling or operation of an oil and/or gas well or the operation of any facility
used in conjunction with the production of oil and/or gas within the city limits shall take reasonable precautions
to prevent gas from escaping into the air and shall not flare or burn gas or oil from any pipe stack, pit or any
similar means within the city limits; provided, gas may be burned for a limited time when necessary to complete
any oil and/or gas well upon the original completion or upon the recompletion of workover jobs upon oil and/or
gas wells so long as the same does not constitute a fire hazard to the property of others within the vicinity of
such oil and/or gas well.
(b) It shall hereafter be unlawful to operate a well for oil and/or gas without a four (4) inch header laid over
the top of the tank and a two and one-half (2-1/2) inch line extending from the tank battery to a point designated
by the oil and gas inspector. The manner and method provided for connection at such point shall be determined
by the fire department of the city so that foamite or other chemicals may be pumped through such line or lines
and the header of the tanks into such tanks to extinguish fires in the tanks.
(c) Emergency firefighting apparatus and supplies, subject to approval by the fire department of the city, shall
be maintained on the drilling site at all times during the drilling operations.
(d) The permittee shall place a sign at each well location or site to identify the well in accordance with state
railroad commission standards.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.051)
Sec. 4.10.092 Abandonment and plugging
Whenever any well is abandoned, it shall be the obligation of the permittee and the operator of the well to
comply with the regulations of the state railroad commission in connection with the abandonment and plugging
of a well. A copy of the plugging and abandonment form shall be furnished to the oil and gas inspector. (1998
Code, sec. 45.052)
Sec. 4.10.093 Disposal of salt water and other impurities
The permittee shall take all reasonable precautions for the disposal of all salt water and other impurities which
he may bring to the surface so as not to contaminate the potable water supply, present or prospective, or to injure
surface vegetation; and no salt water or other substance will be disposed of in wells or earthen tanks within the
city. (1998 Code, sec. 45.053)
Sec. 4.10.094 Annual inspections
Each production well and/or pumping unit, together with their associated equipment (tankage, separators,
structures, fencing, landscaping, etc.), regulated by this article shall be inspected annually by the oil and gas
inspector for compliance with the various applicable regulations. If any nonconformance is found, the permittee
will be notified in writing of the violation immediately, and the permittee shall begin to institute proceedings to
come into full compliance with this article. An annual inspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be
paid by the permittee. (1998 Code, sec. 45.054)
Sec. 4.10.095 Landscaping
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/420
The land surrounding any well or surface facility shall be planted and maintained with grass, plants or shrubs
during production operations, but only to the extent reasonably compatible with the general status of the surfaces
in the vicinity. The entire controlled site shall be adequately landscaped except for those portions occupied by
any required structure, appurtenance or driveway, and all such landscaping shall be maintained in good condition
at all times. (1998 Code, sec. 45.055)
Sec. 4.10.096 Approval of equipment; operations near residential areas
All equipment necessarily incident to the production of oil and/or gas within the city limits shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the appropriate qualified inspectors (oil and gas inspector, building inspector,
electrical inspector, fire and safety inspector, etc.). All operations will be maintained in such a manner that will
minimize dust, noise, noxious odors, vibrations and other offensive conditions to the surrounding residential
area. Any aboveground facility which is located within or immediately adjoining any subdivided area where ten
percent (10%) of the lots or subdivided tracts within a one-half (1/2) mile radius thereof are improved with
residential structures or located within one-half (1/2) mile of any school or public building shall be considered
within a developed residential area. (1998 Code, sec. 45.056)
Sec. 4.10.097 Loss of well control
In the event of loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to regain
control of such well, regardless of any other provisions of this article, and shall notify the oil and gas inspector
as soon as practicable after receipt of notice by his employees of the occurrence of such loss of well control
endangering persons or property. If and when the oil and gas inspector certifies in writing to the city secretary
that, in his opinion:
(1) Danger to persons or property exists because of such loss of well control (briefly describing the
same); and
(2) The operator is not taking, or is unable to take, all reasonable necessary steps to regain control
of such well;
the oil and gas inspector may employ any well control experts or other contractors or suppliers of special
services, or may incur any other expenses for labor or material which the oil and gas inspector deems necessary
to regain control of such well. The city shall have a valid lien against the interest of the well of all working
interest owners who have voluntarily joined in the drilling of such well to secure payment of any expenditures so
made by the city pursuant to the above provisions.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.057)
Sec. 4.10.098 Report upon completion of well
Within thirty (30) days after completion of any well, the permittee shall file in the office of the oil and gas
inspector a final report including the casing program actually utilized in the well. The final report shall specify
any changes in well location or depth and any other variation from the terms of the permit. The final report shall
specify the perforated interval and include information pertaining to other perforation if any. (1998 Code, sec.
45.058)
Sec. 4.10.099 Geophysical work
No geophysical work employing underground explosives will be permitted anywhere at any time within the city
limits, nor shall other geophysical systems employing the “thumper,” “vibroseis,” or other techniques, even
though not employing explosives, be permitted, without the express prior consent of the oil and gas inspector.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.059)
Sec. 4.10.100 Necessity of contract with surface owner
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/420
(a) Neither this article, nor any permit issued hereunder, shall be interpreted to grant any right or license to the
permittee to enter upon, use or occupy in any well on any surface land except by the written contract of the
surface owner, nor shall it limit or prevent the free right of the owner or permittee to contract for the amount of
damages, right or privileges with respect to his own land and property or to use any other action allowed by law.
(b) This article shall never be interpreted to grant any rights or licenses to drill or operate any well on land in a
subdivision which has been restricted to residential use only, unless consent from the owner of the surface estate
and owners in said subdivision is first secured by the permittee.
(1998 Code, sec. 45.060)
ARTICLE 4.11 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Sec. 4.11.001 Near a church, public or private school or public hospital; exceptions
(a) The sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by a dealer whose place of business is within:
(1) Three hundred feet (300') of a church, public school, or public hospital; or
(2) One thousand feet (1,000') of a public school, if the city council approves a request from the
board of trustees of a school district under section 38.007, Texas Education Code.
(b) Subsection (a)(1) does not apply to the holder of a license or permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code who also holds a food and beverage certificate by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission
covering the premises that is located within 300 feet of a public school. Subsection (a)(2) does not apply to a
retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50 percent of the gross receipts for the premises,
excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages.
(c) Subsection (a)(2) does not apply to the holder of:
(1) A license or permit issued under V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code chapter 27 (temporary and
special wine and beer retailer's permit), V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code chapter 31 (caterer's
permit), or V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code chapter 72 (temporary licenses) who is operating on
the premises of a private school; or
(d) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a
church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door,
and in a direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the places of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and a public or private school shall be:
(1) In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the
place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
(2) If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of
business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the
base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located.
(e) Applications of distance requirements:
(1) If at the time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission for a premises, the premises satisfies the requirements regarding distance from
schools, churches, and other types of premises set forth in this section, the premises shall be deemed
to satisfy the distance requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/420
(2) On the sale or transfer of the premises or the business on the premises in which a new original
license or permit is required for the premises, the premises shall be deemed to satisfy any distance
requirements as if the issuance of the new original permit or license were a renewal of a previously
held permit or license.
(f) The city council may allow variances to the regulations of this section if it determines that enforcement of
the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use
of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant, does not serve its intended purpose, is not
effective or necessary, upon a signed and notarized waiver of the distance requirement executed by a public or
private school, hospital or church, or for any other reason in the best interest of the city.
Sec. 4.11.002 Permit required, fees established
(a) A permit or license issued under the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code is required for the
sale of mixed beverages or beer or wine within the city. The permit or license issued under the provisions of the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code shall be prima facie proof of the classification of the permit or license upon
which the fee is levied and shall be the sole basis of determination of the amount of the city's license fee.
(b) There is hereby levied a fee equal to one-half (1/2) of the amount of the state fee applicable to each permit
and license issued under the authority of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, provided however, such fee
shall not exceed $30.00 for BQ (wine and beer retailer's off-premises permit) per year and $100.00 for RM
(mixed beverage permit with FB) per year. Such fee shall be payable to the city at the time of the granting or
renewal of the permit or license.
(c) Each original application and each application for renewal of any permit or license shall be submitted in
writing, under oath, by the applicant, and must affirmatively show that:
(1) The applicant has not violated or caused to be violated, during the six-month period
immediately preceding the date of the application, any provisions of the state Alcoholic Beverage
Code or any rule or regulation of the state alcoholic beverage commission which involves a question
of moral turpitude as distinguished from a technical violation.
(2) The applicant has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of the violation of any
provision of the state Alcoholic Beverage Code during the two (2) years next preceding the filing of
the application.
(3) The applicant has never been convicted of a felony; or if the applicant has been convicted of a
felony, that five (5) years have elapsed since the termination of any sentence imposed upon the
applicant upon conviction thereof.
(4) The applicant is of good moral character and his reputation for being a peaceable law-abiding
citizen in the community wherein he resides is good and that the applicant is not consider a minor as
per Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
(5) The applicant is not in the habit of using alcoholic beverages to excess and is not physically or
mentally incapacitated.
(6) The place and manner in which the applicant may conduct his business is of such a nature that,
based on the general welfare, health, peace, morals, and safety of the people and in the public sense
of decency, the issuance of a permit is warranted.
(7) The applicant is a citizen of the United States and has been a citizen of the state for a period of
one (1) year immediately preceding the date of the application.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/420
(8) The applicant does not reside with any person whose Alcoholic Beverage Commission permit
has been cancelled or who was refused a permit within the twelve-month period next preceding the
date of the application.
(9) During the six (6) months immediately preceding the filing of the application, the premises for
which the permit is sought has not been used, operated, or frequented for a purpose or in a manner
that is lewd, immoral or offensive to public decency.
(10) The applicant has not failed or refused to furnish a true copy of this application to the
alcoholic beverage commission district office in the district in which the premises for which the
permit is sought or located.
(11) The applicant has truly and correctly answered every question contained in the original
application and in any renewal application.
(d) When the word “applicant” is used it shall also mean and include each member of a partnership or
association and all officers and the owner or owners of the majority of the corporate stock of a corporation as of
the date of the application.
(Ordinance O-08-11 adopted 6/7/11)
ARTICLE 4.12 FAIR HOUSING*
Sec. 4.12.001 Policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures,
the opportunity of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(b) It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each
individual to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, or familial status and further that the denial of such rights through considerations based on these
protected classes is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an
unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the power and the proper responsibility of
government to prevent.
Sec. 4.12.002 Definitions
As used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
this section unless the context requires otherwise.
Discriminatory housing practice. An act which is unlawful under this article.
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereof of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Executive director. The executive director of the human relations department or authorized assistant.
Family. A single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof.
Major life activities. Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
Person. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/420
in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
Physical or mental handicap. Any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major
life activities. Physical or mental impairment shall include:
(1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting
one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs;
respiratory including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic
and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
(2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome,
emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities.
Senior adult. A person fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
To rent. To lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not
owned by the occupant.
Sec. 4.12.003 Interpretation and effect
This article shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or
substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended or
the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 U.S.C. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted
to them pursuant to title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended and the Federal Equal Credit
Opportunity Act. In construing this article, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by
federal court interpretations of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate.
Sec. 4.12.004 Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
Except as exempted by section 4.12.008, it shall be unlawful:
(1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the
sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a
dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(3) To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or
advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation
or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or
familial status, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination.
(4) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or
mental handicap, or familial status, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental
when such dwelling is in fact so available.
(5) To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations
regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular
race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
Sec. 4.12.005 Discrimination in housing financing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/420
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other
financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status of such person or such persons
associated therewith or because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or
familial status, of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings
for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Sec. 4.12.006 Discrimination in providing brokerage service
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in, or participation in any
multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling and renting dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of
such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or
mental handicap, or familial status.
Sec. 4.12.007 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group
or business because such individual, group, or business has complied with the provisions of this article or has
exercised in good faith rights under this article, or has enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because such
individual, group, or business has made a charge in good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in
any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or has made any report to the executive
director.
Sec. 4.12.008 Exemptions and exclusions
(a) Nothing in this article shall apply to:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that:
(A) Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at
any one time;
(B) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent
resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply
only with respect to one such sale within any twenty-four-month period;
(C) Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned
or reserved on such person's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any
right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such
single-family houses at any one time;
(D) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or
agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and
(E) The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of this article; but nothing in this provision shall
prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/420
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by
no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such living quarters as his residence.
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting
dwellings if:
(1) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein;
(2) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of
his own personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2)
or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by five (5)
or more families.
(c) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for
other than a commercial purpose to person of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, physical or mental
handicap, or familial status.
(d) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose,
from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members.
(e) Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which
rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation
contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such
housing accommodation.
(f) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and
operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further
restricted on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap or familial status.
(g) Nothing in this article shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings whether located
on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of
dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; provided however, in the event that
said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling said rental
dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the
tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this article.
Sec. 4.12.009 Violations
No person shall violate any provision of this article, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this
article.
Sec. 4.12.010 Enforcement
The executive director of the human relations department shall have the responsibility of administering and
implementing this article. The executive director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate
complaints to other designated city employees.
Sec. 4.12.011 Complaints
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/420
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he
will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as
the “charging party”) may file a complaint with the executive director. Such complaints shall be in writing and
shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing
practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The
executive director shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person, upon request.
(b) The executive director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney
General and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of title VII, Fair
Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as
complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
(c) All complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days following the occurrence of an alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the executive director shall provide
notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter referred
to as the “respondent”) who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory
housing practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the
written complaint.
(d) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer
oaths.
(e) If at any time the executive director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable
cause to believe that any person or persons have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no
complaint has been filed or is about to be filed, the executive director may prepare and file a complaint upon his
own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a
complaint filed by a person aggrieved.
Sec. 4.12.012 Investigation and conciliation
(a) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the executive director shall cause to be made
a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge
becomes accepted for investigative purposes, the executive director or an investigator shall have personally
reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein and shall have determined that said charge
comes within the provisions of this article. In the event such review results in the determination that a particular
charge does not come within the provisions of this article, the charging party shall be given a clear and concise
explanation of the reasons why it does not.
(b) If the executive director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged
discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the executive director shall take no further action with
respect to that alleged offense.
(c) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the executive
director shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt
by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing
practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with provisions of this article. Nothing
said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the executive director, the
commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as evidence in a
subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned.
(d) Upon completion of an investigation where the executive director has made a determination that a
discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, if the executive director is unable to secure from the
respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the human relations commission of the city must, upon a
majority vote, refer the case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court or to other agencies as
appropriate. With such recommendation of the executive director and the referral of the human relations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/420
commission, the executive director shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, after
such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal
court.
Sec. 4.12.013 Penalty
If a discriminatory housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case has been referred to municipal
court, the respondent shall be assessed a penalty of $300.00 per violation.
(Ordinance O-15-12 adopted 12/18/12)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Destruction of buildings at fire
(a) When any building in the city is on fire, it shall be lawful for the chief or acting chief engineer, with the
concurrence of the mayor, to direct such building, or any other building which they may deem hazardous and
likely to take fire and communicate to their [other] buildings, to be torn down or blown up or destroyed, and no
action shall be maintained against any person or against any person [sic] or against the city therefor.
(b) Any person interested in any such building so destroyed or injured may, within six (6) months, and not
thereafter, apply in writing to the city council to assess and pay the damage he has sustained, and, if the city
council and the claimant cannot agree on the terms of adjustment, then the application of such claimant shall be
referred to three (3) commissioners, one to be appointed by the claimant, one by the city council and the third by
both.
(c) Said commissioners shall be qualified voters and owners of real estate in the city. They shall be sworn
faithfully to execute their duty according to the best of their ability, shall have power to subpoena and swear
witnesses and shall give all parties a fair and impartial hearing, and give notice of the time and place of meeting.
They shall take into account the time and place of meeting. [sic] They shall take into account the probabilities of
the building being destroyed by fire if it had not been so destroyed, and the loss of insurance upon said property,
if any, caused by destroying same, and may report that no damage should equitably be allowed to such claimant.
Whenever a report shall be made and finally confirmed for the appraising of said damages, a compliance with
the terms thereof by the city council shall be deemed a full satisfaction of said damages.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.002)
Sec. 5.01.002 Maintaining dangerous conditions
Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with
an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including
chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire,
health or safety of persons or property of others, or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or
premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives,
petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible materials, or refuse or with
any other conditions which shall be dangerous in character to the person, health or property of other; or which
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/420
shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires, or which shall create conditions
dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such building, structure of premises other than the maintainer thereof,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 31.003)
Sec. 5.01.003 Mobile service units dispensing flammable liquids
(a) Mobile service units are forbidden to be used commercially in the city.
(b) Flammable liquids may not, as an act of retail sale, be dispensed into the fuel tank of a motor vehicle
parked on an off-street parking facility within the city limits.
(c) For the purposes of this section, a “mobile service unit” is a vehicle, a tank truck, or other mobile device
from which flammable liquids used as motor fuels may, as an act of retail trade, be dispensed into the fuel tank
of a motor vehicle. It may also be defined as a mobile gasoline filling station which either parks or roams around
on a parking lot of a shopping center and from which the driver or operator makes sales of gasoline to shoppers
whose vehicles are parked on the parking lot.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.048)
Sec. 5.01.004 Storage and burning of cotton gin waste and other bulky combustible matter
(a) Storage. It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate or store on any premises within the city limits,
or five thousand feet (5000') outside the city limits, more than ten (10) cubic yards of grass, loose cotton or
paper, cotton burrs, shavings or any other bulky combustible matter, unless such matter be stored within a
fireproof building constructed of brick, concrete, stone or other masonry construction, the roof of which shall be
of noncombustible material.
(b) Incinerator required. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or destroy any of the combustible matter
mentioned in subsection (a) of this section within or without the city limits except to burn the same in an
approved incinerator, the specifications of which must meet the approval of the governing body of the city, or, in
the case of operators of cotton gins, as provided in subsection (c) of this section.
(c) Incinerators for cotton gin operations.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person operating a cotton gin within the city limits to burn or
destroy any cotton burrs, leaves, parts of cotton stalks, waste lint or other combustible matter
mentioned in subsection (a) of this section within or without the city limits, except to burn the same
in an incinerator of the following specifications:
(A) The incinerator shall be a cylinder-shaped structure standing upright on a suitable
reinforced concrete foundation and not less than fifteen feet (15') inside diameter at the base,
and not less than thirty feet (30') in height.
(B) Walls shall be constructed of fire brick of at least nine inches (9") thickness with steel
banks around the structure spaced at intervals of four feet (4'), or of solid welded or bolted steel
casing of at least ten (10) gauge material with a six-inch (6") fire brick lining.
(C) The blow line for burrs shall be level at its entry into the burner and must enter the burner
at an angle so as to create a whirlwind inside the same.
(D) Not more than eight hundred (800) cubic feet of air per minute shall be admitted to the
burner per each gin stand.
(E) Beginning slightly above the blow line, a conical ignition arch of fire brick is to be
constructed to a height of approximately one-half (1/2) the inside base diameter of the burner,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/420
and the tip diameter of the cone shall be not less than one-half (1/2) or over two-thirds (2/3) of
the inside base diameter of the burner.
(F) At the top of the conical arch the circular fire brick walls will continue vertically upward
until the overall burner height is reached.
(G) The inside diameter of the top of the burner shall not be less than one-half (1/2) of the
inside base diameter or greater than two-thirds (2/3) of same.
(H) All incombustible materials must be removed from burrs and trash before entering the
burner.
(2) Such incinerator shall be subject to the inspection for approval or disapproval of the governing
body of the city or under its direction, and, when so approved, a proper permit shall be issued for its
use.
(1998 Code, secs. 31.031–31.033)
State law reference–Texas Clean Air Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 382.
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created
The office of fire marshal is hereby created, and such office shall be independent of other city departments, the
fire marshal reporting directly to the city manager. (1998 Code, sec. 31.011)
Sec. 5.02.002 Appointment and removal; qualifications; compensation
The fire marshal shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to the approval of the city council. The fire
marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office and shall be deemed an employee at will. He shall
receive such compensation as provided for by the city council. (1998 Code, sec. 31.012; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 5.02.003 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be commenced within twenty-four (24) hours,
not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. (1998 Code, sec. 31.013)
Sec. 5.02.004 Taking of testimony
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons cognizant of any facts relating to the matter under investigation, and shall
cause the same to be reduced to writing. (1998 Code, sec. 31.014)
Sec. 5.02.005 Authority to summon witnesses, require production of evidence and administer oaths
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the
provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book,
paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing before him as witnesses. (1998 Code, sec. 31.015)
Sec. 5.02.006 Duty when evidence indicates crime
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/420
If the fire marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of
arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in
connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or
offenses, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of
witnesses and all the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken
in the case. (1998 Code, sec. 31.016)
Sec. 5.02.007 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
the fire marshal or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to
cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. (1998 Code, sec. 31.017)
Sec. 5.02.008 Right of entry
The fire marshal shall have the authority, at all times of the day or night, when necessary in the performance of
the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or
premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which
authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1998 Code, sec. 31.018)
Sec. 5.02.009 Inspection of premises; order to correct dangerous conditions
The fire marshal, upon the complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent
thereto, or without any complaint, shall have the right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to
enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty to enter upon and make or
cause to be entered upon and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public
buildings together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure
which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that the fire would
endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of
stoves, ranges, furnaces, or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes
with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or electrical wiring or a
dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals,
vegetable products, ashes, combustible or inflammable refuse materials, wastepaper, or rags, or other conditions
which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to firemen
combating a fire or to occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be
forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. If said owner or occupant deems
himself aggrieved by such order he may, within five (5) days, appeal such order to the mayor, who shall
investigate the cause of the complaint, and unless such order is revoked by the mayor such order shall remain in
force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. Any owner or occupant who fails to comply
with such order within a ten (10) day period from the date of such notice shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 31.019)
Sec. 5.02.010 Record of fires
The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances,
including the origin of the fires and the amounts of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation
required by this article. (1998 Code, sec. 31.020)
Sec. 5.02.011 Reports to state fire marshal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/420
At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions
together with a separate report on each fire in the city during the month. (1998 Code, sec. 31.021)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Sec. 5.03.001 Operation of vehicles
Fire department vehicles are authorized emergency vehicles and subject to the provisions of section 12.03.002 of
this code. (1998 Code, sec. 82.002)
Sec. 5.03.002 Interference with equipment
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously interfere or meddle with any vehicle, hose, ladder or other
equipment of any kind belonging to the city and used by the fire department. (1998 Code, sec. 82.003(a))
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE PREVENTION CODE
Sec. 5.04.001 Adopted
The International Fire Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, a copy of which is on
file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, is hereby
adopted as the fire code of the city, for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city, and for
providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses and operations, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2000 edition, published by the International
Code Council, as on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof
as if fully set out in this section. (1998 Code, sec. 31.001(1); Ordinance adopting Code; Ordinance O-05-12, sec.
4, adopted 4/3/12)
Sec. 5.04.002 Amendments
Section 101.1 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Lamesa, Texas,
hereby referred to as “this code.”
Section 109.3 of the International Fire Code is amended to read as follows:
109.3. Violation penalty. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work
in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or the
permit or certificate issued under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed as separate offense.
Section 111.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
111.4. Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served
with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $10.00 or more than
$500.00.
Section 3204.3.1.1 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/420
3204.3.1.1. Location. Stationary containers shall be located in accordance with section 3203.6,
Containers of cryogenic fluids, [and] shall not be located within diked areas containing other
hazardous materials.
Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited within the fire zone
of the city.
Section 3406.2.4.4 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
3406.2.4.4. Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of class 1 and 2
liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited within the fire zone of the city.
Section 3804.2 of the International Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
3804.2. Maximum capacity within established limits. The aggregate capacity of any one LP-gas
installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570 L).
Exception: In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be determined by the code
official, after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of
occupancy, and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed containers, degree of fire
protection to be provided, and capabilities of the local fire department.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.001(2), (3))
ARTICLE 5.05 MANUFACTURED OR LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS*
Sec. 5.05.001 Definitions
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
Equipment. All that equipment designed to use a fuel of any form of manufactured or liquefied petroleum gases.
Standard grade. That grade of article which is accepted by dealers in such equipment and recognized as
complying with all fire law regulations.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.041)
Sec. 5.05.002 Standards for piping and appliances
All persons who may install or equip any residence, business house, apartment house, or any other building
located and situated within the city with any installation of equipment shall use in any such installation, whether
for domestic or industrial use, only a standard grade of pipe or piping. All appliances used in accordance with
any such installation shall be a standard grade and type of equipment. Any system which uses any form of
manufactured or liquefied petroleum gases must bear the label of approval or listing of the Underwriters'
Laboratories. (1998 Code, sec. 31.042)
Sec. 5.05.003 Installation and use of equipment
(a) Minimum standards for installation and repair. All equipment shall be installed or repaired in a
workmanlike manner which shall comply with all laws and the regulations of the city, the regulations of the
National Board of Fire Underwriters and the regulations recommended by the National Fire Protection
Association.
(b) Approval of installation. When any equipment is installed, it shall not be placed in operation or used
unless and until such installation has been approved by the city inspector.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/420
(c) Inspection fee. Any person installing any equipment shall, upon requesting such inspection for approval,
pay an inspection fee as set by the city council for each piece of equipment, to cover cost of inspection.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.043)
Sec. 5.05.004 Containers and equipment at gasoline service stations
Gasoline service station owners or operators may apply for and be granted a permit by the city council to install
liquefied petroleum gas containers and equipment outside of the fire limits for the purpose of servicing motor
vehicles which are equipped to use such gas as a fuel to propel such vehicles under the following conditions:
(1) The storage tank and equipment and the installation thereof must meet the requirements of the
other sections of this article, as well as the requirements contained in division IX and other applicable
provisions of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Docket No. 1 of the state railroad commission, published
under date of June 1, 1954, as may be amended from time to time;
(2) No such installation shall be placed into operation until it has been inspected and approved by
the liquefied petroleum gas division of the railroad commission; and
(3) Prior to the beginning of installation of such containers and equipment a permit shall be applied
for and granted by the city council, and the water capacity of such containers shall not exceed two
thousand (2,000) gallons.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.044)
Sec. 5.05.005 Storage generally; restrictions in fire limits
The storage of any liquefied petroleum gases in any container, either aboveground or underground, is prohibited
inside of or underneath any building in the city. No equipment using liquefied petroleum gases shall be
permitted within the fire limits, and no equipment used for the purpose of storing wholesale quantities of such
gases shall be permitted within the city. (1998 Code, sec. 31.045)
Sec. 5.05.006 Tank trucks and trailers
All tank trucks and tank trailers used for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gases within the city shall be
so constructed and operated as to comply with the regulations for the design, construction and operation of
automobile tank trucks and tank trailers for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gases as approved by the
National Board of Underwriters and the National Fire Protection Association. Any person who shall operate or
cause to be operated any such tank truck or tank trailer within the city shall keep such equipment in good
condition at all times, and upon the development of any defect that would create a hazard to persons or property,
such tank truck or tank trailer shall be removed from the streets of the city until such defects have been repaired
or faulty equipment replaced. Any such tank trucks and tank trailers shall be subject to inspection by the proper
authorities at any time. No tank truck or tank trailer shall be parked, stored or operated upon any street within
the fire limits, nor shall they be stored or repaired inside or outside of any building within the fire limits. (1998
Code, sec. 31.046)
Sec. 5.05.007 Treatment with malodorant
All liquefied petroleum gas sold within the city shall be treated with a malodorant in such quantities as required
by state law to create an odor easily detected in case of leaks in piping or equipment. (1998 Code, sec. 31.047)
ARTICLE 5.06 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.06.001 Definition
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/420
As used in this article, “fireworks” shall mean and include any combustible substance or article prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall
include blank cartridges, and shall include toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives
are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers, or other fireworks of like
construction and any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive. It does not mean:
(1) Fireworks being transported in interstate commerce under transportation (DOT) regulations
covering the transportation of explosives and other dangerous articles by motor, rail, and water.
(2) The use of fireworks by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes or
illumination, or the sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, or for signal or ceremonial
purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military organizations.
(3) Caps containing less than twenty-five hundredths of a grain of pyrotechnic composition when
designed to be used in toy cannons or guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of
which shall be permitted.
(4) Model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models.
(5) The sale, storage, and use in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices or distress
signals for marine, aviation, or highway use.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.061)
Sec. 5.06.002 Prohibition
It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, or association to manufacture, assemble,
sell, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or otherwise put in action any fireworks of any
description within the jurisdiction of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 31.062)
Sec. 5.06.003 Discharge declared nuisance
The use or discharge of any fireworks within the city limits is declared to be a common and public nuisance and
is in violation of the provisions of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 31.063)
Sec. 5.06.004 Enforcement
(a) The fire marshal shall seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks found in violation of this
article.
(b) The fire marshal or any city peace officer is authorized to:
(1) Detain any fireworks being illegally transported; and
(2) Close any building where illegally stored fireworks are located until the fire marshal has been
provided with an opportunity to seize and destroy the fireworks in accordance with the provisions of
this article.
(c) Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of
the city to prevent unlawful storage, transportation, sale, or use of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city,
and to aid the fire marshal in the discharge of his duties, or prevent a person from interfering with the seizure
and destruction of illegal fireworks in accordance with this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/420
(d) It is not necessary to obtain injunctive relief as a prerequisite to seizure and destruction of illegal
fireworks.
(1998 Code, sec. 31.064)
Sec. 5.06.005 Exception for public displays
The above provisions of this article shall not apply to public displays of fireworks when conducted in
accordance with state law in areas within the jurisdiction of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 31.065)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 6.01.001 Health authority
(a) Office created. There is hereby created the office of health authority, which shall be the director of the
South Plains Public Health District.
(b) Duties. The health authority shall perform such duties as are prescribed by this code, state law, and the
department of state health services.
(1998 Code, sec. 61.001)
State law reference–Health authorities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 121.021 et seq.
Sec. 6.01.002 Allowing wastewater, grease, etc., to escape onto streets
It shall be unlawful for any person, or for the operator, manager, agent or employee of any place of business, to
allow or permit any wastewater, grease, or greasy or sandy water to escape from any private premises onto any
street, alley or sidewalk of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 61.031).
Sec. 6.01.003 Depositing garbage or refuse on street
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, or leave any refuse, garbage, rubbish or junk on any street
within the city. (1998 Code, sec. 61.032)
State law reference–Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 365.
Sec. 6.01.004 Privies
(a) New privies. It shall be unlawful to build a new privy within the city limits.
(b) Existing privies. All existing privies used by the owner or occupant of any premises in the city shall meet
the following standards:
(1) Vault. All privies used by the owner or occupant of any premises in the city shall be
constructed either:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/420
(A) Over a vault at least six feet (6') deep; provided that when the contents of such privy
accumulate to a point within two feet (2') of the top of such vault, the same shall be filled with
dirt and a new vault shall be dug and such privy shall be placed over the same; or
(B) With buckets or boxes of a type which are easily removed and cleaned under the seat
board placed so that all offal or droppings shall fall into such buckets or boxes; provided that
lime or some other disinfectant shall be freely applied at all times.
(2) Interior to be flyproof. The inside of such privies shall be floored at least four inches (4") above
the ground, flaps shall be fastened to the seat board with hinges and the walls and seat board shall be
so constructed that the privy shall be completely flyproof.
(3) Disinfection. During the months of May, June, July, August and September of each year, all
privies located in the city shall be thoroughly disinfected with lime or some other disinfectant.
(c) Penalty. Violation of the provisions of this section by any person shall be deemed a misdemeanor and shall
be punishable as provided in section 6.02.005 of this code.
(1998 Code, sec. 61.033)
State law reference–Municipal power concerning sewers and privies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, secs. 342.002, 342.005 et
seq.
ARTICLE 6.02 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE*
Sec. 6.02.001 Generally
Any person who shall own, keep or use any building or premises located within the corporate limits of the city
or in an area lying within 5,000 feet of the corporate limits of the city in such a manner as to be injurious to the
health of the people or offensive to the neighborhood or to any private family or person, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 6.02.002 Prohibited conditions
(a) Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies any property within the
corporate limits of the city or in an area lying within 5,000 feet of the corporate limits of the city to permit or
allow holes or places where water may accumulate and become stagnant and remain thereon or to permit or
allow the accumulation of stagnant water on such property and permit the same to remain thereon. It shall be the
duty of such person to keep the area from the line of his property to the curbline or street adjacent to it free and
clear of accumulations of stagnant water.
(b) Accumulations of trash, carrion, filth, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies any
house, building, establishment, lot or yard located within the corporate limits of the city or in an area lying
within 5,000 feet of the corporate limits of the city to permit or allow any trash, rubbish, carrion, filth or other
impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon or therein. It shall be the duty of such person to
keep the area from the line of his property to the curbline or street adjacent to it free and clear of such matter.
(c) Abandoned vehicles and appliances, building materials, etc. It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant
of a residential building, structure or property located within the corporate limits of the city or in an area lying
within 5,000 feet of the corporate limits of the city to utilize the premises of such residential property for the
open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle, icebox, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building
rubbish or similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner or occupant to keep the
premises of such residential property clean and to remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed
above upon notice from the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/420
Sec. 6.02.003 Weeds and other unsightly vegetation; vegetation obstructing view
(a) Weeds and other unsightly vegetation. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying, or
having supervision or control of any property located within the corporate limits of the city or in an area lying
within 5,000 feet of the corporate limits of the city to allow or permit objectionable or unsightly vegetation to
grow to a height greater than twelve (12) inches upon any such real property within one hundred (100) feet of
any property line or within fifty (50) feet of any structure. It shall be the duty of such person to keep the area
from the line of his property to the curbline or street adjacent to it free and clear of the objectionable or unsightly
vegetation. All vegetation not regularly cultivated which exceeds twelve (12) inches in height shall be presumed
to be “objectionable and unsightly” within the meaning of this section.
(b) Vegetation obstructing view of traffic. Trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, grass or weeds growing at or near
intersections in such manner as to obstruct the view of approaching traffic from the right or left are hereby
declared to be a nuisance and the city manager is hereby authorized to remove the same.
Sec. 6.02.004 Notice to correct or remove condition
(a) If any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied
or unoccupied, located within the corporate limits of the city or in an area lying within 5,000 feet of the
corporate limits of the city, fails to comply with the provisions of this article, it shall be the duty of the city
secretary to give a minimum of seven days' written notice to such person violating the terms of this article.
(b) The notice shall be in writing and may be served on such person violating the terms of this article by:
(1) Delivering it to him in person;
(2) Letter or written notice addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the
appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located and mailed by
United States Certified Mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. If the letter or written notice
is returned by the United States Postal Service as refused or unclaimed, the validity of the notice is
not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered; or
(3) If personal service by either method above cannot be obtained, by:
(A) Publication at least once in the city's official newspaper;
(B) Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
(C) Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property
to which the violation relates.
(c) The city may inform the owner by regular mail and by posting on the property, or by personally delivering
the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the
public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice
may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation
covered by a notice under this section occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in
writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted and
assess expenses as provided by this article.
Sec. 6.02.005 Penalty for refusal to correct or remove condition
If any person notified as provided in this article fails or refuses to correct or remove the condition specified in
such notice within ten (10) days after the date notice is effected, such person owning, claiming, occupying, or
having supervision or control of the property shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and issued a warrant to appear in
municipal court and upon conviction shall be fined in any sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/420
Each and every day that the violation remains uncorrected shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject
to penalty under this section.
Sec. 6.02.006 Correction or removal of condition by city
If any person notified as provided in this article fails or refuses to correct, remedy, or remove the condition
specified in such notice within ten (10) days after the date notice is effected, the city may go upon the property
and do such work or make such improvements as are necessary to correct, remedy, or remove such condition
only in those cases which may present a serious threat to the health, safety, and general welfare of nearby
residents. The expense incurred pursuant to this section in correcting, remedying or removing the condition, and
the cost of notification, shall be paid by the city and charged to the owner of such property. In the event that the
owner fails or refuses to pay such expenses within thirty (30) days after the first day of the month following the
month in which the work was done, the city shall file with the county clerk a statement of the expense incurred.
When such statement is filed, the city shall have a privileged lien on such property, second only to tax liens and
liens for street improvements, to secure the payment of the amount so expended. Such amount shall bear interest
at the rate of ten percent (10%) from the date the city incurs the expense. For any such expense and interest, suit
may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure had by the city. The statement of expense filed with the county
clerk or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of any amount expended in such work, all as more
particularly specified in chapter 342 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, which is hereby adopted.
Sec. 6.02.007 Dangerous weeds
(a) The city manager may go upon property and do or cause to be done the work necessary to obtain
compliance with this article without notice when:
(1) Weeds have grown higher than 48 inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person.
(b) No later than the tenth day after the date the necessary work to obtain compliance is completed, the city
shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 6.02.004.
(c) The notice shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violations of this section that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds;
(4) An itemized statement of the charges incurred by the city in doing or in having such work done
as necessary to bring the real property into compliance with this section; and
(5) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing about the
city's abatement of the weeds.
(d) The municipal court judge shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of the weeds under
this section if, not later than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the property owner files
with the city manager a written request for a hearing.
(e) An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after
the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information
relating to the city's abatement of the weeds.
(f) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens as
provided in section 6.02.006.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/420
(g) The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the city manager, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to interfere with or hinder the building official and his duly appointed representatives in the exercise of
their duties under this section.
(h) Penalties.
(1) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this section
who continues to violate or fails to comply with such after seven days after notice is given and
received as set forth herein, shall also be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) of this section, any violation of any provision
of this section which constitutes an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the town for such purpose.
(3) In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this section, the city may enforce the
provisions of this section pursuant to the applicable provisions of chapter 54 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, which chapter provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances.
(4) Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense
defined by this section.
Sec. 6.02.008 Declaration of nuisance
All property located within the corporate limits of the city or in an area lying within 5,000 feet of the corporate
limits of the city upon which exists any of the conditions deemed by the provisions of this article to be unlawful
is declared to be a public nuisance.
(Ordinance O-6-18 adopted 4/17/18)
ARTICLE 6.03 FOOD SANITATION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.03.001–6.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Food Establishments†
Sec. 6.03.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following words shall mean as follows:
Commissary. A catering establishment, restaurant, or any other place in which food, containers, or supplies are
kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored.
Employee. The permit holder, individual having supervisory or management duties, person on the payroll, family
member, volunteer, person performing work under contractual agreement, or any other person working in a food
establishment.
Food. Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or
for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/420
Food establishment. Each of the following types of food establishments: commissary, mobile food unit, food
processing establishment, food service establishment, retail food store, and temporary food service
establishment.
Food processing establishment. A commercial establishment in which food is manufactured or packaged for
human consumption. The term does not include a food service establishment, retail food store, or commissary
operation.
Food service establishment. Any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portion service, and
includes the site at which individual portions are provided. The term includes any such place regardless of
whether consumption is on or off the premises and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food. The term
includes delicatessens that offer prepared food in individual service portions. The term does not include private
homes where food is prepared or served for individual family consumption, retail food stores, the location of
food vending machines, and supply vehicles.
Mobile food unit. A vehicle-mounted food service establishment designed to be readily movable.
Person. Includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, trustee, or other legal entity.
Regulatory authority. The physician designated to administer state and local laws relating to public health.
Retail food store. Any establishment or section of an establishment or section of an establishment [sic] where
food and food products are offered to the consumer and intended for off-premises consumption. The term
includes delicatessens that offer prepared food in bulk quantities only. The term does not include establishments
which handle only prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous foods; roadside markets that offer only fresh fruits
and fresh vegetables for sale; food service establishments; or food and beverage vending machines as defined in
Vending of Food and Beverages, 1978, Department of Health, Education and Welfare Publication No. (FDA) 78-
2091.
Temporary food service establishment. A food service establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period
of time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration.
(1998 Code, sec. 62.001)
Sec. 6.03.032 Adoption of state rules
(a) For the purpose of protecting the public health, the following rules, including any amendments, copies of
which shall be on file with the city and available for inspection, are hereby adopted:
(1) Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation (title 25, Health Services, part 1. Texas Department of
Health, chapter 229. Food and Drug Retail Food Store Sanitation, 25 TAC sections 229.231–
229.239).
(2) Rules on Food Service Sanitation (Texas Department of Health, 301.73.11.001–.011).
(b) The rules herein adopted shall establish standards for the inspection of food establishments, as herein
defined, within the city, shall be the basis for issuing and revoking permits for the operation of such
establishments, and shall provide the standards for the determination of adulterated, misbranded or
unwholesome food.
(c) In the event there is any conflict between the provisions contained in the city code and the provisions
contained in the rules adopted herein, the provisions of the city code shall apply.
(d) Homemade confections, breads, or pastries which are not a cream or cream-filled type and which are not
deemed “potentially hazardous” by the regulatory authority may be sold to the general public during fundraising
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/420
events, such as bake sales, provided the seller has gone through the proper steps to secure a temporary permit
from the regulatory authority.
(1998 Code, sec. 62.002)
Sec. 6.03.033 Permit
(a) Generally. No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid permit issued to him by
the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of these rules shall be entitled to
receive or retain such a permit. Permits are not transferable. A valid permit shall be posted in every food
establishment.
(b) Application; issuance.
(1) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a permit
on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Such application shall include the name and address of
each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment, and the signature of each
applicant. In addition, plans must be submitted for review with such application as required.
(2) The regulatory authority shall issue a permit to the applicant if its inspection reveals that the
proposed food establishment complies with the requirements of these rules and if it has received the
proper permit fee as required herein.
(c) Suspension.
(1) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to
operate a food establishment if the holder of the permit does not comply with the requirements of
these rules, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the requirements of these
rules, or if the operation of the food service establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard
to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice. When a permit is suspended, food
operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be
afforded an opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of a request for a hearing.
(2) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit, or the person in charge, shall be
notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an
opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is
filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at
any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(d) Revocation. The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for
serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory
authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of
the permit, or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that
the permit shall be revoked at the end of ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request
for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten (10) day period. If
no request for hearing is filed, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
(e) Service of notices. A notice provided for in these rules is properly served when it is personally delivered to
the holder of the permit, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records
of the regulatory authority.
(f) Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time
and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/420
make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(g) Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the
revoked permit may make written application for a new permit.
(h) Fees.
(1) The fee for a food establishment, excluding mobile food units and temporary food units, shall
be based upon the total number of people which are employed at that establishment and shall be
determined as follows:
Employees Fee
1 - 10 $35.00
11 - 35 $75.00
36+ $150.00
(2) Food establishments which are not open to the general public and which operate exclusively as
a part of a hospital, nursing home, day care center, home or center for the aged, or any other medical
care institution or facility that is licensed by the state, or a public or parochial school or college, or
operated by the city or the county or a church kitchen, shall be charged no fee; however, they must
otherwise comply with the applicable provisions of this regulation.
(3) The fee for a mobile food establishment shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(4) The fee for a temporary food establishment shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and remain
valid for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days.
(i) Renewal. Permits for the operation of all food establishments, with the exception of temporary food
establishments, shall expire on December 31 of each year and must be renewed annually and the fee provided
for herein will become due and payable the first of January of each year. Such permits may be obtained during
the month of December just prior to the date of expiration, or they may be secured during a period of grace
between January 1 and February 1, following the date of expiration. Failure to secure a permit within the time
provided in this section shall result in a charge of twice the amount otherwise due for a permit under this section.
(1998 Code, sec. 62.003)
State law reference–Authority to require permit for food service establishment, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 437.004.
Sec. 6.03.034 Inspections; correction of violations
(a) Frequency of inspections. An inspection of a food establishment, with the exception of a mobile food
establishment, shall be performed at least once every six months. A mobile food establishment which deals in
products which the regulatory authority deems “potentially hazardous foods” is required to appear weekly at the
regulatory authority, at regular hours to be specified by the regulatory authority, for every week the mobile
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/420
establishment is in operation. Additional inspections of the food establishment shall be performed as often as
necessary for the enforcement of these rules.
(b) Access to premises and records. Agents of the regulatory authority, after proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter any food establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to
determine compliance with these rules. The agents shall be permitted to examine the records of the
establishments to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or used, or to persons
employed.
(c) Report of inspection. Whenever an inspection of a food establishment or commissary is made, the findings
shall be recorded on an inspection report form approved by the regulatory authority.
(d) Correction of violations.
(1) The inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the
violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified,
in accordance with the following provisions:
(A) If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage
backup into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service
operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority.
(B) In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected
within twenty-four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected within twenty-four (24) hours, the
establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the
regulatory authority.
(2) The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may
result in cessation of food operations. An opportunity for appeal from the inspection findings and
time limitations will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory
authority within ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for a hearing is received,
a hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of receipt of the request.
(3) Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of this rule to cease operations,
it shall not resume operations until such time as a reinspection determines that the condition
responsible for cessation of operations no longer exists. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered
within a reasonable time.
(1998 Code, sec. 62.004)
Sec. 6.03.035 Examination and condemnation of food
Food may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority as often as necessary for enforcement of these
rules. The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, specifying with
particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation. The regulatory
authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order
shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall permit storage of the food
under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in
which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request
for hearing may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A
hearing shall be held if so requested, and, on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may
be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy
such food or to otherwise bring it into compliance with the provisions of these rules. (1998 Code, sec. 62.005)
Sec. 6.03.036 Review of plans
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/420
(a) Submission of plans. Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for
review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall
indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the
type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The regulatory authority shall approve the plans and
specifications if they meet the requirements of these rules. No food establishment shall be constructed,
extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the
regulatory authority.
(b) Follow-up inspection. In the case of additions, remodeling, or conversions, after plans have been
submitted and approved by the regulatory authority, it must complete a follow-up inspection of the new portion
of the establishment prior to its use to determine compliance with the requirements of these rules and with the
approved plans and specifications.
(1998 Code, sec. 62.006)
Sec. 6.03.037 Procedure when infection is suspected
When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any
food service establishment employee, it may secure morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any
other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. The regulatory authority may require
any or all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food establishments;
(2) The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the
regulatory authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
(3) Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be
no danger of transmitting disease;
(4) Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, of other employees, and of his
and their body discharges.
(1998 Code, sec. 62.007)
Secs. 6.03.038–6.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Milk and Milk Products*
Sec. 6.03.071 Milk code adopted
The production, transportation, processing, handling, sampling, examination, grading, labeling and sale of all
milk and milk products sold for ultimate consumption within the city; the inspection of dairy herds, dairies, and
milk plants; the issuing and revocation of permits to milk producers, haulers, and distributors; and the fixing of
penalties shall be regulated in accordance with the terms and provisions of the unabridged form of the ordinance
in “Milk Ordinance and Code–1953 Recommendations of the Public Health Service,” a copy of which shall be
on file in the office of the city secretary. (1998 Code, sec. 62.031)
Sec. 6.03.072 Sale of raw milk prohibited
The sale within the limits of the city, and the sale for intended use within the limits of the city, of raw milk and
raw milk products, same being defined as fluid milk and fluid milk products that shall not have first been
pasteurized and do not meet Grade A quality standards as established by law, and dry milk and dry milk
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/420
products that have not been made from pasteurized milk and milk products, is prohibited. (1998 Code, sec.
62.032)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to allow sale of only pasteurized milk and milk products at retail, V.T.C.A., Health and
Safety Code, sec. 435.013.
Secs. 6.03.073–6.03.100 Reserved
Division 4. Meat and Meat Products
Sec. 6.03.101 Adoption of state rules
The rules, regulations and standards for the inspection of meat, meat products, and meat food products,
promulgated by the state commissioner of health under authority of section 11.12 [11.012] of the Health &
Safety Code, as authorized by chapter 433 of the Health & Safety Code, are hereby in all things adopted and
made a part of this division as if set forth in full herein, and the provisions, standards, rules and regulations
contained therein are made mandatory requirements for the inspection and labeling of meat and meat food
products produced, sold or offered for sale within the limits of the city with the “Texas State Approved Meat for
Human Food” label thereon. Any establishment desiring to sell or offer for sale meat, meat products and meat
food products in the city containing thereon the “Texas State Approved Meat for Human Food” label on such
meat, meat products and meat food products shall be governed by the specifications and regulations promulgated
by the state commissioner of health adopted herein, and all requirements specified therein shall be complied
with. (1998 Code, sec. 62.051)
State law reference–Texas Meat and Poultry Inspection Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 433.
Sec. 6.03.102 Meat to be inspected, approved and labeled
Only meats bearing the inspection mark, stamp, tag or label of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the
department of state health services, any municipality bearing a state approved legend, or the city shall be
acceptable for sale in the city. (1998 Code, sec. 62.052)
ARTICLE 6.04 ILLICIT SYNTHETIC DRUGS AND MISBRANDED DRUGS
Sec. 6.04.001 Sale, public display for sale, attempted sale, gift, barter, delivery, possession, or use
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, to sell, publicly display for sale, attempt to sell, give,
barter, deliver, possess, or use the following substances within the city limits:
(1) Any substance listed as a controlled substance or a controlled substance analogue as defined in
chapter 481 of the Texas Health and Safety Code;
(2) Salvia divinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as
salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant,
and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds,
or extracts;
(3) [(1R, 2R, SR)-2-[2, 6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenyl]-7, 7-dimethyl-4-bicyclo
[3.1.1] hept-3-enyl] methanol, commonly known as HU-308;
(4) (6aR, 10aR)-3-(1, 1-Dimethylbutyl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydro-6, 6, 9-trimethyl-6H-dibenzo [b,
d] pyran, commonly known as JWH-133;
(5) (-)-2-Carbomethoxy-3-(4-fluorophenyl) tropane, known as -CFT, WIN-35, 428;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/420
(6) (6aR, 10aR)-1-methoxy-6, 6, 9-trimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen, commonly known as L-759, 633;
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, to breathe, inhale, drink, or otherwise ingest, any
compound, liquid, or chemical listed within this section for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication,
stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or which, in any manner, changes, distorts, or disturbs the
auditory, visual, or mental process of the user.
Sec. 6.04.002 Defenses
(a) It is not a violation of this section if the person breathed, inhaled, drank, or otherwise ingested the
substance under the lawful supervision of an authorized law enforcement officer to enforce or ensure compliance
with this section.
(b) It is not a violation of this section if the person who commits any act described in this section commits the
act pursuant to the lawful direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist licensed by the state to
direct or prescribe such act.
(c) This section does not apply to the inhalation of a lawfully prescribed anesthesia for a medical or dental
purpose.
Sec. 6.04.003 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and be subject to
a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) upon
conviction in municipal court.
(Ordinance O-04-13 adopted 4/2/13)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Appointment and compensation of judge and clerk
The judge of the municipal court and the court clerk shall be appointed by the city council and shall receive such
salary as may be established by the city council. (1998 Code, sec. 5.051)
State law references–Municipal court judges, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004; municipal court clerk generally, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, sec. 29.010.
Sec. 7.01.002 Term of judge; removal of judge; vacancy in office of judge
(a) Term. The term of office for the judge of the municipal court shall be two years as provided by state law
(section 29.005 of the Texas Government Code). Said term of office shall expire on the 30th day of April on
each odd-numbered year. If the judge is not reappointed by the 91st day following the expiration of a term of
office the judge shall, absent action by the city council, continue to serve for another term of office beginning on
the date the previous term of office expired.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/420
(b) Removal. The judge of the municipal court shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council and may be
removed from office by action of the city council.
(c) Vacancy. The city council shall by appointment fill a vacancy in the office of municipal judge for the
remainder of the term of office only.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.052)
State law reference–Term of municipal court judge, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.005.
Sec. 7.01.003 Temporary judges
(a) Appointment. The city council may appoint one or more temporary judges to serve if the regular judge of
the municipal court is temporarily unable to act.
(b) Qualifications; powers and duties. A temporary judge must have the same qualifications as the regular
judge and shall have the same powers and duties as that judge.
(c) Salary. A temporary judge shall receive such salary as may be determined by the city council.
(d) Term. The term of office of a temporary judge of the municipal court shall be for thirty (30) days. The
temporary judge, absent action by the city council and with the approval of the mayor, may continue to serve an
additional thirty (30) day term of office beginning on the date the previous term of office expired. No person
shall serve as a temporary judge for more than one hundred twenty (120) days without being reappointed by the
city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.053)
ARTICLE 7.02 FINES, FEES AND COSTS*
Sec. 7.02.001 Payment of fines
(a) When the defendant has been convicted of any offense over which the municipal court has jurisdiction, a
judgment that the defendant pay a fine may also direct that he pay the fine within a limited time or in
installments on specified dates and that in default of payments as therein stipulated he be imprisoned until the
fine is satisfied in full, but unless such direction is given in the judgment the fine shall be payable forthwith. It is
expressly provided, however, that if the defendant has duly posted an appearance bond, appeal bond, or cash
escrow deposit the convicted party shall remain free pending the further disposition of his case.
(b) In the administration of the procedure set out in subsection (a) of this section, the municipal court judge
may require a pauper's oath or affirmation from a defendant who, after a conviction and assessment of a fine,
represents to the court that he is financially unable to pay said fine. Upon filing of such oath or affirmation, the
court may hold a separate hearing to determine said defendant's financial ability to pay and, after making his
determination, incorporate his findings in the judgment.
(1998 Code, sec. 86.002)
Sec. 7.02.002 Fines and fees generally
There shall be paid into the city treasury, for the use and benefit of the city:
(1) All fines imposed by the municipal court;
(2) A special expense, not to exceed twenty-five dollars ($25.00), for the issuance and service of a
warrant of arrest [under] section 543.009 of the Texas Transportation Code;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/420
(3) The special expenses described in article 17.04 Code of Criminal Procedure dealing with the
requisites of a personal bond and a special warrant of arrest, after due notice, not to exceed twentyfive
dollars ($25.00); and
(4) Any other lawful fees or special expenses.
(1998 Code, sec. 86.003(a))
Sec. 7.02.003 Driving safety course fee
There shall be paid into the city treasury, for the use and benefit of the city, a special fee, not to exceed ten
dollars ($10.00), for services performed in cases in which the laws of the state require that the case be dismissed
because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant which were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense,
such action to be limited to compliance with the provisions of section 543.115 of the Texas Transportation Code,
relating to dismissal of certain misdemeanor charges upon completing a defensive driving or other driving safety
course approved by the court; and if any person requesting a driving safety or defensive driving course does not
take the course, the person is not entitled to a refund of the fee authorized by this section. (1998 Code, sec.
86.003(b))
State law reference–Additional court fees for driving safety course, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 103.021.
Sec. 7.02.004 Building security fund
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the “fund”) pursuant to
article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The municipal court of the city (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized and required to assess a
municipal court building security fee (the “fee”) in the amount of three dollars ($3.00) against all defendants
convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a
separate assessment of the fee.
(c) A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if:
(1) Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives deferred disposition; or
(3) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
(d) The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the
treasury of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund.
(e) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchases of security devices and/or services
for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the city. “Security devices and/or services” shall
include any and all items described in article 102.017(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(f) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance O-06-09 adopted 9/15/09)
CHAPTER 8
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/420
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Adoption of state penal laws
Any act the commission of which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state is prohibited within the
city, and if committed within the city is hereby declared to be an offense; provided, however, that the penalty
therefor shall not exceed the penalty for such offense prescribed in section 1.01.009 of this code. (1998 Code,
sec. 86.001)
Sec. 8.01.002 Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any property
owned by the city, except as permitted in this section.
(b) The possession or consumption of beer and wine only in and upon property owned by the city is permitted
provided the person is attending an event sponsored by the city or a non-profit or religious organization which
has obtained the appropriate permit from the city and only within the area designated in the permit.
(c) A permit for the sale of beer and wine only required by subsection (b) may be granted by the city if the
following conditions are met:
(1) The sale of beer and wine on city property may be granted by the city for events sponsored by
the city or by a non-profit or religious organization.
(2) An applicant wishing to obtain a permit shall submit an event application to the city secretary at
least ten (10) business days prior to the proposed event.
(3) Organizations requesting a permit shall use the services of a caterer licensed by the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Commission or acquire such permit as may be required by the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission to sell beer and wine, and all sales shall be subject to all applicable rules and
requirements established by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
(4) Both the organization requesting the permit and the licensed caterer must insure that no beer or
wine being sold under the terms of the permit will be allowed outside the permitted area.
(5) Hours of permitted sales of beer and wine are limited to the hours between 10:00 a.m. and
midnight of the same day. Further hourly restrictions as imposed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission and state law must be observed should they be more restrictive.
(6) Beer and wine must be sold, possessed and consumed only in accordance with state law.
(7) The applicant must provide the types and terms of insurance as may be required by the city
which insurance shall name the city as an additional insured.
(8) The event must be conducted in accordance with all applicable municipal codes and ordinances
including zoning, food service, building or other codes.
(Ordinance O-07-12 adopted 4/17/12)
Sec. 8.01.003 Abandoned refrigerators or airtight containers
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/420
Abandoned refrigerators, freezers, and similar airtight containers shall be regulated in accordance with the
provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code, sec. 756.011 et seq. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Regulation of abandoned refrigerators, freezers, and similar containers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec.
756.011 et seq.
ARTICLE 8.02 NOISE†
Sec. 8.02.001 General prohibition
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or wantonly use or operate or cause to be used or operated any
mechanical or electrical device, machine, apparatus, or instrument which causes or produces any sound or noise
which is reasonably calculated to disturb the peace and good order of the neighborhood or the persons owning,
using or occupying property within the city. (1998 Code, sec. 86.061)
Sec. 8.02.002 Specific noises prohibited
The noise or sound caused or produced by the operation of the devices, machines, apparatus or instruments
mentioned below is hereby defined as noises or sounds which are prohibited by this article:
(1) The operation of any mechanical or electrical device, machine, or instrument to intensify or
amplify or to reproduce the human voice or any other sound, within any building or on any premises
in the city, whereby the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the public streets or places or where
such device is maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting
attention of the passing public, or which is so placed or operated that the sounds coming therefrom
can be heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of travelers upon any street or public place, or of
persons in neighboring premises;
(2) The operation of open-air roller rinks or open-air skating rinks;
(3) Unnecessarily sounding automobile horns or warning devices;
(4) Open blast furnaces under or connected with steam boilers or water heaters;
(5) The operation of any steam boiler or water heater to which is attached an instrument or outlet,
commonly called a “pop-off valve,” through which steam is permitted to escape when the steam
pressure within a boiler or water heater to which it is attached has reached a given pressure.
(1998 Code, sec. 86.061(b))
Sec. 8.02.003 Exemptions
This article shall not apply to:
(1) Delegations from neighboring towns and cities visiting in the city on goodwill tours;
(2) The operation of microphones or any mechanical or electrical device, machine or instrument to
intensify the human voice or any other sound at any public or community gathering of a civic or
religious nature;
(3) Community trades day activity; and
(4) Political speakings.
(1998 Code, sec. 86.061(c))
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/420
ARTICLE 8.03 WEAPONS*
Sec. 8.03.001 Slingshots
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, discharge, shoot, propel or use on the streets and public property
in the city a weapon or instrument used for propelling missiles, commonly known as a slingshot, or to discharge,
shoot or propel the missiles therefrom over the streets and public property of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 86.091)
Sec. 8.03.002 Discharge of firearms
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any pistol, gun, or firearm of any kind, or discharge any cannon
cracker or torpedo, airgun, air pistol, pellet gun or missile, within the city limits or on or across any public
square, street, or alley in the city. (1998 Code, sec. 86.092)
ARTICLE 8.04 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that is self propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate; or
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Nuisance vehicle. A junked vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public
right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private
property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health
and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is a public nuisance.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.051)
Sec. 8.04.002 Penalty
In addition to the other remedies provided by this article and any other remedies provided by applicable state
law, it is hereby expressly provided that any person maintaining a public nuisance upon private property, public
property, or on a public right-of-way, as defined in this article, who fails to remove and abate such public
nuisance after notice as provided in this article and who fails to request a public hearing within a ten (10) day
period as provided in this article, shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a public nuisance. On conviction, the
court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. (1998 Code, sec. 91.058)
Sec. 8.04.003 Enforcement
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/420
(a) Generally. The provisions of this article and the procedures to be followed for its administration shall be
administered by the chief of police of the city or his designee, provided that the actual removal of vehicles or
parts thereof from property may be performed by any other person duly authorized by the city manager.
(b) Authority to enter private property. A person authorized by this article to administer the procedures
authorized by this article may enter private property for the purpose specified in this article to examine a vehicle
or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle
or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance. The municipal court of the city may issue orders necessary to enforce
the procedures set forth in this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.052)
Sec. 8.04.004 Notice to remove
(a) Vehicle on private property. When it is determined that such public nuisance is being maintained on
private property within the city, a ten-day notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property, and
that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days, must be mailed to the last known registered owner of
the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record, and the owner or occupant of the private premises
whereupon such public nuisance exists, by certified mail with a five-day return requested. Such notice shall
further provide that a request for a hearing must be made by any interested party before the expiration of said
ten-day period. If the notice required herein is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official
action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return.
(b) Vehicle on public property or public right-of-way. When it is determined that such public nuisance is
being maintained upon public property or a public right-of-way within the city, a ten-day notice stating the
nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way, and that it must be removed and
abated within ten (10) days, must be mailed, by certified mail with a five (5) day return requested, to the last
known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record, and the owner or occupant of the
public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the
public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to
abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days after the date of the return.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.053)
Sec. 8.04.005 Hearing
Within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the public nuisance, the owner or occupant of the premises
adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, as the case may be, may request a public
hearing before the city manager prior to the removal, as a public nuisance, of the junked vehicle or any part
thereof. An order by the city manager requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must include a
description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the
information is available at the site. (1998 Code, sec. 91.054)
Sec. 8.04.006 Notification to state department of transportation
Notice shall be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of
removal of any vehicle or part thereof pursuant to the provisions of this article. Such notice shall identify the
vehicle or the vehicle parts thus removed. (1998 Code, sec. 91.055)
Sec. 8.04.007 Disposal to demolisher; reconstruction of removed vehicle prohibited
(a) Disposal. A junked vehicle or vehicle part may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher, or
any suitable site for processing as scrap or salvage. The process of disposal must comply with the provisions of
this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/420
(b) Reconstruction of removed vehicle prohibited. A junked vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this
article shall not be reconstructed or made operable after it has been removed.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.056)
Sec. 8.04.008 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner
where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property;
(2) A vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard; or
(3) An unlicensed operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a collector on
the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that
they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a
fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.057)
ARTICLE 8.05 SEX OFFENDERS' RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS*
Sec. 8.05.001 Prohibition
It is unlawful for any person who is required to register on the state department of public safety sex offender
database (the “database”) under section 62 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure because of a reportable
conviction or adjudication involving a victim younger than seventeen (17) years of age or who has been civilly
committed as a sexually violent predator under chapter 841 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and is subject
to outpatient treatment and supervision under that chapter, to establish a permanent or temporary residence
within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including, but not limited to, a school,
daycare facility, playground, park, ballpark, public or private youth center, public or private swimming pool,
video arcade facility, or church, as those terms are defined in section 481.134 of the Texas Health and Safety
Code. Each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed and constitute a separate offense.
Sec. 8.05.002 Evidentiary matters; measurements
(a) It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to such a person if that person's record appears on
the database and the database indicates that the victim was a minor.
(b) For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by
following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest
property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as defined herein, or, in the case of multiple
residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line
of the premises where children commonly gather.
(c) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained and annually updated by the police department
which shall be available to the public at the police department.
Sec. 8.05.003 Culpable mental state not required
Neither the allegation, nor evidence, of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by
this article.
Sec. 8.05.004 Affirmative defenses
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/420
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply:
(1) The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary
residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date
of the adoption of this article.
(2) The person required to register on the database was a minor when such person committed the
offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person required to register on the database is a minor.
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, within 1,000 feet of the permanent or
temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person
established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration
laws of the state.
(5) The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this article would not apply to
the person who was erroneously listed on the database.
Sec. 8.05.005 Penalty
An offense under the article is deemed to be a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punishable by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense.
(Ordinance O-10-09 adopted 11/17/09)
ARTICLE 8.06 CURFEW FOR MINORS*
Sec. 8.06.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article the following words or terms shall have the meanings given below:
Curfew hours. Those hours between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. each day and those hours between 9:00 a.m.
and 4.00 p.m. on each day the Lamesa Independent School District is officially conducting classes on any of its
campuses.
(Ordinance O-04-16 adopted 4/9/16)
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting conditions that call for immediate
action, including, but not be limited to, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident, or any unforeseen situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious illness, bodily injury, loss of life, or for the preservation of
property.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business to which the public has access or is invited, including, but
not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private
agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under 17 years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, entity, or corporation operating, managing, or
conducting the operation of any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association,
entity, or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/420
Parent. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of a minor, or a person at least 18 years
of age who is authorized by the parent or guardian of a minor or by court order to have the care and custody of
such minor.
Police department. The Lamesa police department and shall include any law enforcement agency working with
the city through any inter-agency agreement.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and shall include, but
not be limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transportation facilities, restaurants, theaters, game rooms, shops, shopping centers, or any other place
that offers for sale services, merchandise, or entertainment services.
Remain. To linger or stay, or to fail to leave, when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator,
or other person in control of the premises.
Sec. 8.06.002 Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly remain, walk, run, or stand, or to operate or ride about in
any motor vehicle or bicycle, in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city
during curfew hours.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control
allow, a minor to knowingly remain, walk, run, or stand, or to operate or ride about in any motor vehicle or
bicycle, in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
Sec. 8.06.003 Defenses
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 8.06.002(a) of this article that a minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian; provided, however, that the
minor has in his or her possession at the time he is stopped by law enforcement personnel, a written
note signed by the parent or guardian authorizing the errand;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel, and traveling by a direct route
between the point of departure and destination;
(4) Engaged in a lawful employment activity, or going directly to the employment activity, or
returning directly to the minor's residence or place designated by the minor's parent or guardian from
the employment activity;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On an errand made necessary by a verifiable illness, injury, or emergency;
(7) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's permanent residence or place designated by the minor's
parent or guardian or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor of the minor's permanent
residence or place designated by the minor's parent or guardian, if the neighbor did not complain to
the police department about the minor's presence at their residence;
(8) Attending a school, religious, or government-sponsored or other civic activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by an educational, religious, or governmental institution, civic organization, or
other similar entity, or traveling directly to, or returning from, any such activity;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/420
(9) Engaged, participating in, or traveling to or from any event, function, or activity for which the
application of section 8.06.002(a) of this article would contravene the minor's rights protected by the
United States Constitution including, but not limited to, First Amendment rights such as the free
exercise of religion, freedom of speech, or the right of assembly; or
(10) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code; or
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 8.06.002(a) of this article that the minor has been
directed by the minors parent or guardian to engage in a specific activity or to carry out expressed instructions,
during the time that the minor is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or responsibilities.
Sec. 8.06.004 Enforcement
(a) A police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 8.06.002(a) of this article, shall:
(1) Ascertain the name and address of the minor;
(2) Ascertain the name and address of the minor's parent(s) or guardian(s);
(3) Ask the minor's reason for being in a public place and determine if a defense to prosecution
pursuant to section 8.06.002(a) of this article applies;
(4) If the police officer reasonably believes that the minor is violating section 8.06.002(a) of this
article and that no defense described in section 8.06.003 of this article is present, issue to the minor a
municipal court misdemeanor citation for a violation of said section;
(5) Immediately notify the parent(s) or guardian(s) to pick up the minor at the location where the
minor is being detained, advise the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the fact that the minor was charged
with a violation of this article by issuance of a municipal court misdemeanor citation, soliciting
cooperation in the future, and including a warning that any subsequent violation will possibly result
in prosecution of the parent(s) or guardian(s) pursuant to section 8.06.002(b) of this article.
(6) Submit a copy of the citation to the police department which shall then send a letter to the
parent(s) or guardian(s) of the minor advising of the fact that the minor was charged.
(b) After following the procedures described in subsection (a) above, the police officer may take the minor
into custody and deliver the minor to a holding location if the officer reasonably believes that the minor is in
violation of section 8.06.002(a) of this article, that no defense described in section 8.06.003 of this article is
present, and:
(1) The minor has received a municipal court misdemeanor citation for a violation of section
8.06.002(a) of this article on more than one (1) previous occasion; or
(2) Reasonable grounds exist to believe that the minor has engaged in delinquent conduct or
conduct indicating a need for supervision in accordance with section 51.03 and section 52.01 of the
Texas Family Code.
(c) When a minor is taken into custody under subsection (b) above, the police department shall immediately
notify the minor's parent(s) or guardian(s) to pick up the minor at the holding location. After a parent or guardian
of the minor arrives at the holding location and provides the information required by the police department to
file an incident report, if the officer reasonably believes the parent(s) or guardian(s) has violated section
8.06.002(b) of this article and that no defense described in section 8.06.003 of this article exists, the police
officer may, in his or her discretion, issue to the parent(s) or guardian(s) a municipal court misdemeanor citation
for a violation of section 8.06.002(b) of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/420
Sec. 8.06.005 Penalties
(a) A person who shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence violates any provision
of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to
exceed $500.00.
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 8.06.002(a) of this article and shall refer the minor to
juvenile court.
(Ordinance O-04-10 adopted 8/3/10)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01.001 Emergency actions by city officers, agents and employees
Officers, agents, and employees of the city are hereby empowered and authorized to take whatever action is
deemed necessary in response to emergency situations arising within the city in order to deal with such situation
in the most effective manner possible under the existing circumstances. Neither the city nor the officer, agent or
employee of the city shall in any way be liable for any failure to use “ordinary care” in such emergency
situations. This section shall prevail over any other section of this code, ordinance, policy or work rule with
regard to the standard of care to be exercised by an officer, agent or employee engaged in emergency action.
(1998 Code, sec. 5.001(b))
Sec. 9.01.002 Liability for penalty for failure to perform duties
No provision of this code designating the official duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to
make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless
the intention of the city council is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1998 Code,
sec. 5.001(a))
Sec. 9.01.003 Neglect of duty
If any officer of this city shall willfully or negligently fail to perform any duty imposed upon him by any section
of this code or ordinance of the city, he shall, when the act or omission is not otherwise defined, be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (1998 Code, sec. 5.002)
Sec. 9.01.004 Moneys collected to be submitted to director of finance
All officers and/or employees of the city, whether they be elective or appointive and whose duty it may be to
collect money, shall turn all moneys collected over to the director of finance, who, on call of the city council,
shall submit a detailed report of any or all collections submitted to him. (1998 Code, sec. 5.003)
Sec. 9.01.005 Purchasing or acquiring witness fees
It shall be unlawful for any mayor, councilman, policeman, or other officer of this city, whether elective or
appointive, to purchase or otherwise acquire from the party interested any fee or fees coming to any witness in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/420
any proceeding whatsoever before the municipal court. (1998 Code, sec. 5.004)
ARTICLE 9.02 EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.02.001–9.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Workers' Compensation
Sec. 9.02.031 Adoption of state law
The provisions of the Texas Workers' Compensation Act, Labor Code 401.001 et seq. and 504.001 et seq., are
hereby adopted and made applicable to the city and to all employees thereof. (1998 Code, sec. 6.001)
Sec. 9.02.032 Coverage
By authority of the act referred to in section 9.02.031, the city may elect to be self-insuring or join a joint
insurance fund and all employees of the city are hereby insured by the city in the manner and to the extent
authorized by such act and the laws referred to therein. The city shall pay to any and all employees, and to their
representatives and beneficiaries, the compensation and benefits to which they may become entitled from and
after such time and date under the terms of such act and the workers' compensation laws of the state made
applicable by such act to cities, towns and villages adopting its provisions. (1998 Code, sec. 6.002)
Sec. 9.02.033 Administration of program; notice to employees
(a) Administration. The workers' compensation program shall be administered by the personnel director, or
under his supervision and direction, and he shall promulgate such rules and prescribe such forms as may be
necessary for its effective administration.
(b) Notice to employees. The personnel director, on behalf of the city council, shall give written notice to all
employees of the city that, in accordance with state law, the city has provided workers' compensation insurance
for all of its employees and for payment to each employee, his representatives and beneficiaries, of the workers'
compensation insurance benefits provided by law.
(c) Coordination of claims. The personnel director, on behalf of the city council, shall coordinate all workers'
compensation claims with the state workers' compensation commission.
(1998 Code, sec. 6.003)
Sec. 9.02.034 Risk management and safety fund
(a) Established. There is hereby established an account to be known as the city risk management and safety
fund, from which account [shall] be paid any costs, administrative expenses, charges, benefits, insurance and
awards authorized by the laws adopted and made applicable to the city by sections 9.02.031 and 9.02.032. The
records of such account shall show the appropriations made thereto, all receipts from other sources, and all
disbursements authorized hereby.
(b) Investment of funds. It is further provided that the funds be invested in securities of the United States, [or]
of the city, or deposited in the city's depository.
(1998 Code, sec. 6.004)
Secs. 9.02.035–9.02.070 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/420
Division 3. Texas Municipal Retirement System*
Sec. 9.02.071 Ordinances on file
The specific ordinances providing for participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted by the
city, are not included in this article, but they are hereby specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained
on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 9.03 POLICE
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.03.001 Prisoners
(a) Communications with prisoners. No person, without prior consent of the chief of police, shall hold any
communication with any prisoner confined in the city jail.
(b) Delivery of intoxicants or other articles. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver to any prisoner
confined in the city jail intoxicating liquors or other articles whatsoever without proper authority.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.002)
Sec. 9.03.002 Refusal to assist officer
Every person who shall refuse to aid or assist the chief of police or any policeman to make any arrest, or to
suppress any disturbance, when called upon to do so by them, shall be fined as provided in this code. (1998
Code, sec. 83.003)
Sec. 9.03.003 Giving false name or address to officer
It shall be unlawful for any person when giving a written promise to appear, or given a written notice by any
police officer to appear before the municipal court of the city to answer for an offense against any law of this
state or section of this code or any ordinance of the city, to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of
residence or address, or any other than the true name and the true place of his residence or address, upon the
request of such officer. (1998 Code, sec. 83.004)
Sec. 9.03.004 Arrest without warrant
Arrest without warrant may be made by the chief of police or any other police officer of the city when offenses
against the laws, sections of this code or ordinances of the city are committed in their presence or when persons
are found in suspicious places and under circumstances which reasonably would indicate that such persons have
been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten or are about to commit some offense against the
law. (1998 Code, sec. 83.005)
Secs. 9.03.005–9.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Police Department*
Sec. 9.03.041 Chief of police
(a) Appointment; oath. There shall be appointed by the city manager a chief of police. Before assuming his
duties of office he shall take and subscribe to the oath of office prescribed in the constitution of the state.
(b) Duties.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/420
(1) It shall be the duty of the chief of police to execute all process or orders issued to him by the
mayor or other officer of the city having authority to issue same, and to make return thereof
according to law. He shall supervise, control and direct the police force of the city and shall see that
they promptly and faithfully perform their duties. He shall also apportion the police force into
different watches so that the entire city shall be diligently protected at all times, and shall assign each
policeman his round of duty.
(2) The chief shall also be active in quelling riots, disorder and disturbances of the peace within the
city. It shall be his duty to arrest without warrant all violators of the police peace [sic], and all who
obstruct or interfere with him in the execution of the duties of his office, and who shall be guilty of
any disorderly conduct or disturbance whatsoever; and he shall have authority to take suitable and
sufficient bail for the appearance before the corporation court of any person charged with an offense
against any section of this code or ordinance of the city.
(c) Chief of police as officer of court. The chief of police shall, either in person or by deputy, attend upon the
municipal court when in session, shall preserve order therein, and shall promptly and faithfully execute all writs
and processes issued from such court. He shall bring all prisoners for trial before such court at the opening
thereof each day, and shall furnish the city manager with a list of arrests made, by whom made and offenses
charged and the names and residences of witnesses, together with such other and further information as may be
required. He shall enforce and collect all judgments rendered by the court.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.021)
Sec. 9.03.042 Interlocal police assistance
(a) Authority to render assistance. The mayor, city manager or chief of police of the city is authorized to
assign the regularly employed law enforcement personnel of the city police department to assist any other
county or municipality in this state when a state of civil emergency in such other county or municipality has
been declared by proper authority, upon request by such proper authority, and when, in the opinion of such
proper authority, a need exists in such other county or municipality for the services of additional law
enforcement officers to protect the health, life, and property of such other county or municipality, its inhabitants,
and the visitors thereto, by reason of riot, unlawful assembly characterized by the use of force and violence, or
threat thereof by three (3) or more persons acting together or without lawful authority, or during time of natural
disaster or man-made calamity.
(b) Status of officers of other jurisdiction assigned to city. When any law enforcement officer of any other
county or municipality is assigned to this city under authority of an order adopted by the governing body of such
other county or municipality to assist under circumstances as described above which may exist in this city, such
officer shall be deemed a peace officer of this city and shall be under the command of the chief of police of this
city while so assigned, and he shall have all the powers of a regular law enforcement officer of this city as fully
as though he were regularly employed by the city, and his qualifications, respectively, for office where regularly
employed shall constitute his qualification for office in this city, and no other oath, bond, or compensation shall
be made.
(c) Compensation of city officers performing duties outside city. When any law enforcement officer of this
city is ordered by proper authority to perform peace officer duties outside the territorial limits of this city, he
shall be entitled to the same wage, salary, pension, and all other compensation and all other rights for such
service, including injury or death benefits, the same as though the service had been rendered within the limits of
this city; and he shall also be paid for any reasonable expenses of travel, food, or lodging, as well as for damage
to equipment and clothing, and medical expenses, which he may incur while on duty outside such limits, or
while traveling to or from such assignment.
(d) Reimbursement for services of officer of other jurisdiction. When any law enforcement officer is assigned
to this city from another county or city under circumstances described above, and upon request of the proper
authority, this city will reimburse the county or city furnishing the services of such law enforcement officer for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/420
actual expenses of travel, food, and lodging, and for such cost or damage to equipment and clothing resulting
from the services of such law enforcement officer in this city and for which the county or city where he is
regularly employed has paid.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.022)
State law reference–Law enforcement services provided through cooperation of municipalities, counties and certain other local
governments, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 362.001 et seq.
Secs. 9.03.043–9.03.080 Reserved
Division 3. Abandoned or Stolen Property*
Sec. 9.03.081 Sale authorized
All abandoned, stolen or recovered property of every kind, including motor vehicles, which shall remain
unclaimed in the possession of the police department for a period of thirty (30) days without being claimed or
reclaimed by the owner, whether known or not, may be sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of as
provided in article 18.17 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure. (1998 Code, sec. 83.041)
Sec. 9.03.082 Delivery of property to purchasing agent
The chief of police shall give to the purchasing agent of the city a list of all property subject to sale under the
provisions of this division, and shall thereafter, when requested by the purchasing agent, deliver such property,
except motor vehicles, to the purchasing agent before the date of sale and take a receipt therefrom showing in
detail all property so delivered. Motor vehicles shall be kept by the chief of police until a sale has been made.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.042)
Sec. 9.03.083 Disposition of proceeds of sale
All funds received for property sold pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be deposited to the credit of
the general fund of the city to be thereafter disbursed as the governing body of the city shall order. (1998 Code,
sec. 83.043)
Secs. 9.03.084–9.03.120 Reserved
Division 4. Police Reserve*
Sec. 9.03.121 Established; maximum number of members
There is hereby established a police reserve force for the city. The police reserve force shall not exceed twenty
members. (1998 Code, sec. 83.081)
Sec. 9.03.122 Appointment and dismissal of members
Members of the police reserve force shall be appointed and/or relieved at the discretion of the chief of police and
shall serve as police officers during the actual discharge of official duties. (1998 Code, sec. 83.082)
Sec. 9.03.123 Qualifications of members
The chief of police may establish minimum physical, mental, educational and moral standards as used by the
regular police department, but in no case shall the standards be less than those established by the state
commission on law enforcement officer standards and education. (1998 Code, sec. 83.083)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/420
Sec. 9.03.124 Training of members
Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards of the state commission on law
enforcement officer standards and education established for all reserve law enforcement officers, and such
standards must be met before a person appointed as a reserve law enforcement officer may carry a weapon or
otherwise act as a peace officer. The chief of police shall establish qualifications and standards of training for
members of the police reserve force and shall establish rules and regulations governing reserve police officers.
(1998 Code, sec. 83.084)
State law reference–Commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1701.
Sec. 9.03.125 Compensation of members; benefits; members to serve in supplementary capacity
Members of the police reserve force shall serve without compensation. Uniforms and uniform compensation
may be provided to the reserve police officers at the discretion of the chief of police. The uniform compensation
shall be based solely upon time served by the member of the police reserve while in training for or in the
performance of official duties. The city may provide hospital and medical assistance to members of the police
reserve force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties, in the same manner as provided by
the city for its full-time police officers, and reserve officers shall be eligible for death benefits as set out in
chapter 86, Acts of 60th Legislature, Regular Session 1967, as amended (article 6228f V.T.C.S); provided,
however, that nothing in this division shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the police reserve
force to become eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to state statute, to which regular
officers may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. Reserve police officers shall act only in a
supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of regular
police officers. (1998 Code, sec. 83.085)
State law reference–Hospital and medical assistance and death benefits for police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
sec. 142.003.
Sec. 9.03.126 Call to service
Members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into
active service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve
the peace and enforce the laws. (1998 Code, sec. 83.086)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.02.001 Short title
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/420
The following regulations shall be and the same are hereby adopted and approved and shall be known as and
may be cited as “City of Lamesa Subdivision Regulation.” (1998 Code, sec. 22.001)
Sec. 10.02.002 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless a different meaning is plainly required by the
context:
Alleys. Minor ways, which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
Authority. The health authority of the city as provided for in section 6.01.001 of this code.
Board of education. The Lamesa Independent School District.
Cul-de-sac. A street closed at one end.
Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land having access to a street, either occupied or to be occupied by a
building or building group together with accessory buildings, which parcel of land is designated as a separate
and distinct tract and is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat filed of
record.
May. Is deemed permissive.
Planning commission or commission. The planning and zoning commission of the city.
Shall. Is deemed mandatory.
Street. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated.
(1) Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic.
(2) Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial
streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets
for circulation within such a development.
(3) Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets
and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(4) Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
Subdivider. One who owns, controls, develops or creates a subdivision.
Subdivision. The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or parcels for the purpose of transfer of
ownership or building development, provided that a division of land for agricultural purposes into lots or parcels
of five (5) acres or more and not involving a new street or alley shall not be deemed a “subdivision.” The term
“subdivision” includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of
subdividing or to the context [sic], shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.002)
Sec. 10.02.003 Application of article; violations in area within city's extraterritorial jurisdiction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/420
(a) The rules and regulations prescribed in this article shall govern the approval and requirement of plats of
subdivisions within that land or area annexed to the city on or after February 15, 1959, and within the territory
and area outside the city limits over which the city has extraterritorial jurisdiction. This article, in its application,
shall include all of the area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, and the provisions of this article
shall have the same force and effect within such area of extraterritorial jurisdiction as within the applicable area
of the city, except as provided in subsections (b) and (c).
(b) No violation of any provision of this article outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the city's
area of extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall constitute a misdemeanor, nor shall any fine provided be applicable to a
violation within such area of extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(c) In the event any provision of this article is violated within the area of extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city
and outside its corporate limits, the city may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in the district court
to enjoin the violation.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.003)
State law reference–Extension of subdivision rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 212.003.
Sec. 10.02.004 Purpose of procedure, standards specified in article
The procedure and standards for the development, layout and design of subdivisions of real estate within the
corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as prescribed in this article, are intended to:
(1) Guide, assist and expedite the subdivider in correct procedures to be followed and to inform
them of the general standards which shall be required.
(2) Protect the public interests by controlling the location, design, class and type of streets,
sidewalks, utilities and essential services required.
(3) Provide, for the public welfare, the essential areas required for educational, recreational,
industrial and commercial purposes.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.004)
Sec. 10.02.005 General requirements
The following requirements shall be applicable to all subdivisions within the city or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction:
(1) Streets.
(A) The width of main thoroughfares and traffic streets shall be determined by the planning
commission.
(B) No street dedication shall be less than sixty feet (60') wide.
(C) All new streets shall be continuations of existing streets, of the same or greater width and
having the same names.
(D) Dead-end streets may be platted where the land adjoins property not subdivided, in
which case the streets shall be carried to the boundaries thereof. Where dead-end streets are
otherwise necessary, a cul-de-sac with a minimum radius of fifty feet (50') shall be provided.
(E) No intersecting street shall be platted with the angle included between adjoining street
lines less than thirty degrees (30°) nor more than one hundred fifty degrees (150°).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/420
(F) Streets shall be platted to allow two (2) tiers of lots with an alley between. Intersecting
cross streets may not be more than twelve hundred feet (1200') apart.
(G) Streets shall be platted with appropriate regard to topographical features lending
themselves to attractive treatment.
(H) Where plats are presented for approval which adjoin unplatted property, the owner of the
proposed subdivision shall provide his pro rata part of boundary streets.
(2) Alleys, reserve strips.
(A) Alleys shall be laid in the rear of lots fronting on adjoining streets. The minimum width
of any alley shall not be less than twenty feet (20') and shall be graded and leveled.
(B) Subdivision showing reserve strips of land controlling the access to public ways or
adjoining properties will be approved.
(3) Lots and blocks.
(A) In general, lots shall conform in width, depth and area to the pattern already established
in the adjacent areas, having due regard to the character of the neighborhood, its particular
suitability for development for residential purposes and, also taking into consideration the
natural topography of the ground, drainage, sanitary sewage facilities and the proposed layout
of the streets.
(B) In locations where sanitary sewers are not already available, and where there is no
immediate prospect for installation of sanitary sewers, then septic tanks of approved type may
be installed in conformity with the sections of this code, and rules, regulations and ordinances
of the city pertaining to public health; provided, however, that in no case shall septic tanks be
installed on lots having a frontage of less than sixty feet (60'), and a depth of less than one
hundred twenty-five feet (125'). Provided however, that if the soil texture in the area is such as
will not lend itself to the utilization of a septic tank, then the proposed size of the lots must be
increased to provide for a safe absorption of the effluent, as determined by the city health
authority.
(C) It shall be unlawful for the building inspector to issue a permit for any residence in any
subdivision utilizing as a building site the rear portion of any corner lot, or the rear portion of
any corner lot merged with a portion of any adjoining lot, to produce a plottage of sufficient
size to meet the minimum requirements for a permissible residential use.
(D) The minimum measurements, restrictions and conditions controlling the area and
dimensions of each lot in a subdivision shall conform to the deed restrictions therefor.
(E) For private housing projects and shopping villages, it will not be necessary to subdivide
tracts of land. Site plans, however, must be filed showing the arrangement of the project in
detail, together with essential requirements such as parking facilities, locations of buildings and
the other uses to be permitted.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.005)
Sec. 10.02.006 Changes and variations from article requirements
If it appears that strict observance of the provisions of this article will work undue hardship on the subdivider, or
is made impracticable or impossible due to unusual circumstances, the planning commission may grant such
change or variations from these rules and regulations it deems just and proper, provided that variations of any
one provision hereof in no way affects or mitigates the remainder. (1998 Code, sec. 22.006)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/420
Sec. 10.02.007 Flood area and flood damage
The city council will review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(2) All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located,
elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage, and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and
(4) Require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the
system into floodwaters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid
impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.007)
Secs. 10.02.008–10.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Preliminary Plats
Sec. 10.02.041 Prerequisites to conditional approval
The subdivider shall have prepared a preliminary plat, together with improvement plans and other
supplementary material as required by this article. Six (6) copies of the preliminary plat with written application
for conditional approval shall be submitted to the city building inspector's office not less than ten (10) days prior
to the meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered. The following notice shall be stamped
on the face of each preliminary plat by the city engineer: “Preliminary plat for inspection purposes only and in
no way official or approved for record purposes” and shall have the other designated city department and the
board of education review the plat and written comments relative to the conformity thereof with the provisions
of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 22.021)
Sec. 10.02.042 Scale, contents
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and shall include
the following items:
(1) Boundary, street, alley and building lines.
(2) Width and names of streets and location with reference to all streets and alleys adjacent to and
leading to the subdivision.
(3) Width and depth of all lots.
(4) Watercourses and drainageways.
(5) Contour lines on not more than one foot (1') intervals with elevations based on USC and GS
datum.
(6) Layout, in dotted lines, of all lots adjacent to the subdivision showing lot size, lot and block
numbers, and the name of the existing subdivision or the name of the property owner if undeveloped
land, all shown in dotted lines and figures.
(7) Scale and north point.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/420
(8) Name and address of subdivider.
(9) Name and address of engineer and surveyor.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.022)
Sec. 10.02.043 Duties of city officials, departments, etc., to check subdivision features
Upon receipt of an application for approval of a subdivision and the preliminary plat required by this article, the
following items shall be checked by the designated official, department or other agency:
(1) Building inspector.
(A) Contour map and drainage.
(B) Street layout and proposed street grades.
(C) Type of paving.
(D) Boundary lines.
(E) Monuments and benchmarks.
(F) Protective covenant restrictions.
(G) Location and width of alleys.
(H) Building lines and setback requirements.
(I) Occupancy regulations and requirements.
(J) Lot and block numbers.
(K) Street numbering layout.
(L) Street names.
(2) Water and wastewater department.
(A) Availability of adequate water and sewer mains to the subdivision.
(B) Water system layout and probable fire hydrant locations.
(C) Sanitary sewer layout and sewer easement designations.
(3) Electric utility company.
(A) General power line layout.
(B) Location of necessary guy easements.
(C) Availability of lines for adequate service conditions.
(D) Future streetlight service.
(4) Board of education.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/420
(A) Probable new school sites.
(5) Natural gas utility company.
(A) Availability of adequate gas mains to the subdivision.
(B) Gas system layout.
(6) Telephone utility company.
(A) General cable line layout.
(B) Location of necessary guy easements.
(C) Availability of lines for adequate service conditions.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.023)
Sec. 10.02.044 Conditional approval
Following a review of the preliminary plat and other material submitted for conformity thereof to these
regulations and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of
improvements to be made by him, the planning commission shall, within (30) days, act thereon as submitted or
modified. If the plat be approved, the planning commission shall express its approval as conditional approval
and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved shall express its disapproval and its reason
therefor with a recommendation to the city council for further action by that body. The action of the planning
commission shall be noted on all six (6) copies of the preliminary plat, referred and attached to any conditions
determined. One (1) copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy retained by the planning engineer and
the others retained by the city engineer, after it has been considered by the council. Conditional approval of a
preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat; rather it shall be deemed an expression of
approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will
be submitted for approval of the planning commission and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of
these regulations and the conditions of the conditional approval, if any. (1998 Code, sec. 22.024)
Sec. 10.02.045 Notification requirement for certain replats
Where any of the area to be resubdivided or replatted was, within the immediate preceding five (5) years, limited
by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two dwelling units per lot,
or if any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two
residential units per lot, then the following additional procedures shall apply:
(1) Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing, in
a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
(2) Written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owners (according to the most
recently approved ad valorem tax roll) of all lots that are within the original subdivision and that are
within 200 feet of the lots to be replatted, together with a copy of Section 212.015(c) in the Local
Government Code for the State of Texas.
(3) If the proposed replat is protested in accordance with this subsection, the proposed replat must
receive, in order to be approved, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the members present
of the planning commission and/or city council, as applicable. For a legal protest, written instruments
signed by the owners of at least 20 percent of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the
area covered by the proposed replat and extending 200 feet from that area, but within the original
subdivision, must be filed with the municipal authority responsible for approving the replat, prior to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/420
the close of the public hearing. In computing this percentage of land area, the area of streets and
alleys shall be included within the adjacent lots.
(4) Compliance with subsection (3) above is not required for approval of a replat of part of a
preceding plat, if the area to be replatted was designated or reserved for other than single or twofamily
residential use, by notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded
restrictions applicable to the plat.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 10.02.046–10.02.080 Reserved
Division 3. Final Plats
Sec. 10.02.081 Generally
(a) The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat, as approved; and, if desired by the
subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and
develop at the time, provided however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of this article.
(b) In cases where a final plat is submitted for approval and where no change from the approved preliminary
plat has been made, it will not be necessary for the planning commission to pass upon such final plat before the
same is presented to the city council for approval. When such procedure is not necessary, such final plat shall be
approved by the engineering department; provided however, that the engineering department shall not consider
final approval of the plat unless the same has been delivered thereto on or before the Thursday immediately
preceding the regular meeting of the city council.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.031)
Sec. 10.02.082 Effect of change prior to submission
In the event that changes or alterations are made to the plat before submitted as final, the final plat shall be filed
with the office of the city engineer not less than five (5) days before the meeting of the planning commission at
which it is considered. The city engineer will check the plat as to compliance with this article and prepare a
report to be submitted to the planning commission along with the plat. (1998 Code, sec. 22.032)
Sec. 10.02.083 Scale, contents, etc.
(a) Number and size. A reproducible sepia and three (3) copies of the final plat shall be drawn upon sheets
twenty-four inches by thirty inches (24" x 30") and to a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100'). Where more than one sheet is required, an index sheet twenty-four inches by thirty inches (24" x
30") shall be filed showing the entire subdivision on the one sheet.
(b) Boundary symbol. The shape and the exterior boundaries of the land subdivided shall be indicated by the
use of a distinctive and individual symbol.
(c) Dimensions. The length of all straight lines, deflection angles, radii, arcs and central angles of all curves
shall be given along the property lines of each street or tabulated on the same sheet by showing all curve data
with its symbol. All dimensions along the lines of each lot, together with the angles of intersection which they
make with each other, shall be indicated.
(d) Adjacent landmarks. The names of all adjoining subdivisions, the side lines of abutting lots, lot and block
numbers, all in dotted lines, shall be indicated with, where possible, accurate reference ties to at least two
adjacent recognized land corners.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/420
(e) Survey monuments. The description and location of all survey monuments placed in the subdivision shall
be given. Two (2) permanent concrete monuments shall be placed on one of the longer lines of the subdivision as
far apart as possible, and still being visible to each other; with the azimuth and distance between them and from
each of them to the nearest boundary corner of the subdivision accurately established and recorded on the plat.
Such monuments shall be not less than ten inches (10") in diameter if poured in a drilled hole or not less than six
inches (6") if poured in a pipe; they shall be set at least one foot (1') in good caliche or in sound rock, and
backfilled with concrete. The exact point in the top of the monument shall be marked by a copper or brass bolt
set in the concrete with a cross filed or scored thereon.
(f) Title, general information. A title shall be included showing the name of the subdivision, the name of the
subdivider, scale and the location of the subdivision, with reference to original surveys and a north point, which
may be magnetic or true north, with notation stating which.
(g) Survey's certificate. A survey's certificate shall be placed on the plat in the following form:
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That I, ____________, do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual and accurate
survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed under
my personal supervision, in accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of the City of
Lamesa, Texas.
(h) Certificate of ownership, dedication of land. A certificate of ownership and of dedication of all streets,
alleys, easements and lands to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner
of land, shall appear on the face of map, and shall contain a complete and accurate description of the land
subdivided and the streets dedicated.
(i) Certificate of approval. The certificate of approval by the city council which shall be place[d] on plat, shall
be in the following form:
Approved this ______ day of ______________, _____, by the City Council of the City of
Lamesa, Texas.
Mayor
City Secretary
(j) Deed restrictions. The subdivider shall furnish the city a copy of his deed restrictions and the authorization
for the city to record the plat and deed restrictions at the same time the final plat is submitted for approval.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.033)
Sec. 10.02.084 Approval
After final approval, the mayor and city secretary shall sign the reproducible sepia, and the developer shall then
have the plat filed for record and a certified copy returned immediately to the city secretary. No work shall be
started by the city before such certified copy is returned. (1998 Code, sec. 22.034)
Secs. 10.02.085–10.02.120 Reserved
Division 4. Improvements
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/420
Sec. 10.02.121 Agreement for improvements and utilities; escrow deposit
(a) After the final plat has been approved and before any improvements are made or utilities installed, the
engineering department will complete a preliminary engineering survey and study detail to determine the
requirements for such work. The subdivider will then be required to enter into a contract agreement with the city
authorizing the construction of the necessary water and sewer extensions to provide service to the subdivision.
The subdivider shall agree to pay into an escrow construction account an amount equal to one hundred percent
(100%) of the estimated costs of the required extensions and engineering. This cost will be based upon estimated
quantities, as determined by the engineering department from their preliminary survey and study, using the
lowest unit prices received for each phase of construction, as established by formal or informal proposals from at
least two (2) outside contractors at the time the work is to be done.
(b) The city will furnish the necessary engineering and furnish supervision of construction, at a cost to the
subdivider, provided that outside contracts can be awarded upon a unit cost basis.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.041)
Sec. 10.02.122 Street signs and markers; installation, cost
Street signs and markers, in accordance with standards adopted by the city, will be required at each intersection
within the subdivision and at street entrances into the subdivision. An advance deposit in an amount equal to the
actual cost of the signs alone will be made by the subdivider at the time the utility agreement is completed. The
city will provide posts for the markers and make the installations as the subdivision progresses, with all signs in
place by the time the subdivision is open for use. (1998 Code, sec. 22.042)
Sec. 10.02.123 Completion, deposit as prerequisite to issuance of building, plumbing, electrical permits
No building permit, or any water, sewer, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the city to the owner or
any other person with respect to any property in said subdivision or resubdivision covered by this article until:
(1) The developer and/or owner has fully completed and paid for the improvements required to be
made by the terms of this article, including the installation of streets with proper paving, curb and
gutter, drainage structures, storm sewers, alleys and the installation of water and sanitary sewer
mains, all according to the specifications of the city; or
(2) An escrow deposit sufficient to pay for the cost of such improvements as determined by the city
engineer computed on a private commercial rate basis has been made with the city secretary,
accompanied by an agreement signed by the developer and/or owner authorizing the city to make
such improvements at prevailing private commercial rates or to have the same made by a private
contractor and paid for out of the escrow deposit.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.043)
Sec. 10.02.124 Work to be done by city; responsibility of city
The city will:
(1) Make all water service taps at their regular charge for such service.
(2) (A) Install or construct all water and sanitary sewer mains as approved on the plans
either directly or by contract.
(B) The water and sewer lines as completed will become the property of the city and the
developer or builder shall have no right or title in same and the city will maintain said lines at
its own expense. Extensions of said lines may be made at any time the city may desire.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/420
(C) The city shall never be liable for payment of interest on any deposits, payments or
refunds provided for herein.
(D) The builder or developer shall never have the right to demand payment hereunder out of
any funds of the city.
(3) Not reimburse any part of the cost of engineering, constructing paving, curb and gutter,
drainage structures, storm sewers, street name signs, water and sanitary sewer mains that are
necessary to serve the subdivision.
(4) Upon approval by the city council, pay to the developer of a subdivision within the city, the
difference of cost in extending a water and sewer main in excess of mains necessary to serve the
subdivision, provided the city council finds that water and sewer main in excess of mains necessary
to serve the same is necessary to take care of future development and is beneficial and necessary to
maintain adequate flow of water and sewer.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.044)
Sec. 10.02.125 Storm sewers; installation, expense
(a) Plans and specifications for the improvements enumerated in section 10.02.123 shall meet the approval of
the engineering department. If it is determined that additional drainage facilities in the form of storm sewers
within the subdivision are necessary, the developer shall prepare, with the approval of the engineering
department, plans and specifications to be used by him in correcting the drainage. All such work necessary to be
done under such plans and specifications shall be done at the sole expense of the developer. Storm sewers
required to provide drainage from the point where stormwater emanates from the subdivision to an adequate
drainage point along existing streets, may, at its discretion, be provided by the city.
(b) In the event that the cost of the storm drain construction is so great as to be prohibitive for either the
subdivider or the city, all areas affected by such drainage shall be omitted from the development.
(1998 Code, sec. 22.045)
Sec. 10.02.126 Final accounting between city and developer for water and wastewater mains
A final accounting of each project shall be the basis of final settlement with the developer for actual costs of
water and wastewater mains and shall, in all cases, be one hundred percent (100%) of the actual costs of the
project, including engineering, based on the unit prices set out in the agreement. In the event that it is impossible
to award a contract for such work upon unit price basis, it will then become the obligation of the developer to
provide complete engineering information, including plans and specifications, on which contractors may bid, to
determine a lump sum price for such work. The ratio of payment between the developer and the city shall remain
the same, with one hundred percent (100%) of such costs by the developer. (1998 Code, sec. 22.046)
Sec. 10.02.127 Temporary water service to structures under construction
The city may furnish temporary water service to houses, buildings or other structures under construction.
Temporary water service may be provided upon application at any desired location. The developer shall be
required upon application for such service to pay all unrecoverable cost of such temporary service, to pay such
tap charge as required by the city, and to make such deposits as required by the city for water service, before
temporary service is provided. The developer shall be refunded the deposit for water service, less the amount of
water used, upon the termination of temporary water service. (1998 Code, sec. 22.047)
Sec. 10.02.128 Small tract subdivisions
Any subdivider proposing to subdivide and bring into the city limits City of Lamesa, Texas a tract of land the
total size of which does not exceed one acre may apply to the city council of the City of Lamesa, Texas for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/420
authority to subdivide said tract and bring it into the city limits of the City of Lamesa, Texas without providing
for the installation of paving, curb and gutter with respect to the streets of said subdivision and without paying
for the cost of constructing water and sewer lines to said subdivision. Any subdivider making application to the
city council as herein provided shall contain in his application to the city council an obligation binding on the
subdivider, his heirs and assigns, that at such time that any street or streets within said subdivision or abutting
said subdivision are paved, either voluntarily or by assessment, the subdivider shall pay the cost thereof to the
city on the same basis that adjoining property owners pay for same. Said application shall also contain a
subdivider's agreement to not contest in any way the paving of said subdivision and shall also contain an
obligation binding upon the subdivider, his heirs and assigns, that at such time as the property within the
subdivision is assessed for the cost of providing sewer and water to the subdivision, the subdivider, his heirs and
assigns, shall not contest the same and shall pay the cost thereof to the city on the same basis that the city
charges subdividers who are required to pay the cost of such services at the time their subdivision is brought into
the city limits. (1998 Code, sec. 22.048)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 11.01.001 Payment of taxes; penalties
The provisions of state law applicable to municipalities shall apply to and govern the payment of taxes due and
owing to the city and penalties in connection therewith, to the same extent as if such provisions have been, by
the terms thereof, made applicable to city taxes by ordinances of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 16.001)
State law references–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.01.002 Tax liens
(a) Creation. A lien is hereby created on all property, personal and real, in favor of the city for all taxes owed
in connection with that particular item of property, ad valorem, occupation or otherwise. Such lien shall exist
from the first of January in each year until all the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims and
liens then existing or thereafter arising, and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind or judicial writ of
any kind can ever defeat such lien.
(b) Date of attachment. The lien for taxes created above shall attach to all property of the taxpayer owned on
the first of January and subsequently acquired, whether assessed or not.
(1998 Code, sec. 16.002)
Charter reference–Tax liens, art. V, sec. 3.
State law reference–Tax liens, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 32.
Sec. 11.01.003 Freeport goods
The city elects to tax that tangible personal property described in article VIII, section 1-j, subsection (a) of the
constitution of the state and section 11.251 of the Texas Property Tax Code, which would otherwise be exempt.
(1998 Code, sec. 16.003)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/420
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
ARTICLE 11.02 SALES AND USE TAX†
Sec. 11.02.001 Adopted
A one cent sales and use tax is hereby adopted and applicable within the city as provided by all applicable
statutes of the state relative to said sales and use tax, and the powers in regard thereto are hereby adopted except
as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter and the city charter and any amendments thereto. (1998 Code,
sec. 16.021)
Note–The sales and use tax was approved at an election held on December 12, 1967, and adopted by Resolution R-12-67 on December
14, 1967.
Sec. 11.02.002 Additional tax for benefit of economic development corporation
An additional one-half percent sales and use tax is hereby adopted and applicable within the city to be used for
the benefit of an economic development corporation as authorized under the provisions of section 4(a) of the
Development Corporation Act of 1979, and all applicable statutes of the state relative to said sales and use tax
and the powers in regard thereto are hereby adopted except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter and
the city charter and any amendments thereto. (1998 Code, sec. 16.022)
Sec. 11.02.003 Tax on residential use of gas and electricity
The imposition of the one percent (1%) city sales tax on residential use of natural gas and electricity within the
corporate limits of the city is to be continued in full force and effect from this date forward. (1998 Code, sec.
16.023)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Sec. 11.02.004 Tax on telecommunications services
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunication services sold within the city, except as to interstate
long distance telecommunications services.
(b) For purposes of this section, the sale of mobile telecommunications services is consummated in
accordance with section 151.061 of the Texas Tax Code. The sale of telecommunications services sold based on
a price that is measured by individual calls is consummated at the location where the call originates and
terminates or the location where the call either originates or terminates and at which the service address is also
located. Except as otherwise provided herein, the sale of telecommunications services sold on a basis other than
on a call-by-call basis is consummated at the location of the customer's place of primary use. A sale of post-paid
calling services is consummated at the location of the origination point of the telecommunications signal as first
identified by the seller's telecommunications system or by information received by the seller from the seller's
service provider if the system used to transport the signal is not that of the seller.
(c) The application of the exemption provided for in section 321.210(a) of the Texas Tax Code is hereby
repealed by the city as authorized by such section, except as to interstate long distance telecommunications
services.
(d) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate then imposed by the city for all other
local sales and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state.
(e) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of public accounts of the state, by United States
registered mail, a copy of Ordinance No. O-06-06, along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote
and discussion on Ordinance No. 14.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/420
(1998 Code, sec. 16.024)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on the sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
321.210.
ARTICLE 11.03 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Definitions
As hereinafter employed, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows:
Consideration. The cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall
not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to
the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Director of finance. The director of finance for the city.
Hotel. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations.
The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or
other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include
hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one
ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant [is other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined.]
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel
if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupy any room or rooms or sleeping
space or facility in a hotel for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of
payment for the period.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any
hotel.
Quarterly period. The regular quarterly period corresponding to that period for which tax reports are filed with
the state comptroller.
(1998 Code, sec. 16.031)
Sec. 11.03.002 Levy; exceptions
(a) Tax levied. There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room or space
furnished by any hotel where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, the tax
to be equal to five percent (5%) of the consideration paid by the occupant of the sleeping room of such hotel,
exclusive of the occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(2) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association organized and operated
exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which
inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual.
(1998 Code, sec. 16.032)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/420
Sec. 11.03.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in section
11.03.002 hereof for the city. (1998 Code, sec. 16.033)
Sec. 11.03.004 Reports
On the last day of the month following each quarter, every person described [required] in section 11.03.003
hereof to collect the tax imposed herein shall file a report with the director of finance showing the consideration
paid for all room or sleeping space occupancies, and any other information as the director of finance may
reasonably require. Such person required to pay the tax shall provide to the city a copy of the report filed with
the state comptroller. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report.
(1998 Code, sec. 16.034; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.03.005 Rules and regulations
The director of finance shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively
collect the taxes levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to
enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes
due under provisions of this article. (1998 Code, sec. 16.035)
Sec. 11.03.006 Penalties
If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein, to make reports as
required herein, or to pay to the director of finance the tax imposed herein shall fail to collect such tax or file a
false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by fine not
to exceed two hundred and no/100 dollars ($200.00) and shall pay to the director of finance the tax due, together
with a penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due for each thirty (30) days that the same is not timely filed.
(1998 Code, sec. 16.036)
Sec. 11.03.007 Advisory committee
The following persons shall constitute a committee for the purpose of advising the city manager in the
distribution of revenues collected from the hotel occupancy tax, provided that such committee's recommendation
is advisory only and the final decision for disbursement of such revenues shall rest entirely with the city
manager, viz:
(1) The mayor of the city;
(2) The president of the Lamesa Area Chamber of Commerce; and
(3) One other person to be selected by the city manager.
(1998 Code, sec. 16.037)
Sec. 11.03.008 Use of revenue
The revenue derived from the herein described hotel occupancy tax may be used only for those purposes
described in section 351.101 of the Tax Code of the state, the specific terms and provisions of which are
incorporated herein by reference just as though same were set out verbatim in this article at this point. (1998
Code, sec. 16.038)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/420
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are
not defined herein but are defined in the state laws regulating the operation of vehicles, any such definition
therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
Alley. A public way which extends only secondary means of access to abutting property.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.001)
Authorized emergency vehicle. A law enforcement vehicle, a fire department vehicle or ambulance when
engaged in delivery of emergency services. (Ordinance O-07-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/14)
Bicycle. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem
wheels either of which is over twenty inches (20") in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as
a bicycle though equipped with two (2) front or two (2) rear wheels.
Business district. The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when, within any six hundred feet (600')
along such roadway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to
hotels, banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings, which occupy at least three hundred feet
(300') of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300') collectively on both sides of the roadway.
Commercial vehicle. Any vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of property.
Crosswalk. That portion of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the
sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges
of the traversable roadway; any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers or freight.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.001)
Data communication. Any method used to transfer information, including, but not limited to, electronic mail,
file transfers, global positioning systems, and messaging. (Ordinance O-07-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/14)
Driver. Every person who drives or is in actual control of a vehicle. (1998 Code, sec. 92.001)
Engaging in a call. Talking into, dialing, or listening on a hand-held mobile telephone, and entering or reading
text messages. (Ordinance O-07-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/14)
Engine brakes. Any switch or device that adjusts vehicle engine timing and compression to slow the vehicle or
which converts the motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of vehicle
braking without the use of wheel brakes. (Ordinance O-06-13 adopted 4/16/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/420
Exhibition of acceleration. Accelerating a motor vehicle so as to move rapidly ahead of or out of a group of
other motor vehicles which are traveling at approximately the officially posted speed limit for the area; or
accelerating a motor vehicle so as to cause the drive wheels of the vehicle to spin, squeal, or otherwise lose
traction with the road surface; or accelerating a motor vehicle by making a rapid start from a stop sign, traffic
light, or other stopped or standing position, so as to cause the drive wheels of the vehicle to spin, squeal, or
otherwise lose traction with the road surface. (1998 Code, sec. 92.001)
Hand-held mobile communications device. A mobile telephone with which a user engages in a call using at least
one hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).
Hands-free mobile communications device. A mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is
equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by which a
user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically
disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate, deactivate,
or initiate a function of such telephone.
(Ordinance O-07-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/14)
Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then
the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may
come in conflict. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty feet (30') or more apart, then every crossing
of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
Loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or
unloading of passengers or materials.
Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than
three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor.
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self propelled, but not operated upon rails.
Operator. Every person who is in actual control of a vehicle upon a street or highway.
Owner. A person who holds the legal or equitable title to a vehicle. In the event a vehicle is the subject of an
agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof, with the right of purchase upon performance of the
conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or
lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, such conditional vendee or lessee or
mortgagor shall be deemed an owner for the purpose of this chapter.
Park. The standing or stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose
of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading.
Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
Police officer. Every officer of the municipal police department or any other officer authorized to direct or
regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner
and those having express or implied permission from the owner.
Railroad. A carrier of persons or property upon cars operated upon stationary rails.
Railroad train. A steam, electric or other type of motor-driven engine with or without cars coupled thereto,
operated upon stationary rails.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/420
Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
Roadway. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the
event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term “roadway” as used herein shall refer to
any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.
Safety zone. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and
which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
School crossing. Any crosswalk marked by signs or pavement markings designating it as a school crossing.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.001)
School crossing zone. A reduced-speed zone designated on a street by a local authority to facilitate safe crossing
of the street by children going to or leaving a public or private elementary or secondary school during the time
the reduced speed limit applies. (Ordinance O-07-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/14)
School zones. Areas adjacent or near to schools when properly marked by signs or pavement markings
designating them as school zones.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent
property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
Slow. A speed of not more than ten (10) miles per hour.
Stop. The complete cessation of movement.
Stop, stopping or standing. Any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or trafficcontrol
sign or signal.
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular travel.
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together, while
using any street for purpose of travel.
Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
Trailer. Every vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for the purpose of carrying persons or property
and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
Truck. Every vehicle designed primarily for the purpose of carrying property, but which may be used for
carrying persons and which is larger than a three-quarter (3/4) ton pickup.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a
highway, except devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.001)
Wireless communication device. A two-way, real time voice telecommunications service that is interconnected to
a public switched telephone network and commonly referred to as cellular service or personal communication
service. (Ordinance O-07-14, sec. 1, adopted 3/18/14)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/420
Sec. 12.01.002 Adoption of state motor vehicle code
The motor vehicle code of the state (Transportation Code, title 7, subtitle C, Rules of the Road) as amended, is
hereby adopted as the motor vehicle code of the city, with the additions contained in this chapter. (1998 Code,
sec. 92.002)
Sec. 12.01.003 Applicability of chapter to persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals, riding bicycles,
or driving animal-drawn vehicles
Every person propelling any pushcart, riding animals, riding a bicycle, or driving any animal-drawn vehicle
upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver
of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application. (1998 Code, sec. 92.003(a)))
Sec. 12.01.004 Applicability of chapter to drivers of government vehicles
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways and streets shall apply to
the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, the state or any county, city, town, district, or
any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles. (1998 Code, sec. 92.004)
State law reference–Applicability of traffic laws to drivers of government vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 542.002.
Sec. 12.01.005 Exemption for persons engaged in work upon streets
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when
traveling to or from such work. (1998 Code, sec. 92.005)
State law reference–Applicability of state traffic rules on persons and equipment engaged in work on highway, V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, sec. 542.004.
Sec. 12.01.006 Duty of police to enforce traffic laws; authority of police officers to direct traffic
It shall be the duty of the police department of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter and all of the
state vehicle laws applicable to traffic in the city. Police officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, either
in person or by means of visible and/or audible signals, in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.007)
Sec. 12.01.007 Authority of officers of fire department and other persons to direct traffic
In the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the fire
department or any other authorized person may direct or assist the police in directing traffic as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. (1998 Code, sec. 82.001)
Sec. 12.01.008 Obedience to traffic laws and officers
(a) Obedience to traffic laws. It shall be unlawful and, unless otherwise declared in this chapter with respect to
particular offenses, it is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act or fail to perform any act required in this
chapter.
(b) Obedience to officers. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction
of any police or other officer invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.008)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/420
State law reference–Obedience to lawful order or direction of police officer or school crossing guard, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
sec. 542.501.
Sec. 12.01.009 Violation of promise to appear; failure to obey notice or summons
(a) Any person who violates his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic
violation, is guilty of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally
arrested.
(b) Any driver of a motor vehicle who fails to answer to the charges set forth in a written notice affixed to
such motor vehicle by a police officer as provided by any section of this code or ordinance of this city is guilty
of a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which said notice was originally given.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.009)
Sec. 12.01.010 Disposition of fines and forfeitures
All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general
fund. (1998 Code, sec. 92.010)
Sec. 12.01.011 Identification of funeral processions; driving in procession; driving through procession
(a) Identification of funeral processions. A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as
such by such method as may be determined and designated by the police department.
(b) Driving in procession. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand
edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.
(c) Driving through procession. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as
required by this chapter. This provision shall not apply when the driver of a vehicle is otherwise directed by an
authorized officer.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.006)
Sec. 12.01.012 Permit required for parades and processions
No procession or parade, excepting the forces of the United States Army, Navy, Air Force, or Marines, the
military forces of the state, and forces of the police and fire department, shall occupy, march, or proceed along
any street, sidewalk or any other public place in the city, except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief
of police and such other regulations as are set forth herein which may apply. (1998 Code, sec. 91.001)
Sec. 12.01.013 Glass, nails or other injurious material deposited on street
(a) Generally. No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited upon any highway or street
any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or
vehicle upon such highway.
(b) Removal. Any person who drops, or causes or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any
destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed.
(c) Wrecked or damaged vehicles. Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.
(1998 Code, sec. 91.002)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/420
State law reference–Removing material from highway, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 600.001.
Sec. 12.01.014 Driving over fire hose
No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street
or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in
command. (1998 Code, sec. 82.003(b))
State law reference–Crossing fire hose, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.408.
Sec. 12.01.015 Following fire apparatus; parking near fire
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in
response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet (500') or drive into or park such vehicle within the block
where the fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm. (1998 Code, sec. 82.003(c))
State law reference–Following or obstructing fire apparatus or ambulance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.407.
Sec. 12.01.016 Clinging to moving vehicle
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall not attach
the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. (1998 Code, sec. 92.003(d))
State law reference–Clinging to streetcar or vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 551.102(d).
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Sec. 12.02.001 Conformity with state manual and specifications
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the manual and specifications
adopted by the state transportation commission as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001.
All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the town must conform to the manual and specifications
adopted under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All existing traffic-control devices and those
erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual and specifications, state law and this section
shall be official traffic-control devices. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.02.002 Placement generally
The director of public works is hereby authorized and directed to cause suitable traffic markers and devices to be
placed on the streets and public places within the city in compliance with existing traffic ordinances and in
compliance with such changes in traffic rules and regulations as may hereafter be directed and ordered by the
city council. The director of public works is hereby specifically authorized and directed to place traffic-control
devices where directed by the city council. (1998 Code, sec. 92.021)
Sec. 12.02.003 Obedience
The driver of any vehicle and all pedestrians shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device
applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. (1998 Code,
sec. 92.022)
State law reference–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004.
Sec. 12.02.004 Enforcement if sign not in place
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/420
No person shall be prosecuted for failure to obey a traffic-control device or sign if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not visible and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant
person. (1998 Code, sec. 92.023)
State law reference–No enforcement against alleged violator if traffic-control device not in proper position or sufficiently legible,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004(b).
Sec. 12.02.005 Marking of traffic lanes
The director of public works is hereby authorized to mark lines for traffic on street pavement at such places
where necessary, when directed by the city council. (1998 Code, sec. 92.024)
Sec. 12.02.006 Installation of traffic signals
The director of public works, as authorized by the city council from time to time, shall designate intersections at
which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or lights
to be installed and maintained at such intersections. (1998 Code, sec. 92.025)
Sec. 12.02.007 Traffic-control signal legend
(a) Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the word “Go,” “Caution,” or “Stop,” or
exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be
used and such terms and lights shall indicate as follows:
(1) Green alone or “Go”.
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal, except when prohibited under the provisions of this
chapter, may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a signal or sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall
yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an
adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
(B) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or “Go” signal.
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or “Stop” signal will be
exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the
intersection when the red or “Stop” signal is exhibited.
(B) Pedestrians facing such a signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross
the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles.
(3) Red alone or “Stop”.
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain
standing until green or “Go” is shown alone.
(B) Every pedestrian facing the signal shall stop before entering the roadway and shall
remain stopped until a green or “Go” signal is shown.
(4) Red with green arrow.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/420
(A) Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make
the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully
within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(B) Every pedestrian facing the signal shall stop before entering the roadway and shall
remain stopped until a green or “Go” signal is shown.
(b) In the event an official traffic-control sign or device is erected and maintained at a place other than an
intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where
the stop shall be made at the signal.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.026)
State law references–Traffic-control signals in general, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.007; applicability of traffic-control
devices to pedestrians, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.001.
Sec. 12.02.008 Pedestrian walk and wait signals
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the word “Walk” or “Wait” are in place, such signals
shall indicate as follows:
(1) Walk signal. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of
the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(2) Wait signal. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but
any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a
sidewalk or safety island while the wait signal is showing.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.027)
Sec. 12.02.009 Flashing signals
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(1) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers
of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line when
marked, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
(2) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent
flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with
caution.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.028)
State law reference–Flashing signals, V.T.C.A, Transportation Code, sec. 544.008.
Sec. 12.02.010 Traffic signal locations
Traffic signal devices shall be erected and maintained at the following locations and intersections:
(1) North 1st Street and Austin Avenue.
(2) North 1st Street and Houston Avenue.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/420
(3) North 1st Street and Main Avenue.
(4) North 4th Street and Bryan Avenue.
(5) North 4th Street and Dallas Avenue.
(6) North 4th Street and Avenue F.
(7) North 4th Street and Avenue G.
(8) North 14th Street and Houston Avenue.
(9) North 14th Street and Avenue F.
(10) North 14th Street and Avenue G.
(11) South 1st Street and Austin Avenue.
(12) South 1st Street and Bryan Avenue.
(13) South 1st Street and Houston Avenue.
(14) South 1st Street and Main Avenue.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.029; Ordinance O-12-13 adopted 8/27/13)
Sec. 12.02.011 Special turn lanes at intersections
The director of public works in cooperation with the police department may cause markers, buttons, or signs to
be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that
specified in this chapter be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons, or signs
are so placed, no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by
such markers, buttons, or signs. (1998 Code, sec. 92.030)
Sec. 12.02.012 Display of unauthorized devices
(a) Prohibited. No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any street or highway any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway or street
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information if of a type
that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(b) Removal. Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the
chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.031)
State law reference–Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.006.
Sec. 12.02.013 Injuring, altering or removing
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any
official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/420
part thereof. (1998 Code, sec. 92.032)
State law reference–Interference with traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.005.
ARTICLE 12.03 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Obstructing intersection or crosswalk
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of
the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. (1998 Code, sec.
92.063)
Sec. 12.03.002 Operation of authorized emergency vehicles; vehicle approached by authorized
emergency vehicle
(a) Operation of authorized emergency vehicles.
(1) The driver of any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call, upon
approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety but may
proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At other times drivers of authorized
emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal. This exemption shall not,
however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the
safety of others.
(2) No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privilege under this
chapter, except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
(b) Vehicle approached by authorized emergency vehicle. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a red light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front of such vehicle and/or when the
driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the
right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to and as close as possible to the right-hand edge
or curb of the highway, provided that on a one-way street a vehicle may drive to a position parallel to and as
close as possible to the right or left edge or curb of the highway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
(c) Duty to drive with due care. This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.067)
State law references–Operation of authorized emergency vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 546; vehicle approached by
authorized emergency vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.156.
Sec. 12.03.003 Racing
All operators of motor vehicles are prohibited from participating in any manner in a race, a vehicle speed
competition or contest, or a drag race or acceleration contest on any of the streets, roads or driveways of this
city. (1998 Code, sec. 92.068)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/420
State law reference–Racing, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.420.
Sec. 12.03.004 U-turns
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
or to make what is commonly known as a U-turn upon any street or alley in the city. (1998 Code, sec. 92.069)
Sec. 12.03.005 Backing a vehicle
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety
without interfering with other traffic. (1998 Code, sec. 92.070)
State law reference–Backing a vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.415.
Sec. 12.03.006 Driving or parking on sidewalk
The operator of a vehicle shall not drive or park such vehicle within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or
temporary driveway. (1998 Code, sec. 92.071)
Sec. 12.03.007 Driving through off-street parking area
It shall be unlawful for any person operating an automobile or other gasoline-propelled vehicle to drive same
into or through any garage or gasoline station, restaurant, grocery or other off-street parking area without coming
to a full stop therein. (1998 Code, sec. 92.072)
State law reference–Crossing property, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.423.
Sec. 12.03.008 Opening vehicle doors
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or any other person to open the door of a vehicle or to step from a
parked vehicle into a roadway or sidewalk in such a manner as to interfere with or impede the progress of any
vehicle or pedestrian. (1998 Code, sec. 92.073)
Sec. 12.03.009 Riding on motorcycle
A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or the
side of the operator. (1998 Code, sec. 92.074)
State law reference–Riding on motorcycle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.416.
Sec. 12.03.010 Engine brakes
(a) No person shall operate (or allow someone else to operate) an internal combustion engine powered vehicle
on any posted public roads within the city while said vehicle is using an engine brake (or jake brake) without an
exhaust muffler sufficient to prevent excessively loud noises by aid vehicle, except during emergency operation.
(b) The city manager is hereby directed to ensure signs are installed at appropriate locations within the city
rights-of-way prohibiting the use of engine braking exhaust systems except during emergency operations as set
forth in this section.
(Ordinance O-06-13 adopted 4/16/13)
Secs. 12.03.011–12.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Speed Limits*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/420
Sec. 12.03.051 Generally
(a) Maximum speed. Except as otherwise provided in this article, the speed limit for vehicles within the city
shall be thirty (30) miles per hour.
(b) Effect of special hazards. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no person shall drive a motor
vehicle on any street or highway in the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing, having regard to the actual and potential hazards when approaching or crossing an
intersection or a railway grade crossing, when approaching or going around a curve, when approaching a hill
crest, when traveling upon a narrow or winding street or highway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or street conditions. In every event, speed shall be so
controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering
the street or highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(c) Prima facie evidence of unreasonable speed. The speed limits established by this article shall be lawful,
but any speed in excess of such limits shall be prima facie evidence that speed is not reasonable or prudent and
that it is unlawful.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.061(a))
State law references–Maximum speed requirement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.351; prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, sec. 545.352.
Sec. 12.03.052 Speed limits on specific streets
(a) It shall be unlawful for any operator to drive any motor vehicle at a rate of speed faster than is indicated
upon any of the streets or portion of streets enumerated below:
Street Direction Extent Speed
Bryan Avenue Northbound only From south city limits to 250 ft. north
of centerline of South 8th
50
Bryan Avenue Northbound only From 250 ft. north of centerline of
South 8th to 360 ft. south of centerline
of South 3rd
40
Bryan Avenue Northbound only From 360 ft. south of centerline of
South 3rd to 680 ft. north of centerline
of North 1st
30
Bryan Avenue Northbound only From 680 ft. north of centerline of
North 1st to 530 ft. north of centerline
of U.S. 180
35
Bryan Avenue Northbound only From 530 ft. north of centerline of
U.S. 180 to 240 ft. south of centerline
40
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/420
of North 14th.
Bryan Avenue Northbound only From 240 ft. south of centerline of
North 14th to 430 ft. south of
centerline of North 15th
45
Bryan Avenue Northbound only From 207 ft. south of centerline of
South 1st to 96 ft. of back of curb of
North 3rd
20 when
flashing
Bryan Avenue Southbound only From 430 ft. south of centerline of
North 15th to 240 ft. south of
centerline of North 14th
45
Bryan Avenue Southbound only From 240 ft. south of centerline of
North 14th to 530 ft. north of
centerline of U.S. 180
40
Bryan Avenue Southbound only From 530 ft. north of centerline of
U.S. 180 to 680 ft. north of centerline
of North 1st
35
Bryan Avenue Southbound only From 680 ft. north of centerline of
North 1st to 360 ft. south of centerline
of South 3rd
30
Bryan Avenue Southbound only From 360 ft. south of centerline of
South 3rd to 250 ft. north of centerline
of South 8th
40
Bryan Avenue Southbound only From 250 ft. north of centerline of S.
8th Street to south city limits
50
Street Direction Extent Speed
Bryan Avenue Southbound only From 96 ft. south of back of curb of
North 3rd to 207 ft. south of centerline
of South 1st
20 when
flashing
Dallas Avenue Northbound only From south city limits to 110 ft. north 45
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/420
of centerline of S. 8th
Dallas Avenue Northbound only From 110 ft. N. of centerline of South
8th to U.S. 87
35
Dallas Avenue Southbound only From N. U.S. 87 to 110 ft. north of
centerline of S. 8th
35
Dallas Avenue Southbound only From 110 ft. N. of centerline of S. 8th
to south city limits
45
Lynn Avenue Northbound only From south city limits to 230 ft. north
of centerline of Southeast 10th
45
Lynn Avenue Northbound only From 230 ft. north of centerline of
Southeast 10th to centerline of FM
826
40
Lynn Avenue Southbound only From centerline of FM 826 to 230 ft.
north of centerline of Southeast 10th
40
Lynn Avenue Southbound only 230 ft. north of centerline of Southeast
10th to south city limits
45
North 22nd
Street (FM 2592)
Eastbound only From centerline of SH 137 to stop
sign at U.S. 87
45
North 22nd
Street (FM 2592)
Westbound only From stop sign at U.S. 87 to centerline
of SH 137
45
Northeast 7th
Street
Eastbound only From centerline of Lynn Street to 35
ft. west of centerline of Northeast
Elgin
40
Northeast 7th
Street
Westbound only From 35 ft. west of centerline of
Northeast Elgin to centerline of Lynn
Street
40
Seminole Road Eastbound only From west city limits to 214 ft. west 50
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/420
of centerline of North Avenue P
Seminole Road Eastbound only From 214 ft. west of centerline of
North Avenue P to 207 ft. west of
centerline of SH 137
40
Seminole Road Eastbound only From 207 ft. west of centerline of SH
137 to 222 ft. west of North Avenue G
35
Seminole Road Eastbound only From 222 ft. west of North Avenue G
to centerline of U.S. 87
30
Seminole Road Westbound only From centerline of U.S. 87 to 222 ft.
west of North Avenue G
30
Seminole Road Westbound only From 222 ft. west of North Avenue G
to 207 ft. west of centerline of SH 137
35
Seminole Road Westbound only From 207 ft. west of centerline of SH
137 to 214 ft. west of centerline of
North Avenue P
40
Seminole Road Westbound only From 214 ft. west of centerline of
North Avenue P to west city limits
50
South 8th Street Eastbound only From Lynn Avenue to Elgin Avenue 45
South 8th Street Eastbound only From Elgin Avenue to Iowa Avenue 55
Street Direction Extent Speed
South 8th Street Eastbound only From Iowa Avenue to east city limit 60
South 8th Street Westbound only From east city limit to Elgin Avenue 55
South 8th Street Westbound only From Elgin Avenue to Lynn Avenue 45
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/420
(b) When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall drive a vehicle or automobile on the
following named streets at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles an hour:
Cherry Lane
Highland Drive
Hillside Drive
Juniper Drive
Maple Lane
Terrace Circle
(1998 Code, sec. 92.061(b), (c))
Sec. 12.03.053 School zones
No motor vehicle shall be driven at a greater rate of speed than twenty (20) miles per hour in or through any
school zone as designated and so marked by the city manager; provided, however, that such speed limit shall
only be applicable during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on days when such schools are in session.
(Ordinance O-16-08, sec. 1, adopted 12/16/08)
Secs. 12.03.054–12.03.080 Reserved
Division 3. Stop Intersections*
Sec. 12.03.081 Designation; manner of stopping at stop sign
The city is hereby authorized to cause any street intersection to be designated and maintained as a stop
intersection and to designate the streets upon which vehicles shall stop before entering such intersection.
Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the same shall be identified by the erection of signs
indicating which vehicles approaching the intersection shall stop. When such signs are erected at the entrance to
any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop at every such sign or at a clearly marked stop line and
ascertain that the way is clear before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police
officer or traffic-control signal. (1998 Code, sec. 92.062(a))
State law references–Manner of stopping at stop sign, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.010; vehicle entering stop intersection,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.153.
Sec. 12.03.082 Locations
Stop signs shall be erected and maintained at the following intersections:
(1) Four-way stops.
Stop Street Stop Street
Avenue N North 3rd Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/420
Avenue O North 4th Street
Elgin Avenue Northeast 4th Street
Main Avenue North 7th Street
North 19th Street Lynn Avenue
(2) Two-way stops.
Through Street Stop Street
Akron Avenue NE 1st Street
Akron Avenue NE 2nd Street
Akron Avenue NE 3rd Street
Akron Avenue NE 5th Street
Akron Avenue NE 6th Street
Akron Avenue South East 8th Street
Akron Avenue South 10th Place
Akron Avenue South 11th Street
Austin Avenue South 3rd Street
Austin Avenue South 7th Street
Avenue F North 5th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/420
Avenue F South 5th Street
Avenue F North 6th Street
Avenue F North 7th Street
Avenue F North 8th Street
Avenue F North 9th Street
Avenue F North 10th Street
Avenue F North 18th Street
Avenue F North 19th Street
Avenue F North 20th Street
Avenue G North 2nd Street
Avenue G North 3rd Street
Avenue G North 5th Street
Avenue G South 5th Street
Avenue G North 6th Street
Avenue G North 7th Street
Avenue G North 8th Street
Avenue G North 9th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/420
Avenue G North 10th Street
Avenue G North 11th Street
Avenue G North 12th Street
Avenue G North 13th Street
Avenue G North 15th Street
Avenue G North 16th Street
Avenue G North 17th Street
Avenue G North 18th Street
Avenue G North 19th Street
Avenue G North 20th Street
Avenue G North 21st Street
Avenue G North 23rd Street
Avenue H North 5th Street
Avenue H North 9th Street
Avenue I North 6th Street
Avenue I North 8th Street
Avenue I North 9th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/420
Avenue I North 13th Street
Avenue I North 15th Street
Avenue I North 17th Street
Avenue I North 18th Street
Avenue I North 19th Street
Avenue I North 20th Street
Avenue I North 21st Street
Avenue K North 6th Street
Avenue K North 11th Street
Avenue K North 13th Street
Avenue L North 2nd Street
Avenue L North 3rd Street
Avenue L North 4th Street
Avenue L North 5th Street
Avenue L North 6th Street
Avenue M North 6th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/420
Avenue N North 6th Street
Avenue N South 8th Street
Avenue N South 11th Street
Avenue N South 12th Street
Avenue N South 13th Street
Avenue N South 14th Street
Avenue O North 3rd Street
Avenue O North 4th Place
Avenue O North 6th Street
Avenue P North 3rd Street
Avenue P North 4th Place
Avenue P North 4th Street
Avenue P North 6th Street
Avenue Q North 8th Street
Avenue Q North 11th Street
Avenue Q North 12th Street
Avenue S Highland Drive
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/420
Avenue S Hillside Drive
Avenue S Juniper Drive
Avenue V Highland Drive
Avenue V Hillside Drive
Avenue V Juniper Drive
Avenue V Maple Lane
Avenue V South 1st Place
Avenue V South 1st Street
Avenue V South 4th Street
Avenue V South 5th Street
Avenue V South 6th Street
Avenue V South 7th Street
Avenue V South 8th Street
Boston Avenue NE 5th Street
Boston Avenue NE 6th Street
Bryan Avenue North 1st Street
Bryan Avenue South 1st Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/420
Bryan Avenue North 2nd Street
Bryan Avenue South 2nd Street
Bryan Avenue North 3rd Street
Bryan Avenue South 3rd Street
Bryan Avenue North 4th Street
Bryan Avenue South 4th Street
Bryan Avenue North 5th Street
Bryan Avenue South 5th Street
Bryan Avenue North 6th Street
Bryan Avenue South 6th Street
Bryan Avenue North 7th Street
Bryan Avenue South 7th Street
Bryan Avenue North 8th Street
Bryan Avenue South 8th Street
Bryan Avenue North 9th Street
Bryan Avenue South 9th Street
Bryan Avenue North 10th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/420
Bryan Avenue South 10th Street
Bryan Avenue North 11th Street
Bryan Avenue South 11th Street
Bryan Avenue North 12th Street
Bryan Avenue South 12th Street
Bryan Avenue North 13th Street
Bryan Avenue South 13th Street
Bryan Avenue North 14th Street
Bryan Avenue South 14th Street
Bryan Avenue North 15th Street
Bryan Avenue North 16th Street
Bryan Avenue North 17th Street
Bryan Avenue North 18th Street
Bryan Avenue North 19th Street
Bryan Avenue North 20th Street
Bryan Avenue North 21st Street
Bryan Avenue North 22nd Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/420
Canyon Avenue NE 5th Street
Canyon Avenue NE 6th Street
Chicago Drive North 20th Street
Chicago Drive North 21st Place
Chicago Drive North 21st Street
Dallas Avenue North 1st Street
Dallas Avenue South 1st Street
Dallas Avenue North 2nd Street
Dallas Avenue South 2nd Street
Dallas Avenue North 3rd Street
Dallas Avenue South 3rd Street
Dallas Avenue North 4th Street
Dallas Avenue South 4th Street
Dallas Avenue North 5th Street
Dallas Avenue North 6th Street
Dallas Avenue South 6th Street
Dallas Avenue North 7th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/420
Dallas Avenue South 8th Street
Dallas Avenue South 9th Street
Dallas Avenue South 10th Street
Detroit Avenue NE 5th Street
Detroit Avenue NE 6th Street
Elgin Avenue NE 2nd Street
Elgin Avenue NE 3rd Street
Elgin Avenue NE 5th Street
Elgin Avenue NE 6th Street
Elgin Avenue South 11th Street
Elgin Avenue South 13th Street
Flint Avenue NE 6th Street
Florence Wood Akron Avenue
Gary Avenue NE 5th Street
Gary Avenue NE 6th Street
Hartford Avenue NE 2nd Street
Hartford Avenue NE 4th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/420
Hartford Avenue NE 5th Street
Hartford Avenue NE 6th Street
Highland Drive - East Terrace Circle
Hillside Drive - West Terrace Circle
Houston Avenue North 2nd Street
Houston Avenue South 2nd Street
Houston Avenue North 3rd Street
Houston Avenue South 3rd Street
Houston Avenue South 4th Street
Houston Avenue South 5th Street
Houston Avenue South 6th Street
Houston Avenue North 7th Street
Houston Avenue South 7th Street
Houston Avenue North 12th Street
Houston Avenue North 13th Street
Houston Avenue North 15th Street
Houston Avenue North 16th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/420
Houston Avenue North 17th Street
Houston Avenue North 18th Street
Houston Avenue North 19th Street
Houston Avenue North 20th Street
Houston Avenue North 21st Place
Houston Avenue North 21st Street
Iowa Avenue NE 4th Street
Iowa Avenue SE 4th Street
Juniper Drive Avenue U
Juniper Drive Terrace Circle
Lubbock Road North 10th Street
Lubbock Road North 12th Street
Lubbock Road North 13th Street
Lubbock Road North 14th Street
Lubbock Road North 15th Street
Lubbock Road North 16th Street
Lubbock Road North 17th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/420
Lubbock Road North 18th Street
Lubbock Road North 19th Street
Lynn Avenue North 1st Street
Lynn Avenue South 1st Street
Lynn Avenue North 2nd Street
Lynn Avenue South 2nd Street
Lynn Avenue North 3rd Street
Lynn Avenue South 3rd Street
Lynn Avenue North 4th Street
Lynn Avenue South 4th Street
Lynn Avenue North 5th Street
Lynn Avenue South 5th Street
Lynn Avenue North 6th Street
Lynn Avenue North 7th Street
Lynn Avenue South 7th Street
Lynn Avenue South 8th Street
Lynn Avenue South 9th Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/420
Lynn Avenue South 10th Street
Lynn Avenue South 11th Street
Main Avenue North 3rd Street
Main Avenue South 3rd Street
Main Avenue South 8th Street
Main Avenue North 9th Street
Main Avenue North 10th Street
Main Avenue North 12th Street
Main Avenue North 13th Street
Main Avenue North 15th Street
Main Avenue North 16th Street
Main Avenue North 17th Street
Main Avenue North 18th Street
Main Avenue North 19th Street
Main Avenue North 20th Street
Main Avenue North 21st Place
Main Avenue North 21st Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/420
Maple Lane Terrace Circle
North 1st Street Avenue F
North 1st Street Avenue G
North 1st Street Avenue H
North 1st Street Avenue I
North 1st Street Avenue L
North 1st Street Avenue M
North 1st Street Avenue N
North 1st Street Avenue O
North 2nd Street Austin Avenue
North 2nd Street Avenue F
North 2nd Street Avenue H
North 2nd Street Avenue I
North 2nd Street Avenue L
North 2nd Street Avenue M
North 2nd Street Avenue N
North 2nd Street Avenue O
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/420
North 2nd Street Avenue P
North 2nd Street Main Avenue
North 3rd Street Austin Avenue
North 3rd Street Avenue F
North 3rd Street Avenue H
North 3rd Street Avenue I
North 3rd Street Avenue L
North 3rd Street Avenue O
North 3rd Street Main Avenue
North 4th Place Avenue N
North 4th Street Austin Avenue
North 4th Street Avenue F
North 4th Street Avenue H
North 4th Street Avenue I
North 4th Street Avenue L
North 4th Street Avenue O
North 4th Street Houston Avenue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/420
North 4th Street Main Avenue
North 5th Street Austin Avenue
North 5th Street Avenue H
North 5th Street Avenue I
North 6th Street Austin Avenue
North 6th Street Avenue H
North 6th Street Avenue L
North 7th Street Austin Avenue
North 7th Street Avenue H
North 7th Street Avenue I
North 7th Street Avenue K
North 7th Street Avenue L
North 7th Street Avenue M
North 7th Street Avenue N
North 7th Street Avenue O
North 7th Street Avenue P
North 7th Street Avenue Q
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/420
North 8th Street Avenue H
North 8th Street Avenue K
North 8th Street Avenue L
North 8th Street Avenue O
North 8th Street Avenue Q
North 8th Street Houston Avenue
North 9th Street Avenue H
North 9th Street Avenue K
North 9th Street Avenue L
North 9th Street Avenue O
North 9th Street Avenue Q
North 10th Street Avenue K
North 10th Street Avenue L
North 10th Street Avenue O
North 10th Street Avenue Q
North 10th Street North Houston Avenue
North 11th Street Avenue H
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/420
North 11th Street Avenue L
North 11th Street Avenue O
North 11th Street Avenue Q
North 12th Street Avenue F
North 12th Street Avenue I
North 12th Street Avenue K
North 12th Street Avenue L
North 12th Street Avenue O
North 13th Street Avenue F
North 13th Street Avenue L
North 13th Street Avenue O
North 13th Street Avenue Q
North 14th Street Avenue I
North 14th Street Main Avenue
North 16th Street Avenue I
North 16th Street Lynn Avenue
North 17th Street Lynn Avenue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/420
North 17th Street North Avenue F
North 18th Street Lynn Avenue
North 18th Street North Avenue F
North 19th Street Chicago Drive
North 19th Street North Avenue F
North 19th Street North Lynn Avenue
North 20th Street Lynn Avenue
North 20th Street North Avenue F
North 21st Street Avenue F
North 21st Street Lynn Avenue
North 22nd Place Boston Avenue
North 22nd Place Lynn Avenue
North 22nd Street Avenue G
North 22nd Street Avenue I
North 22nd Street Boston Avenue
North 22nd Street Chicago Drive
North 22nd Street Houston Avenue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/420
North 22nd Street Lynn Avenue
North 22nd Street Main Avenue
North 22nd Street Woody Road
North 23rd Street Boston Avenue
North 24th Street Boston Avenue
North 24th Street North Hartford Avenue
North 26th Street North Hartford Avenue
North Hartford Place North 26th Street
North Hartford Place North Hartford Avenue
Northeast 1st Street Boston Avenue
Northeast 1st Street Canyon Avenue
Northeast 1st Street Detroit Avenue
Northeast 1st Street Elgin Avenue
Northeast 1st Street Flint Avenue
Northeast 1st Street Gary Avenue
Northeast 2nd Street Boston Avenue
Northeast 2nd Street Canyon Avenue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/420
Northeast 2nd Street Detroit Avenue
Northeast 2nd Street Flint Avenue
Northeast 2nd Street Gary Avenue
Northeast 3rd Street Boston Avenue
Northeast 3rd Street Canyon Avenue
Northeast 3rd Street Detroit Avenue
Northeast 3rd Street Flint Avenue
Northeast 3rd Street Gary Avenue
Northeast 3rd Street Hartford Avenue
Northeast 3rd Street Iowa Avenue
Northeast 4th Street Akron Avenue
Northeast 4th Street Boston Avenue
Northeast 4th Street Canyon Avenue
Northeast 4th Street Detroit Avenue
Northeast 4th Street Flint Avenue
Northeast 4th Street Gary Avenue
Northeast 4th Street Hartford Avenue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/420
Northeast 5th Street Detroit Avenue
Northeast 5th Street Flint Avenue
Northeast 5th Street Iowa Avenue
Northeast 6th Street Iowa Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Akron Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Boston Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Canyon Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Detroit Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Elgin Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Flint Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Gary Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Hartford Avenue
Northeast 7th Street Iowa Avenue
Northeast 14th Street Elgin Avenue
Northeast 25th Street Hartford Avenue
Northeast 26th Street Lubbock Highway
Northeast 26th Street Woody Road
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/420
Northeast 27th Street Hartford Avenue
Northeast 27th Street Lubbock Highway
Northeast 27th Street Woody Road
Seminole Road Avenue L
Seminole Road Avenue N
Seminole Road Avenue O
Seminole Road Avenue P
Seminole Road Avenue S
Seminole Road Avenue U
Seminole Road Avenue V
Seminole Road North 7th Street
Skyline Drive South 1st Place
Skyline Drive South 4th Street
Skyline Drive South 5th Street
Skyline Drive South 6th Street
South 1st Place Elgin Avenue
South 1st Place Flint Avenue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/420
South 1st Place Gary Avenue
South 1st Street Akron Avenue
South 1st Street Avenue F
South 1st Street Avenue G
South 1st Street Avenue H
South 1st Street Avenue I
South 1st Street Avenue K
South 1st Street Avenue L
South 1st Street Avenue M
South 1st Street Avenue N
South 1st Street Avenue O
South 1st Street Avenue P
South 1st Street Avenue Q
South 1st Street Avenue R
South 1st Street Avenue S
South 1st Street Elgin Avenue
South 1st Street Skyline Drive
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/420
South 2nd Street Akron Avenue
South 2nd Street Austin Avenue
South 2nd Street Avenue F
South 2nd Street Avenue G
South 2nd Street Avenue H
South 2nd Street Avenue I
South 2nd Street Avenue K
South 2nd Street Avenue L
South 2nd Street Avenue M
South 2nd Street Avenue N
South 2nd Street Avenue O
South 2nd Street Avenue R
South 2nd Street Elgin Avenue
South 2nd Street Main Avenue
South 3rd Street Avenue F
South 3rd Street Avenue G
South 3rd Street Avenue H
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/420
South 3rd Street Avenue I
South 3rd Street Avenue K
South 3rd Street Avenue L
South 3rd Street Avenue M
South 3rd Street Avenue N
South 3rd Street Avenue V
South 4th Street Austin Avenue
South 4th Street Avenue F
South 4th Street Avenue G
South 4th Street Avenue H
South 4th Street Avenue I
South 4th Street Avenue K
South 4th Street Avenue M
South 4th Street Main Avenue
South 5th Street Avenue H
South 5th Street Avenue I
South 5th Street Avenue Q
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/420
South 5th Street Avenue R
South 5th Street Dallas Avenue
South 6th Street Austin Avenue
South 6th Street Avenue F
South 6th Street Avenue G
South 6th Street Avenue H
South 6th Street Avenue I
South 6th Street Avenue V
South 6th Street Court C
South 6th Street Lynn Avenue
South 6th Street Main Avenue
South 7th Street Avenue F
South 7th Street Avenue G
South 7th Street Avenue V
South 8th Street Avenue M
South 8th Street Avenue S
South 8th Street Avenue U
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/420
South 8th Street Elgin Avenue
South 8th Street Iowa Avenue
South 8th Street Skyline Avenue
South 9th Street Houston Avenue
South 10th Street Court C
South 11th Street Avenue M
Through Street Stop Street
South 11th Street Boston
South 11th Street Canyon
South 11th Street Detroit
South 12th Street Avenue K
South 12th Street Avenue L
South 12th Street Avenue M
South 13th Street Akron
South 13th Street Avenue K
South 13th Street Avenue L
South 13th Street Avenue M
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/420
South 13th Street Boston
South 13th Street Canyon
South 13th Street Detroit
South 14th Street Avenue L
South 14th Street Avenue M
South 14th Street Canyon Avenue
South 15th Street Akron Avenue
South 15th Street Boston Avenue
South 15th Street Bryan Avenue
South 15th Street Canyon Avenue
South East 8th Street Gary Avenue
South East 8th Street Hartford Avenue
South East 8th Street Knoxville Avenue
Terrace Circle Highland Drive - West
Terrace Circle Hillside Drive - West
Woody Road North 22nd Place
Woody Road North 23rd Street
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/420
Woody Road North 24th Street
Woody Road North 25th Street
(1998 Code, sec. 92.062(b); Ordinance O-04-12 adopted 3/5/12; Ordinance O-04-14 adopted 1/21/14; Ordinance
O-28-17 adopted 11/21/17)
Secs. 12.03.083–12.03.110 Reserved
Division 4. Yield Intersections*
Sec. 12.03.111 Designation; manner of stopping at yield sign
The city council is hereby authorized to cause any street intersection to be designated and maintained as a yield
intersection and to designate the streets upon which vehicles shall yield before entering such intersection.
Whenever any intersection has been so designated, the same shall be identified by the erection of signs
indicating which vehicles approaching the intersection shall yield right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection
or approaching on another street so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is
moving across or within the intersection. Provided, however, that if such a driver is involved in a collision with a
vehicle in the intersection after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima
facie evidence of his failure to yield right-of-way. (1998 Code, sec. 92.064(a))
State law references–Manner of stopping at yield sign, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.010; vehicle entering yield
intersection, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.153.
Sec. 12.03.112 Locations
Yield signs shall be erected and maintained at the following intersections:
Through Street Yield Street
South Elgin Avenue Compress Road
(1998 Code, sec. 92.064)
Secs. 12.03.113–12.03.140 Reserved
Division 5. One-Way Streets and Alleys*
Sec. 12.03.141 Locations
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street or alley within the city
limits except in the direction indicated on the sign and herein indicated:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/420
Street or Alley Direction
The alley between North First Street and North Second Street (the traffic
between Avenue G and Avenue H)
East to west
The alley in Block 20 of the Original Town of Lamesa (traffic will enter
from North 2nd Street, proceed through and exit on Avenue F)
East to west
The alley in Block 6 of the Original Town of Lamesa West to east
(1998 Code, sec. 92.065)
Secs. 12.03.142–12.03.160 Reserved
Division 6. Use of Wireless Communications Device
Sec. 12.03.161 Prohibited in school zones
(a) Except as provided by section 12.03.162, an operator may not use a wireless communication device while
operating a motor vehicle within a school crossing zone, as defined by section 541.302 of the Transportation
Code of the state, within the corporate limits of the city, unless:
(1) The vehicle is stopped; or
(2) The wireless communication device is used with a hands-free device.
(b) This section does not apply to:
(1) An operator of an authorized emergency vehicle using a wireless communication device while
acting in an official capacity; or
(2) An operator who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a
radio frequency device other than a wireless communication device.
(c) An operator may not use a wireless communication device while operating a passenger bus with a minor
passenger on the bus unless the passenger bus is stopped.
Sec. 12.03.162 Affirmative defense
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under section 12.03.161 that:
(1) The wireless communication device was used to make an emergency call to:
(A) An emergency response service, including a rescue, emergency medical, or hazardous
material response service;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/420
(B) A hospital;
(C) A fire department;
(D) A health clinic;
(E) A medical doctor's office;
(F) An individual to administer first-aid treatment; or
(G) A police department; or
(2) A sign required by section 12.03.163 was not posted at the entrance to the school crossing zone
at the time of an offense committed in the school crossing zone.
Sec. 12.03.163 Sign required
A sign that complies with the standards described in this section shall be posted at the entrance to each school
crossing zone in the city:
(1) The sign required by this section may be attached to an existing sign;
(2) The sign required by this section shall inform an operator that:
(A) The use of a wireless communication device is prohibited in the school crossing zone;
and
(B) The operator is subject to a fine if the operator uses a wireless communication device in
the school crossing zone.
(3) The signs shall be posted at each location specified in the attached exhibit A to Ordinance O-
07-14.
Sec. 12.03.164 Penalty
Any person convicted of a violation of this division shall upon conviction be assessed a fine not to exceed
$200.00 for each separate offense.
(Ordinance O-07-14, sec. 2, adopted 3/18/14)
ARTICLE 12.04 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING†
Sec. 12.04.001 Responsibility of vehicle owner for violations
No person shall allow, suffer or permit any vehicle registered in his name, or in his possession or subject to his
control, to stand or be parked in any street in the city in violation of any of the sections of this article or city
ordinances regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. (1998 Code, sec. 92.041)
Sec. 12.04.002 Manner of parking
(a) Parallel parking. Except as otherwise provided in this article, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a street
where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked so that the right-hand wheels thereof are parallel to
and within eighteen inches (18") of the right-hand curb.
(b) Angle parking. The city council may, by ordinance, establish and designate areas and spaces within the
city where vehicles may be parked at an angle of no more than forty-five (45) degrees from the curb. Upon
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/420
leaving such parking spaces, vehicles shall not be operated in any manner so as to unnecessarily obstruct traffic
on the street.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.042)
State law reference–Additional parking regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.303.
Sec. 12.04.003 Parking longer than twenty-four hours
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any street or alley in the city for a longer period than
twenty-four (24) hours. (1998 Code, sec. 92.043(a))
Sec. 12.04.004 Time limit zones
When signs are erected or curbs painted giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle for more than the
indicated period or length of time upon any of the streets or sides of streets or portions thereof hereafter
enumerated:
Street Extent Side Time
South 1st Street From Bryan Avenue to Avenue K North 5 minutes
(1998 Code, sec. 92.043(b))
Sec. 12.04.005 Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places
(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with law or directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places:
(1) On a sidewalk;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
(5) On a crosswalk;
(6) Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(7) Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control
signal located at the side of the roadway;
(8) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet (30') of points on the curb
immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the traffic authority indicates a different length
by signs or markings;
(9) Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(10) Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street
opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five feet (75') of said entrance when properly
signposted;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/420
(11) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
(12) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked [at an] angle or parallel at the edge or
curb of a street;
(13) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway;
(14) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
(15) In any alley.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from
a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.044)
State law reference–Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain places, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.302.
Sec. 12.04.006 Parking near fire hydrant
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with law or directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, within fifteen feet (15') of a fire
hydrant. (1998 Code, sec. 82.004)
Sec. 12.04.007 No parking zones
When signs are erected or curbs painted giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time, unless
otherwise provided, upon any of the streets or sides of streets or portions thereof hereafter enumerated:
Street Extent Side
Lubbock Road Portions within city limits north of North 10th
Street
Both
Lynn Street Between South 13th Street and North 10th Street Both
North 1st Street Between Akron Avenue and Canyon Avenue North
North 1st Street From Dallas Avenue to a point 100 feet west
thereof; provided, however, that this shall not
prohibit the parking or stopping of an emergency
vehicle or the vehicle of a person responding to an
emergency
South
North 1st Street From Avenue F to a point 32 feet east thereof South
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/420
North 4th Street Between the west side of North Lynn Avenue and
the east side of North Avenue I
Both
North 4th Street (U.S.
180)
East from the centerline of Bryan Avenue (State
Highway 137) approximately 491 feet to a point
50 feet from east of centerline of North Avenue I
Both
North 15th Street From North Houston Avenue to a point 450 feet
east thereof, between the hours of 8 a.m. to 4 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Both
North 22nd Street Between the east side of Bryan Avenue and the
west side of Lubbock Road
Both
North Avenue G From North 10th Street to the alley between North
10th and North 11th Streets
East
North Bryan Avenue From South 1st to North 1st Streets Both
North Bryan Avenue From North 2nd Street to North 7th Street Both
North Bryan Avenue Between the north side of North 21st Street and
the south side of North 22nd Street
East
North Dallas Avenue Between the north side of North 3rd Street and the
south side of North 5th Street
Both
North Houston Avenue From North 14th Street to North 17th Street,
between the hours of 8 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday
through Friday
Both
North Lynn Street Portions within city limits north of North 10th
Street
Both
North Lynn Street Between the north side of North 3rd Street and the
south side of North 5th Street
Both
North Main Between the north side of North Fourth Street and
the south side of North Fourteenth Street
Both
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/420
Seminole Road (U.S. 180) From the centerline of Bryan Avenue (State
Highway 137) 410 feet west to a point
North
Seminole Road (U.S. 180) From the centerline of Bryan Avenue (State
Highway 137) 420 feet west to a point
South
(1998 Code, sec. 92.045)
Sec. 12.04.008 Parking of large vehicles and vehicles with trailers on Dallas Avenue
Any vehicle which has an overall length of nineteen feet (19') or more or any vehicle having a trailer attached,
not in the process of loading or unloading, is prohibited from parking on Dallas Avenue between North Second
Street and South Second Street at any time day or night on any day of the week. (1998 Code, sec. 92.046)
Sec. 12.04.009 Parking for purpose of exhibiting vehicle for sale
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, corporation, partnership or association to park automobiles,
trucks or other motor vehicles on or around the courthouse square or on the streets around the public square, or
on the streets or sidewalks within one block of the courthouse square, for the purpose of exhibiting the same for
sale; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the parking of one car for such purpose by the owner
thereof. (1998 Code, sec. 92.047)
Sec. 12.04.010 Loading zones
(a) Designation. Loading zones for handling of passengers and heavy or bulky merchandise, supplies, and
materials shall be designated by the city manager, laid out and designated by orange colored lines or marks on
the surface of the street and/or curb, with the words “loading zone” painted thereon. No parking meter shall be
installed in or adjacent to a loading zone.
(b) Use generally. The use of loading zones for the loading and unloading of goods, wares, merchandise, etc.,
shall be for handling of heavy or bulky merchandise, supplies and materials.
(c) Time limit for use. It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to stop or permit any vehicle in his
possession or under his control to be or to remain in any loading zone either for the purpose of loading and/or
unloading passengers for a period of time longer than two (2) minutes, or for the purpose of loading and/or
unloading merchandise, supplies and materials for a longer period of time than necessary to expeditiously load
and/or unload such merchandise, supplies, and materials, and to give or secure a delivery receipt therefor.
(d) Hours when applicable. The provisions of this section shall apply on all days and at all hours; except that
the city manager is authorized to cause to be painted on the curb and/or adjacent street surface of any loading
zone the words: “Loading Zone. Reserved ______ a.m. to ______ p.m.” and insert therein the numbers
indicating the hours so reserved. Then such regulations shall apply to such loading zone during such reserved
hours only, and then only so long as the figures, etc., indicating the hours of reservation are legible.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.048)
ARTICLE 12.05 TRUCKS
Sec. 12.05.001 Trucks prohibited on certain streets
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/420
Except for making deliveries to a business, residence or school situated thereon or for going to or from the place
where such vehicles are kept or stationed by the owners thereof, all trucks with a capacity of more than one (1)
ton are prohibited from and shall not use the following described streets or portions of streets:
Street Extent
Avenue S Between Seminole Highway (U.S. Highway 180) and South First
Street
Avenue V Between Seminole Highway and South Eighth Street
Chicago Drive Between North 19th and North 22nd Streets
Houston Avenue Between the south city limits and North Fourth Street
North 14th Street Between Dallas and Bryan Avenues
North 16th Street Between Bryan Avenue and the alley west of North Avenue I
South First Street Between Avenue V and Dallas Avenue
South Sixth Street Between Bryan Avenue and Dallas Avenue
South Eighth Street Between Bryan Avenue and Avenue V
(1998 Code, sec. 92.066)
Sec. 12.05.002 Parking trucks containing hazardous materials in residential areas
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, suffer or permit any truck which is in his
possession or subject to his control or which is registered in his name under the motor vehicle registration laws
of the state or any other jurisdiction, and which contains a cargo of hazardous materials as defined in this
section, to stand or be parked in any street, alley, public right-of-way or private property in a residential area of
the city.
(b) Definitions. As used in this section:
Hazardous material.
(1) For the purposes of this section, hazardous material shall mean a substance or material which
has been determined by the United States Secretary of Transportation to be capable of posing an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/420
unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property when transported in commerce, and which has been
so designated. The term includes hazardous substances, hazardous wastes, marine pollutants, and
elevated temperature materials as defined in title 49 of the United States Code of Federal Regulations
(49 CFR), materials designated as hazardous under the provisions of 49 CFR 172.101, and materials
that meet the defining criteria for hazard classes and divisions in 49 CFR 173. For the purposes of
this section the term includes petroleum, crude oil, natural gas, natural gas liquids, liquefied natural
gas, or synthetic gas usable for fuel. It shall include the following:
Class No. Name of Class or Division 49 CFR Reference
for Definitions
1 Explosives with a mass explosion hazard 173.50
1 Explosives with a projection hazard 173.50
1 Explosives with predominately a fire hazard 173.50
1 Explosives with no significant blast hazard 173.50
1 Very insensitive explosives; blasting agents 173.50
1 Extremely insensitive detonating substances 173.50
2 Flammable gas 173.115
2 Nonflammable compressed gas 173.115
2 Poisonous gas 173.115
3 Flammable and combustible liquid 173.120
4 Flammable solid 173.124
4 Spontaneously combustible material 173.124
4 Dangerous when wet material 173.124
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/420
5 Oxidizer 173.127
5 Organic peroxide 173.128
6 Poisonous materials 173.132
6 Infectious substance (etiologic agent) 173.134
7 Radioactive material 173.403
8 Corrosive material 173.136
9 Miscellaneous hazardous material 173.140
(2) This section does not apply to the following:
(A) Flammable liquids in the fuel tanks of a motor vehicle, boat, or portable or stationary
engine.
(B) Flammable or combustible paints, oils, varnishes, and similar mixtures used for painting
or maintenance.
Residential area. Any parcel of property located in any of the districts set forth in article 14.03 of this code as
zoning districts R-1 (single-family residential), R-2 (multifamily residential) or R-3 (mobile homes), and shall
include the right-of-way of any street or alley which abuts any parcel of property within such district.
Truck. Any motor vehicle, including a trailer, designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of
property.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.049)
ARTICLE 12.06 PEDESTRIANS*
Sec. 12.06.001 Generally
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as provided in this chapter, but at all other
places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.081)
Sec. 12.06.002 Crosswalks
(a) Right-of-way in crosswalks.
(1) When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/420
roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the
vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
(2) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(b) Use of crosswalk mandatory at certain places.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross any street or roadway in the fire limits of the
city except in a designated crosswalk.
(2) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians
shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
(c) Use of right half of crosswalk. Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.082)
State law references–Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalk, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.003; pedestrian to keep to right,
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.004; crossing at other than crosswalk, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.005.
Sec. 12.06.003 Use of roadway
(a) Roadways with sidewalks. Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk
along and upon an adjacent roadway.
(b) Roadways without sidewalk. Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a
highway or street shall when possible walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic
which may approach from the opposite direction.
(c) Hitchhiking. No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any
vehicle.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.083)
State law references–Pedestrian walking along roadway, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.006; solicitation of ride by
pedestrian, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.007.
Sec. 12.06.004 Drivers to exercise due care
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care when
traveling upon any roadway to avoid colliding with any pedestrian and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper caution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated
person upon a roadway. (1998 Code, sec. 92.084)
State law reference–Drivers to exercise due care, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.008.
ARTICLE 12.07 BICYCLES AND PLAY VEHICLES*
Sec. 12.07.001 Use of roller skates, skateboards, etc., prohibited in certain places
(a) Definitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/420
Downtown district. That area of the city lying south of North 2nd Street, west of Dallas Avenue, north of South
2nd Street, and east of Avenue G.
Rollerblades. Shoes with inline wheels located along their soles, used for gliding or rolling along a hard surface.
Roller skates. Shoes with a pair of small wheels located on the ends, used for gliding or rolling along a hard
surface.
Scooter. A foot-operated or engine-powered vehicle consisting of a narrow board mounted between two wheels
tandem, with an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel.
Skateboard. Any device propelled by human power upon which a person may ride, consisting of a short, oblong
board with four or more wheels, typically ridden in a standing position.
(b) Downtown district. No person shall ride rollerblades, scooters, skateboards, roller skates or other similar
devices on or along the sidewalks or on any square or park within the downtown district of the city.
(c) Areas outside downtown district. No person shall ride rollerblades, scooters, skateboards, roller skates or
other similar devices on any public or private property located within the city outside the downtown district
where such activity is prohibited by one or more signs conspicuously displayed upon such property by or at the
direction of the owner or lawful occupier of such property. Signs prohibiting such activity must state that a
violation may subject the violator to a fine up to $500.00.
(d) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500.00.
(1998 Code, secs. 92.085–92.088)
Sec. 12.07.002 Riding roller skates, coasters or similar devices on roadway
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon
any roadway except while crossing a street or a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all
of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. (1998 Code, sec. 92.003(b))
Sec. 12.07.003 Riding on bicycle; lights on bicycles
(a) Use of seat. A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat
attached thereto.
(b) Passengers. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
(c) Riding on sidewalk. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district.
(d) Lights. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit
a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the
seat of a type which shall be visible from all distances from fifty feet (50') to three hundred feet (300') to the rear
when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.
(1998 Code, sec. 92.003(c))
State law references–General operation, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 551.102; safety equipment, V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, sec. 551.104.
ARTICLE 12.08 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/420
Sec. 12.08.001 Impounding uninsured vehicles
(a) A police officer is authorized to remove or cause to remove a vehicle from a public street to a place
designated by the chief of police when:
(1) The vehicle is involved in an accident and the vehicle's owner or operator fails to show proof of
established financial responsibility as required under chapter 601 of the Texas Transportation Code,
as amended; or
(2) The vehicle is stopped by a police officer for an alleged violation of a city or state traffic law or
other law applicable to the operation of a vehicle on the roadway, and the vehicle's operator fails to
show proof of established financial responsibility as required under chapter 601 of the Texas
Transportation Code, as amended.
(b) A vehicle removed and towed under this section must be kept at the place designated by the chief of police
until application for redemption is made by the owner or the owner's authorized agent, who will be entitled to
possession of the vehicle upon payment of costs of towing, notification, impoundment, storage, and upon
showing proof of financial responsibility. Fees for vehicles impounded under this section shall be in accordance
with the currently active section 4.08.003 of this code - wrecker service fees.
(c) The chief of police or a designated representative may release a vehicle without payment of fees if
subsequent or investigation results in a determination that there was no violation of this code of the Texas Motor
Vehicle Laws. Furthermore, the city may reimburse the wrecker service company for the towing and storage fees
as approved by chief of police and city manager.
(Ordinance O-05-11 adopted 4/19/11)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
The repeal provided for in the ordinance adopting this code shall not affect any ordinance relating to the granting
of any franchise or the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities, or any ordinance purporting to be an
agreement between the city and a utility company, excepting as this code may contain provision for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect of such
provisions only. (1998 Code, sec. 47.001)
Sec. 13.01.002 Third party natural gas sales
(a) Definitions.
Consumer. Any individual person, corporation, company, partnership, firm, unincorporated association, trust,
state agency, government entity, political subdivision of the state, school district, institution of higher learning,
or public corporation that uses or consumes natural gas within the corporate limits of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/420
Permit. The right, license, and privilege granted by the city to a consumer or seller to use the public ways for the
purpose of transporting gas owned by any party other than the transporter and to be used or consumed by
consumer.
Permittee. A consumer or seller granted a permit under this section.
Pipeline system. A gas system installed in the public ways and consisting of works, pipes, pipelines, apparatus,
machinery, structures, appliances, and appurtenances reasonably necessary for the sale, transportation, or
distribution of natural gas.
Public way. Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, lane, park, parkway, sidewalk, driveway, utility easement, or
right-of-way, and any other public ways, places, areas, or grounds within the corporate limits of the city as now
constituted or as may be added hereafter.
Purchase price. The total purchase price paid by a consumer to a seller for natural gas that is used or consumed
within the corporate limits of the city and that is transported to the consumer through a pipeline system.
Seller. Any individual person, corporation, company, partnership, firm, unincorporated association, trust, or
public corporation (excluding, however, any transporter) that sells natural gas to any consumer, which natural
gas is transported to the consumer through a pipeline system.
Transporter. Any individual person, corporation, company, partnership, firm, unincorporated association, trust
or public corporation that transports and delivers gas owned by any party other than the transporter through the
transporter's pipeline system.
(b) Permit required.
(1) No consumer shall receive, directly or indirectly, gas within the city that was purchased from a
seller outside of the corporate limits of the city and that is to be transported through any pipeline
system installed in the public ways unless the consumer or the seller shall hold a valid permit from
the city. Such permit shall be issued for the purpose of granting the permittee authority to use the
public ways.
(2) After the operative date of this section, no transporter shall enter into any agreement or
arrangement by which natural gas owned by any party other than such transporter shall be transported
through any portion of the transporter's pipeline system for delivery to any consumer within the
corporate limits of the city unless:
(A) The consumer or seller shall have obtained a permit from the city for the use of the
public ways in transporting and delivering gas pursuant to such agreement or arrangement;
(B) If requested by the city, the transporter agrees to collect from the permittee any and all
fees to be paid pursuant to such permit and to remit such fees so collected to the city on a
monthly basis; and
(C) The transporter agrees to report to the city, on a monthly basis, all volumes transported
through its pipeline system for delivery to any consumer within the corporate limits of the city
pursuant to any such agreement or arrangement.
(3) This section shall not apply to or affect any transportation agreements or arrangements that are
in existence as of the effective date of this section.
(c) Fee. In consideration of the issuance of a permit by the city, a permittee shall pay to the city a fee for the
use of the public ways in an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the purchase price of the gas transported or
delivered within the city during the preceding calendar month for consumption or use within the corporate limits
of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/420
(d) Application for permit; issuance.
(1) Every application for a permit, as required in this section, shall be in writing and shall include
the following information:
(A) The date of the application;
(B) The name of the applicant;
(C) The address of the principal place of business of the applicant;
(D) The name and address of the principal place of business of the consumer of the natural
gas;
(E) The name and address of the principal place of business of the seller of the natural gas;
(F) The name of and the principal place of business address of the transporter of the natural
gas;
(G) The date that the applicant proposes to begin delivery of said natural gas;
(H) The name of the party who is to be responsible for the collection and payment of all fees
pursuant to said permit; and
(I) The proposed purchase price of the gas to be transported or delivered within the city.
(2) Every application for a permit shall be filed with the city secretary at least sixty (60) days
before the proposed date to begin delivery of the natural gas.
(3) The city council shall, within sixty (60) days of the filing of the application for a permit, as
required in this section, first consider the application to determine whether or not the application
complies with all respects and provisions of this section, and if it does so comply, pass an ordinance
issuing said permit.
(4) Any permit issued shall contain the following material terms:
(A) The permittee shall pay the fee set forth in subsection (c) of this section to either the city
or transporter, as the case may be, on a monthly basis, according to the city's direction;
(B) The permittee shall grant to the city the right to audit at reasonable times the books and
records of the permittee to verify the correct payment of the fee set forth in subsection (c) of
this section; and
(C) The permit shall specify the beginning and ending dates that the permit will be effective;
provided that said permit not be granted for a period to exceed five (5) years and may be
granted for a lesser period upon the discretion of the city council.
(e) Penalty for operation without permit; revocation of permit.
(1) Any consumer or seller adjudged guilty of operating without the permit required by subsection
(b) of this section shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and
each day of a continuing violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
(2) A permit may be revoked by the city, upon action by the city council, at any time, upon ten (10)
days' prior written notice to the permittee and transporter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/420
(1998 Code, sec. 47.021)
ARTICLE 13.02 SOLID WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.02.001 Purpose; scope
This article covers all aspects of solid waste management under the authority of the city and is enacted to
implement the stated purpose of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, chapter 361, Texas Health and Safety Code, as
amended; the Municipal Solid Waste Regulations as promulgated by the state commission on environmental
quality; and the Comprehensive Municipal Solid Waste Management, Resource Recovery, and Conservation
Act. (1998 Code, sec. 71.001)
Sec. 13.02.002 Applicability of article
The provisions of this article shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the city and to any and all
territory subsequently annexed into said corporate limits and to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as
specified, and shall apply to any individual, corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity, including all federal installations involved
in any aspect of the collection, storage, handling, transportation, processing, or disposal of any solid wastes
within the city limits. (1998 Code, sec. 71.002)
Sec. 13.02.003 Applicability of Solid Waste Disposal Act
The provisions of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, chapter 361, Texas Health and Safety Code, shall apply, and the
city shall exercise all authority granted under said statute when it appears that a violation of said statute, or any
rule, regulation, permit, license, or other order of the state commission on environmental quality granted in said
statute, occurs or is occurring within the jurisdiction or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, or is causing or
will cause injury to or an adverse effect on the health, welfare or physical property of the city or its inhabitants.
The city may cause a civil suit to be instituted in district court through its own attorney for the injunctive relief,
or civil penalties, or both, as authorized in said statute, against the person who committed, is committing, or is
threatening to commit the violation. (1998 Code, sec. 71.003)
Sec. 13.02.004 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms have the meanings ascribed to them by this
section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms arranged, designed or occupied by a family, and shall include, but not
exclusively, a subordinate dwelling occupied as a garage apartment or a servant's quarters.
Apartment house. A building or portion thereof, or buildings, arranged, designed or occupied by three (3) or
more families.
Asbestos-containing materials. Includes the following:
(1) Category I nonfriable asbestos-containing material (ACM). Asbestos-containing packings,
gaskets, resilient floor covering, and asphalt roofing products containing more than 1.0% asbestos as
determined using the method specified in appendix A, subpart F, 40 CFR, part 763, section 1,
Polarized Light Microscopy.
(2) Category II nonfriable ACM. Any material, excluding category I nonfriable ACM, containing
more than 1.0% asbestos as determined using the methods specified in appendix A, subpart F, 40
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/420
CFR, part 763, section 1, Polarized Light Microscopy, that, when dry, cannot be crumbled,
pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure.
(3) Friable ACM. Any material containing more than 1.0% asbestos that, when dry, can be
crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure.
(4) Nonfriable ACM. Any material containing more than 1.0% asbestos that, when dry, cannot be
crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure.
Authorized landfill employee. Any employee of the city assigned to the sanitation department, including the
sanitation superintendent, all landfill attendants, operators and technicians, sanitation truck drivers, the city
manager, and any other employee engaged in enforcement of the provisions of this article.
Battery. An electrochemical device that generates electric current by converting chemical energy. Its essential
components are positive and negative electrodes made of more or less electrically conductive materials, a
separate medium, and an electrolyte. There are four major types:
(1) Primary batteries (dry cells);
(2) Storage or secondary batteries;
(3) Nuclear and solar cells or energy converters; and
(4) Fuel cells.
Battery acid (also known as electrolyte acid). A solution of not more than 47% sulfuric acid in water suitable for
use in storage batteries, which is water white, odorless, and practically free from iron.
Brush. Tree trimmings, weeds, large hedge trimmings and trees.
CFR. Code of Federal Regulations.
Collection. The act of removing solid waste (or materials which have been separated for the purpose of
recycling) for transportation elsewhere.
Collection system. The total process of collecting and transporting solid waste. It includes dumpsters or other
collection containers, collection crews, vehicles, equipment and management, and operating procedures.
Commercial solid waste. All types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other
nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes.
Conditionally exempt small-quantity generator. A person who generates no more than 220 pounds of hazardous
waste in a calendar month.
Construction and demolition waste. Waste which typically results from construction or demolition projects, and
includes all materials which are directly or indirectly the byproducts of construction work or which result from
demolition of buildings and other structures, including but not limited to paper cartons, gypsum board, wood,
excelsior, rubber, and plastics.
Container. A mechanically loaded refuse container as defined below.
Customer. A person legally consuming and paying for service from the sanitation department or sanitary landfill
of the city.
Discard. To abandon a material and not use, reuse, reclaim, or recycle it. A material is abandoned by being
disposed of or burned or incinerated (except where the material is being burned as a fuel for the purpose of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/420
recovering usable energy); or physically, chemically, or biologically treated (other than burned or incinerated) in
lieu of or prior to being disposed.
Disposal. The discharge, disposal, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste or
hazardous waste (whether containerized or uncontainerized) into any land or water so that such solid waste or
hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged
into any waters, including groundwaters.
Dumpster. A mechanically loaded refuse container as defined below.
EPA. United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Excessive weight or volume. A weight or volume which exceeds or impairs the ability of the city's mechanical
loading equipment to empty or load the contents of a mechanically loaded refuse container, or any weight
exceeding one thousand pounds (1000 lbs.).
Family. One (1) or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit.
Garbage. Solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage
facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products.
Generator. Any person, by site or location, whose act or process produces a solid waste or first causes it to
become regulated.
Hazardous household waste. Any solid waste generated in a household by a consumer, which, except for the
exclusion provided in 40 Code of Federal Regulations 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste
under 40 Code of Federal Regulations, part 261.
Hazardous waste. Any solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource
and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq., as amended.
Household waste. Any solid waste (including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks) derived from
households (including single and multiple residences, hotels, and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew
quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas); does not include yard waste or brush that
is completely free of any household wastes.
Industrial hazardous waste. Hazardous waste determined to be of industrial origin.
Industrial solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry or manufacturing, or
mining or agricultural operations, and which may be classified by the state commission on environmental quality
as class I, II, or III industrial solid wastes. Such classifications shall apply to any such wastes under this
definition.
(1) Class I industrial solid waste or class I waste. Any industrial solid waste designated as class I
by the executive director of the state commission on environmental quality as an industrial solid
waste or mixture of industrial solid wastes which because of its concentration or physical or chemical
characteristics is toxic, corrosive, flammable, or a strong sensitizer or irritant, or a generator of
sudden pressure by decomposition, heat, or other means, and may pose a substantial present or
potential danger to human health or the environment when improperly processed, stored, transported,
or otherwise managed, including hazardous industrial waste.
(2) Class II industrial solid waste. Any individual solid waste or combination of industrial solid
wastes which cannot be described as class I or class III.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/420
(3) Class III industrial solid waste. Inert and essentially insoluble industrial solid waste, including
materials such as rock, brick, glass, dirt, and certain plastics and rubber, etc., that are not readily
decomposable.
Inert material. A naturally occurring nonputrescible material which is essentially insoluble, such as soil, dirt,
clay, sand, gravel, and rock.
Infectious waste. Waste containing pathogens or biologically active material which because of its type,
concentration, and quantity is capable of transmitting disease to persons exposed to the waste.
Junk. All worn-out, worthless, and discarded material, including odds and ends, old iron or other metal, glass,
and cordage.
Leachate. Liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or
miscible materials removed from such waste.
Lead. The metal element, atomic number 82, atomic weight 207.2, with the chemical symbol “Pb”.
Lead acid battery. A secondary or storage battery that uses lead as the electrode and dilute sulfuric acid as the
electrolyte and is used to generate electrical current.
Liquid waste. Any waste material that is determined to contain “free liquids” as defined by EPA Method 9095
(Paint Filter Test), as described in Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Wastes, Physical/Chemical Methods (EPA
Publication Number SW-846).
Litter. Rubbish and putrescible waste.
Mechanically loaded refuse container. A mechanically loaded refuse container, or dumpster, shall mean a
container constructed in accordance with plans of the city for refuse containers and can be loaded with the
mechanical loading equipment operated by the city.
Medical waste. Waste generated by health care related facilities and associated with health care activities, not
including garbage or rubbish generated from offices, kitchens, or other non-health-care activities.
Motel. The area, including a building or portion thereof, or buildings, where families, transients or tourists are
accommodated, and shall include, but not exclusively, a trailer camp.
Municipal hazardous waste. Any municipal solid waste or mixture of municipal solid wastes that has been
identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator, United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Municipal solid waste (MSW). Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial,
institutional, and recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and all other solid waste other than industrial solid waste.
Non-RACM. Non-regulated asbestos-containing material as defined in 40 CFR 61. This is asbestos material in a
form such that potential health risks resulting from exposure to it are minimal.
Nuisance. Municipal solid waste that is stored, processed, or disposed of in a manner that causes the pollution of
the surrounding land, the contamination of groundwater or surface water, the breeding of insects or rodents, or
the creation of odors adverse to human health, safety, or welfare.
One-family residence. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by one (1) family.
Other regulated medical waste. Medical waste that is not included within special waste from health care related
facilities but that is subject to special handling requirements within the generating facility by other state or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/420
federal agencies, excluding medical waste subject to chapter 289 of title 25 [of the Texas Administrative Code]
(relating to occupational safety and radiation control).
PCB. Polychlorinated biphenyl molecule.
PCB waste. Those PCBs and PCB items that are subject to the disposal requirements of 40 CFR 761. Substances
that are regulated by 40 CFR 761 include, but are not limited to, PCB articles, PCB article containers, PCB
containers, PCB-contaminated electrical equipment, PCB equipment, PCB transformers, recycled PCBs,
capacitors, microwave ovens, electronic equipment, and light ballasts and fixtures.
Person. An individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business
trust, partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
Premises. A tract of land with the buildings thereon, or a building or part of a building with its grounds or other
appurtenances.
Private hauler. A person or business, other than the city, that engages in the collection and transportation of
municipal and/or industrial solid wastes within the city limits.
Prohibited waste. Material named by the state commission on environmental quality, the federal Environmental
Protection Agency or any other federal, state, or local agency having jurisdiction which is prohibited to be
placed in a permitted sanitary landfill as operated by the city.
Putrescible waste. Organic waste, such as garbage, wastewater treatment plant sludge, and grease trap waste,
that is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause odors or gases or is
capable of providing food for or attracting birds, animals, and disease vectors.
RACM. Regulated asbestos-containing material as defined in 40 CFR 61, as amended, includes friable asbestos
material; category I nonfriable ACM that has become friable; category I nonfriable ACM that will be or has
been subjected to sanding, grinding, cutting, or abrading; or category II nonfriable ACM that has a high
probability of becoming or has become crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by the forces expected to act
on the material in the course of demolition or renovation operations.
Radioactive waste. Waste that requires specific licensing under 25 TAC chapter 289 or chapter 401 Health and
Safety Code (relating to radioactive materials and other sources of radiation), and the rules adopted by the
commission under that law.
RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
Recyclable material. A material that has been recovered or diverted from the nonhazardous waste stream for
purposes of reuse, recycling, or reclamation, a substantial portion of which is consistently used in the
manufacture of products that may otherwise be produced using raw or virgin materials. Recyclable material is
not solid waste. However, recyclable material may become solid waste at such time, if any, as it is abandoned or
disposed of rather than recycled, whereupon it will be solid waste with respect only to the party actually
abandoning or disposing of the material.
Recycling. A process by which materials that have served their intended use or are scrapped, discarded, used,
surplus, or obsolete are collected, separated, or processed and returned to use in the form of raw materials in the
production of new products. Except for mixed municipal solid waste composting, that is, composting of the
typical mixed solid waste stream generated by residential, commercial, and/or institutional sources, recycling
includes the composting process if the compost material is put to beneficial use.
Refuse. The same as “rubbish.”
Regulated hazardous waste. A solid waste that is a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR, part 261.3, and that is
not excluded from regulation as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR, part 261.4(b), or that was not generated by a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/420
conditionally exempt small-quantity generator.
Resource recovery. The recovery of material or energy from solid waste.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible
waste materials; combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics,
yard trimmings, leaves, used or scrap tires and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish includes glass,
crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator
temperatures (1600 degrees Fahrenheit to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit).
Salvaging. The controlled and authorized removal of materials for utilization, for recycling, or for sale.
Sanitary landfill. Means the same as “solid waste landfill.”
Sanitation collection services. The collection of solid wastes from residences and commercial and industrial
establishments by the city.
Sanitation department. Either the department of sanitation of the city or the duly authorized agents of said
department.
Sanitation superintendent. Either the superintendent of sanitation, his superiors, or his duly authorized agents.
Scavenging. The uncontrolled and unauthorized removal of materials at any point in the solid waste management
system of the city.
Scrap tire. Any tire that can no longer be used for its original intended purpose.
Septage. The liquid and solid material pumped from a septic tank, cesspool, or similar sewage treatment system.
Sludge. The solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated by the wastewater treatment plant of the city.
Solid waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, or sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, and any other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal,
commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities, but does not
include:
(1) Solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved material in irrigation
return flows, or industrial discharges subject to regulation by permit issued pursuant to chapter 26 of
the Water Code;
(2) Soil, dirt, rock, sand, and other natural or man-made inert solid materials used to fill land if the
object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements;
(3) Waste materials which result from activities associated with the exploration, development, or
production of oil or gas and are subject to control by the state railroad commission.
Solid waste landfill. The permitted disposal site owned and operated by the city.
Special waste. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that because of its quantity, concentration,
physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties requires special handling and disposal to protect
human health or the environment. If improperly handled, transported, stored, processed, or disposed of or
otherwise managed, it may pose a present or potential danger to human health or the environment. Special
wastes include, but are not limited to:
(1) Hazardous wastes from small generators that may be exempt from full controls under state
solid waste regulations;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/420
(2) Class I industrial nonhazardous waste not routinely collected with municipal solid waste;
(3) Special waste from health care related facilities (refers to certain items of medical waste), and
includes infectious and pathological wastes from health care facilities, veterinary hospitals, or
laboratories;
(4) Municipal wastewater treatment plant sludges that have not been treated by one of the
processes prescribed in federal regulations under 40 CFR part 257, appendix II;
(5) Septic tank pumpings;
(6) Grease trap wastes;
(7) Wastes from commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plants (except domestic sewage);
air pollution control facilities; and tanks, drums, or containers used for shipping or storing any
material that has not been listed as a commercial product in 40 CFR 261.33(e) or (f);
(8) Slaughterhouse wastes;
(9) Dead animals;
(10) Drugs, contaminated foods, or drink products, other than those contained in normal household
wastes;
(11) Pesticide (insecticide, herbicide, fungicide, or rodenticide) containers;
(12) Discarded materials containing asbestos;
(13) Incinerator ash;
(14) Soil contaminated by petroleum products, crude oils, or chemicals;
(15) Used oil;
(16) Light ballasts and/or small capacitors containing polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) compounds;
(17) Waste from oil, gas, and geothermal activities subject to regulation by the state railroad
commission when those wastes are to be processed, treated, or disposed of at a solid waste
management facility permitted under this article;
(18) Waste generated outside the boundaries of Texas that contains:
(A) Any industrial waste;
(B) Any waste associated with oil, gas, and geothermal exploration, production, or
development activities; or
(C) Any item listed as a special waste in this subsection;
(19) Any waste stream other than household or commercial garbage, refuse, or rubbish;
(20) Lead acid storage batteries; and
(21) Used oil filters from internal combustion engines.
Stabilized sludges. Those sludges processed to significantly reduce pathogens as specified in federal regulations
under CFR part 257, appendix II.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/420
Storage battery. A secondary battery, so called because the conversion from chemical to electrical energy is
reversible and the battery is thus rechargeable. Secondary or storage batteries contain an electrode made of
sponge lead and lead dioxide, nickel-iron, nickel-cadmium, silver-zinc, or silver-cadmium. The electrolyte used
is sulfuric acid. Other types of storage batteries contain lithium, sodium-liquid sulfur, or chlorine-zinc using
titanium electrodes.
Transporter. A person who collects and transports municipal solid waste; does not include a man or woman
transporting his or her household waste or city collection crews.
Trash. Rubbish such as paper, boxes, grass, shrubs, yard cleanings, yard clippings, leaves, tree trimmings,
weeds, hedge trimmings and similar matter.
Triple rinse. To rinse a container three times using a volume of solvent equal to ten percent of the volume of the
container or liner for each rinse.
Two-family residence. A detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied as a dwelling by
two (2) families.
Used tire. Any tire that has been mounted upon a wheel and utilized for any period of time, or any tire that
cannot be legally described as new.
Vector. Any agent, such as an insect, snake, rodent, or animal, capable of mechanically or biologically
transferring a pathogen from one organism to another.
Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush, including clean woody vegetative
material not greater than six inches in diameter, that results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing
operations. The term does not include stumps, roots, or shrubs with intact root balls.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.008)
Sec. 13.02.005 Penalty
Any person, firm or individual who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined a sum not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2000.00), and each and every day's violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. (1998 Code, sec. 71.004)
Sec. 13.02.006 Assent to provisions by consumers
All of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in every contract between the sanitation
department and its consumers, and each customer shall be charged with knowledge of the provisions of this
article and, by applying and/or accepting sanitation service from the sanitation department, to have consented to
the provisions hereof. (1998 Code, sec. 71.005)
Sec. 13.02.007 Efforts to obtain voluntary compliance
Nothing in this article shall prevent the city or its agents from making efforts to obtain voluntary compliance
through warning, conference or any other appropriate means. (1998 Code, sec. 71.006)
Sec. 13.02.008 Exemptions
Any person may apply to the city council for an exemption or partial exemption to the provisions of this article,
and an exemption may be granted, after a public hearing and affirmative vote of the city council, if it is found
that:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/420
(1) The violation occurring or proposed to occur does not constitute a danger to public health or
safety;
(2) The violation occurring or proposed to occur will not be for more than ninety (90) days;
(3) Compliance with the provisions from which exemption is sought would produce serious
hardship without equal benefits to the public;
(4) If the exemption is granted, it would not constitute a violation of any federal or state law or
regulation; and
(5) If the violation occurring or proposed to occur does not involve the collection, transportation or
disposal of any class I, class II, special, infectious, hazardous, prohibited or any other wastes
regulated by state or federal law or regulations.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.007)
Secs. 13.02.009–13.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Disposal
Sec. 13.02.041 Permitted methods of disposal
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, dump or unload any garbage, rubbish, refuse or other waste
matter at any place within the city or its jurisdiction, except as follows:
(1) Approved methods of disposal. All disposal of solid wastes shall be by one of the following
methods:
(A) Disposal by city. At a state permitted sanitary landfill.
(B) Individual disposal. The disposal of solid wastes in any place within the city and within
five thousand (5,000) feet outside of the city limits except at the designated sanitary landfill, a
recycling or composting facility or a collection site, or at an approved facility or collection site
for special or hazardous wastes, is prohibited, except that occupants of private dwellings
outside the city limits where garbage pickup is not available may dispose of their solid wastes
by any state approved method so long as the method of disposal does not create a nuisance.
(2) Placing waste for collection. All items of garbage, trash and other waste material shall be
placed in approved type containers except as hereinafter specifically exempted. Large volumes of
brush and other approved materials may be placed on the ground for collection near the alley
property line of the property from which it originated and clear of the traveled right-of-way. Such
accumulations will be collected by the sanitation department when possible. It shall be unlawful to
place any other waste material in the alley or public right-of-way except as herein provided.
(3) Yard waste generated by contractors, utilities, etc. It shall be the duty of all tree surgery
operators, commercial nurserymen, yard work contractors or public utility concerns to provide their
own facilities for the removal, hauling and disposal of trees, tree trunks or any other accumulation of
brush, grass clippings, dirt, or similar yard wastes generated by them, and to remove the same in a
manner which shall be designated by the department of sanitation, the provisions of this article
notwithstanding. Such wastes shall not be placed in sanitation containers.
(4) Waste placed in container must be free of liquids. It shall be the duty of every person placing
solid wastes in any container provided for by this article to eliminate, as far as possible, all water and
liquid from such solid wastes, and to securely wrap the solid waste before placing it in the container.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/420
It shall be unlawful to pour water or any liquid over the solid wastes or into the container. Liquid
material or semi-liquid material that will harden must be sealed in a container that will not break or
spill during a normal loading cycle. Flammable liquids may not be placed in the container.
(5) Animal matter. Animal matter that is subject to decomposition shall be placed in a plastic
container or bag before being placed in a sanitation container.
(6) Manure, waste oils, and residue from wash drains. Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry
yards and pigeon lofts, human excrement, dog and cat excrement, waste oils and all residue which
collects in wash drains from garages and filling stations shall be disposed of by the owner or agent
responsible and shall not be placed in sanitation containers or at the sanitary landfill. Disposal shall
be at a disposal site permitted to accept such wastes at the expense of the party responsible for the
same.
(7) Heavy refuse and industrial waste. Discarded automobile bodies and frames and other heavy,
bulky refuse and all industrial waste resulting from manufacturing operations must be disposed of by
the owner or occupant of the building or premises where such industrial waste originates. This
subsection shall include accumulations from packing houses, killing and dressing plants for poultry
and fowl, wholesale fruit and vegetable houses and stores, and cotton gins, cotton oil mills and cotton
compresses.
(8) Waste resulting from building construction or cleanup of vacant property.
(A) Rock, waste building materials or other trash resulting from building or remodeling
operations, or resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property, will not be
removed by the city. Such waste shall be removed by the contractor, owner or occupant of the
building at his own expense and at no time shall this material be placed in a sanitation
container, unless approved by the sanitation superintendent, or placed in any alley in such a
manner that the alley will be obstructed or blocked.
(B) It shall be the duty of all roofing contractors, carpet layers, electricians, plumbers,
carpenters, or any other person contracting for residential, commercial, or industrial
construction or improvements to provide their own facilities for the removal of wastes
generated by them, and to remove the same in a manner which shall be designated by the
department of sanitation, the provisions of this article notwithstanding. Such wastes shall not be
placed in sanitation containers.
(9) Boxes and cartons. All boxes and cartons not suitable for placement in a container must be
broken down and bundled, and no bundle shall exceed seventy-five (75) pounds in weight. Such
bundles shall be placed in a location designated by the department of sanitation. Boxes and cartons
not broken down and bundled shall not be placed outside of the container.
(10) Dead animals. When any horse, cow, jack, jennet, goat, sheep, hog, chicken or any other kind
of large animal or fowl shall die within the corporate limits of the city, the owner or person in control
of the animal or fowl shall be required to remove the body or carcass thereof outside the city limits,
and to bury or otherwise dispose of such body or carcass so that the sight or odor thereof shall not be
offensive to any citizen of the city. Dogs, cats or any other small dead animals shall not be placed in
sanitation containers. The animal control officer of the police department may, upon notice, remove
such small dead animals.
(11) Ashes. Ashes shall be wrapped or placed in a paper sack before placement in the container.
No live coals or embers shall be placed in the containers.
(12) Trees, tree limbs and brush. All trees to be removed from premises shall be trimmed free of
branches, and cut into lengths not to exceed ten inches (10") in diameter and four feet (4') in length,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/420
and the weight of such lengths shall not exceed sixty (60) pounds. All brush, trees and tree limbs
prepared in accordance with this section may not be placed in containers and shall be placed on the
ground in the alley adjacent to the premises for collection by individual occupants of private
residences. If such brush, trees and tree limbs are placed in the alley adjacent to the premises, they
shall be placed in a neat and orderly manner so as to not obstruct vehicular use of the alley. Materials
exceeding ten inches (10") in diameter and four feet (4') in length and weighing more than sixty (60)
pounds shall be removed by the resident or property owner.
(13) Grass clippings, leaves and weeds. Grass clippings, leaves and weeds may be placed in plastic
bags and on the ground in the alley adjacent to the premises for collection, by individual occupants of
private residences. Said bags shall not be intermingled with tree limbs and brush. All commercial
nurserymen and firms shall provide for hauling and disposal of tree trunks, limbs and trimmings, and
for the dirt and grass combinations generated in renovating lawns, the provisions of this subsection
notwithstanding.
(14) Dirt, rocks and turf. Dirt, rocks and turf shall not be placed in the street or alley or in a
sanitation container.
(15) Records, books, and confidential matter. Records, books, and confidential matter may be
disposed at the landfill or in any collection container, except that the city will not guarantee the
destruction or confidentiality of same in any manner whatsoever.
(16) Heavy accumulations. Heavy accumulations, such as brick, broken concrete, lumber,
construction materials, cinders, dirt, plaster, sand or gravel, automobile frames, dead trees and other
bulky, heavy material, including debris from vacant lots, shall be immediately disposed of at the
expense of the owner or person controlling the same. Such heavy accumulations shall not be stored or
placed in an alley or other public right-of-way or on any private property except the premises on
which such accumulation originated. The city reserves the right to pick up all material, waste or
otherwise, placed in the alley and shall not be held liable for the disposal of said material regardless
of its nature. If removed by the sanitation department the charge shall be at the rate of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per truckload.
(17) Demolition and removal of dilapidated residential structures. The city may demolish and
dispose of dilapidated residential buildings in accordance with the provisions in section 3.05.010
through section 3.05.013 of the Code of Ordinances for the city. The charge for demolition, removal,
and disposal of the demolished materials shall be $100.00 per truckload in accordance with
subsection (16) of this section. The charges for demolition, removal, and disposal shall be assessed
according to section 3.05.011(b)(3). Property owners who voluntarily wish to have the city perform
the demolition shall sign a written consent form allowing the demolition and giving the city
permission to enter the property to perform the work. The owner shall then pay the city a minimum
of $200.00 in advance with the balance due upon completion of the demolition, or the city may place
a lien on the property in accordance with the provisions in section 3.05.011(b)(3) to cover the cost of
the demolition.
(18) Demolition and removal of dilapidated commercial and/or industrial structures.
(A) The city may demolish and dispose of dilapidated commercial and/or industrial buildings
in accordance with the provisions in section 3.05.010 through section 3.05.013 of the Code of
Ordinances for the city. The charge for demolition, removal, and disposal of the demolished
materials shall be the posted rate per hour of each piece of equipment used in the demolition,
plus $100.00 per truckload, plus $20.00 per ton disposed of in the city landfill. The charges for
demolition, removal, and disposal shall be assessed according to section 3.05.011(b)(3).
Property owners who voluntarily wish to have the city perform the demolition shall sign a
written consent form allowing the demolition and giving the city permission to enter the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/420
property to perform the work. The owner shall then pay the city a minimum of $500.00 in
advance with the balance due upon completion of the demolition.
(B) The city encourages commercial and industrial property owners to seek out all available
local contractors for bids to demolish their structures before approaching the city to contract for
demolition work. The city manager may review each bid from local contractors before
considering any request for demolition.
(C) Demolition of commercial and/or industrial buildings is not generally within the normal
scope of services provided by the city. However, if no local contractors are available to perform
the work, and the removal of such building is considered necessary to prevent blight, and/or to
protect life and safety, in accordance with section 3.05.010, the city may undertake such
activities necessary to demolish the structures in accordance with the above guidelines and
within a schedule to be set by the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.011)
Sec. 13.02.042 Prohibited acts
The following acts, among others, are declared to be unlawful and in violation of this section, and are declared
to be trespasses, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) Placing solid waste on public property. To dump, throw, or place any garbage, rubbish, refuse,
junk, ashes, filth, wastepaper, weeds, grass cuttings, rock or other waste matter of whatever kind in or
on any public building, street or alley, other than the city's solid waste landfill, except as herein
otherwise provided.
(2) Placing solid waste on private property. To dump, throw, or place any garbage, rubbish, refuse,
junk, ashes, filth, wastepaper, weeds, grass cuttings, rock or other waste matter of whatever kind in or
on any private property, except the premises on which such waste matter originated.
(3) Sweeping solid waste into public street or alley. To sweep paper, litter, or debris into any public
street or alley.
(4) Placing solid waste in gutter or drainage ditch. To put any garbage, refuse, junk, rubbish, or any
other substance capable of impeding the flow of water into any gutter or drainage ditch.
(5) Placing vegetation trimmings on public property. To throw, place, dump or deposit any lawn
trimmings, hedge trimmings or other cuttings or trimmings of weeds, flowers or other vegetation on
or in any gutter, street, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb, or alley, or on any other public property of
the city.
(6) Placing vegetation trimmings on private property. To throw, place, dump or deposit any lawn
trimmings, hedge trimmings or other cuttings or trimmings of weeds, flowers or other vegetation on
any lot, vacant or occupied, driveway, or any other private property.
(7) Disposal of unsanitary matter. To cause or permit to be or remain in or upon any premises,
private or public, any animal, vegetable or mineral matter or any composition or residue thereof
which is in an unsanitary condition or injurious to public health.
(8) Disposal of scrap or used tires. To throw, place, dump or deposit any scrap or used tire on or in
any gutter, street, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, curb, or alley, or on any other public property of the
city, or on any lot, vacant or occupied, driveway, or any other private property. In addition to any fine
levied for said violation, an administrative fee of at least ten dollars ($10.00) per tire shall be charged
for the disposal of said tires if removed by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/420
(9) Depositing equipment or appliances containing freon or PCBs. To throw, place, dump or
deposit any appliance or equipment containing freon or PCBs on or in any gutter, street, sidewalk,
parkway, driveway, curb, or alley, or on any other public property of the city, or on any lot, vacant or
occupied, driveway, or any other private property. In addition to any fine levied for said violation, an
administrative fee of at least one hundred dollars ($100.00) per item shall be charged for the disposal
of said items if removed by the city.
(10) Explosives, highly volatile chemicals, drugs, narcotics and other harmful matter. To dispose
of explosives, highly volatile chemicals, drugs, narcotics and any other harmful matter in a sanitation
container, at the landfill, or in any other manner prohibited by law. Such materials will not be
accepted for disposal by the city either at the landfill or in any collection container.
(11) Medical wastes. To dispose of any medical wastes either at the landfill or in any collection
container in a manner not approved or allowed by state or federal law.
(12) Hazardous household waste. To engage in any activity to collect, aggregate or dispose of any
hazardous household waste that has been segregated from other solid wastes either at the landfill or
in any collection container.
(13) Scrap or used tires. To engage in any activity to collect, aggregate or dispose of any scrap or
used tires at the landfill or in any collection container, except as herein otherwise provided.
(14) Used oil or oil filters. To engage in any activity to collect, aggregate or dispose of any used oil
or oil filters at the landfill or in any collection container, except as herein otherwise provided.
(15) Disposal of household appliances. To engage in any activity to collect, aggregate or dispose of
any household appliances, including refrigerators and air conditioners, at the landfill, in any
collection container, or in a vacant lot, alley or other right-of-way, except as herein otherwise
provided.
(16) Disposal of equipment containing PCBs. To engage in any activity to collect, aggregate or
dispose of any equipment containing PCBs, including electric motors, capacitors and transformers, at
the landfill, in any collection container, or in a vacant lot, alley or other right-of-way, except as herein
otherwise provided.
(17) Accumulations of garbage, refuse, etc. To place, deposit or throw, or permit or cause to be
placed, deposited or thrown, any garbage, brush, broken glass, bottles, loose waste or refuse of any
kind, on public or private property outside of any house, building, flat or tenement in the city, unless
the same has been deposited in accordance with the provisions of this article. The presence of
garbage, brush, rubbish or miscellaneous waste upon any street, alley or public place shall be held to
constitute a violation of this section on the part of the owner or occupant upon whose half of the alley
such garbage, brush, rubbish or miscellaneous waste is permitted to remain for longer than twentyfour
(24) hours.
(18) Removal of solid waste. To scavenge, salvage, separate and collect, carry off or dispose of
solid wastes and other materials lawfully deposited or otherwise introduced into the solid waste
management system of the city, including any dumpster or other collection point, such materials
being the property of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.012)
State law reference–Illegal dumping, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 365.012.
Secs. 13.02.043–13.02.080 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/420
Division 3. Collection
Sec. 13.02.081 Receptacles; storage of waste
(a) Mechanically loaded refuse containers may be furnished by the city. When a mechanically loaded
container is placed to provide for garbage collection, no other type of container may be placed in the alley or any
other collection point.
(1) The mechanically loaded container shall be used to dispose of garbage, litter, trash, and other
normally generated refuse.
(2) Building material, rocks, bricks, junk metal, dirt, tires, brush, large tree limbs and other
material that produces excessive weight or volume may not be placed in the mechanically loaded
container.
(3) Excessive weights or volumes of residential yard waste may not be placed in the mechanically
loaded container. Large volumes of grass clippings shall be packed in plastic bags and placed in the
alley or other public right-of-way adjacent to the owner's property, in a manner specified in this
article, for collection, or shall be disposed of by the owner at the owner's expense.
(b) All material placed in the container must not project above the lip of the container at any point so that the
lid may close properly.
(c) All solid waste shall be stored in such a manner that does not constitute a fire, safety, or health hazard or
provide food or harborage for animals and vectors, and shall be contained or bundled so as not to result in litter.
(d) It shall be the responsibility of the occupant of a residence or the owner or management of an
establishment to utilize city-provided containers of an adequate size, and in sufficient numbers, to contain all
solid waste that the residence or other establishment generates in the period of time between collections.
(e) Establishments generating solid wastes containing food wastes shall store said wastes in covered or closed
containers which are leakproof, and the owner or management of said establishment shall be responsible for
maintaining said containers in a clean condition so that they do not constitute a nuisance and to retard the
harborage, feeding, and propagation of vectors.
(f) Each occupant of a residence, or owner, occupant, tenant, lessee or management of an establishment, shall
be responsible for maintaining the area around the garbage containers in a clean and sanitary condition, free of
weeds, tall grass, garbage and trash.
(g) It shall be unlawful for any person who is a residential sanitation service customer to deposit or dispose of
any solid wastes in a collection container more than two hundred feet (200') from their residence unless said
container is the nearest container to said residence or the person is directed to do otherwise by the sanitation
superintendent.
(h) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or dispose of any solid wastes in a collection container
located at and paid for by a commercial or industrial establishment that is not their own or without the
permission of the person in control of said container.
(i) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or dispose of any solid wastes in a collection container if that
person is not a current paying customer of the city's sanitation service.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.031)
Sec. 13.02.082 Collection of waste containing putrescibles
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/420
The collection and removal of solid wastes containing putrescibles shall be made at least once weekly to prevent
propagation and attraction of vectors and the creation of public health nuisances. In the event that circumstances
prevent the normal collection of such wastes, it shall be the responsibility of the person or establishment
generating such wastes to collect and transport them to the city's solid waste landfill. (1998 Code, sec. 71.032)
Sec. 13.02.083 Charges for residential collection
(a) An assessment is hereby levied for removing garbage, rubbish and trash in accordance with the schedule
listed in this section. This shall be a minimum assessment, and additional charges for extra pickups, extra service
or extra containers [shall] be assessed in addition to this minimum charge. (1998 Code, sec. 71.033)
(b) The minimum rate for commercial and industrial sanitation collection service, which shall be charged all
customers, except as otherwise provided, shall be twenty-nine dollars ($29.00) per month effective October 1,
2009. (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
(c) The city through its water and waste department shall charge and collect, and every commercial customer
shall pay, for sanitation collection service furnished to the customer, the amount calculated by application of the
following rates for all billing cycles on or after October 1, 2009:
Type of Service Rate
One-family residence $29.00
Two-family residence on one water meter $58.00
Two-family residence on separate water meters, each $29.00
One-family residence on apartment on one water meter $29.00
(Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11; Ordinance O-12-11, sec. 6, adopted 9/13/11)
(d) The minimum monthly charge per individual customer shall never be less than the minimum charge set out
in subsection (b) above, and the total charge to all customers sharing one container shall not be less than $84.00
per month unless the container has been placed at its location for the sole convenience of the city in furnishing
such service. None of these charges shall be interpreted to place a maximum amount that can be charged on one
container when it has multiple users. (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
(e) In calculating the minimum rate to be charged apartment houses, townhouses, or other multifamily living
units, each living unit shall be deemed a residential unit and subject to a minimum rate charge for each unit.
(f) For service outside the city limits, residential users of city sanitation service shall pay two hundred twentyfive
percent (225%) of the established rate for similar customers inside the city limits.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.033)
Sec. 13.02.084 Charges for commercial and industrial collection
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/420
(a) An assessment is hereby levied for removing garbage, rubbish and trash in accordance with the schedule
listed in this section. This shall be a minimum assessment, and additional charges for extra pickups, extra service
or extra [containers shall] be assessed in addition to this minimum charge. (1998 Code, sec. 71.034)
(b) The minimum rate for commercial and industrial sanitation collection service, which shall be charged all
customers, except as otherwise provided, shall be twenty-one dollars ($21.00) per month effective October 1,
2009. (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
(c) The city through its water and waste department shall charge and collect, and every commercial customer
shall pay, for sanitation collection service furnished to the customer, the amount calculated by application of the
following rates for all billing cycles on or after October 1, 2014:
Type of Service Rate
Minimum charge $29.00
1 container, 2 pickups per week $89.25
1 container, 3 pickups per week $130.00
1 container, 4 pickups per week $170.00
(Ordinance O-18-14, sec. 4, adopted 9/9/14)
(d) The minimum monthly charge per individual customer shall never be less than the minimum charge set out
in subsection (b) above, and the total charge to all customers sharing one container shall not be less than $81.20
per month unless the container has been placed at its location for the sole convenience of the city in furnishing
such service. None of these charges shall be interpreted to place a maximum amount that can be charged on one
container when it has multiple users. (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
(e) The minimum charges set out herein will remain in effect and will apply to all customers regardless of
whether or not the establishment uses the collection services of the sanitation department. The minimum charge
will be stopped only if both of the following requirements are met: the structure is unoccupied and the water
service to the structure has been disconnected.
(f) For service outside the city limits, users of city commercial and industrial sanitation services shall pay two
hundred twenty-five percent (225%) of the established rate for similar customers inside the city limits.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.034)
Sec. 13.02.085 Billing; collection of charges
(a) The water department shall include on its monthly bills mailed to persons who receive the services
specified in this article the charge designated for the sanitation collection and removal services rendered to the
premises of those persons.
(b) The charges fixed by this article shall be payable to the city on or before the due date specified on such
billing. In the event any person receiving services does not have a water connection billing, then a separate
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/420
monthly bill shall be sent to such person, and in that event the specified charges for trash and garbage collection
shall be due on or before the tenth day following the mailing of the separate bill.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.035)
Sec. 13.02.086 Payment of charges
(a) The time, manner of billing and enforcement of payment of the garbage collection rates set out elsewhere
herein shall be under the direction and control of the director of finance and in the form and manner used for the
payment of the rates and charges set forth elsewhere herein which are applicable to the water and sewer system.
(b) Failure to pay such sanitation service collection rates as provided in this article shall result in the
termination of water and sewer service. In the event such water and sewer service is terminated under this
section, restoration thereof shall be as set forth elsewhere herein.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.036)
Sec. 13.02.087 Collection services outside city limits
(a) The city shall have the right, but shall not have the obligation, to provide solid waste collection services
outside of its corporate limits and within Dawson County. Any entity within Dawson County, whether public or
private, commercial, industrial, or residential, may apply for collection services with the city.
(b) All wastes collected must comply with section 13.02.081(a) through (i) of the Code of Ordinances.
(c) In order to determine which customers will be served, each request will be reviewed according to, but not
specifically limited to, the following:
(1) Be within Dawson County, Texas;
(2) Be within a reasonable distance to established routes;
(3) Generate enough waste to need service at least once per week; and
(4) Have a dedicated roadway which is paved and rated for the weight of the solid waste collection
vehicles.
(d) All requests for service to be considered must be in compliance with the above conditions, and, in the
opinion of the city manager, prove beneficial to the city. Service may be denied for any reason, and all decisions
made by the city manager are final.
(e) Either party may terminate the service for any reason upon thirty (30) days' written notice.
(f) Collection services provided for other municipalities within the county shall be negotiated by the city
manager. Upon reaching an acceptable agreement, a written service agreement showing all rates and fees, and
outlining the scope of services to be provided, shall be presented to the city council for approval.
(g) All wastes collected shall be deposited in the city municipal solid waste landfill and will be subject to the
terms and conditions of divisions 5 and 6 of this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.038)
Sec. 13.02.088 Vector control
The city, through its water and wastewater department, shall charge and collect, and every customer shall pay,
for vector control services for all billing cycles on or after April 1, 2005, an amount of $1.00 per month for no
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/420
more than five months out of the year. (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
Secs. 13.02.089–13.02.120 Reserved
Division 4. Private Haulers
Sec. 13.02.121 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person (other than the city and its employees acting in the scope of their
employment) to collect, remove or dispose of garbage or trash from any premises within the city, except
premises owned or controlled by the person, without first obtaining a permit therefor, [and] unless the council
has, after hearing, determined that there is a present public need and necessity for such additional service by
passing a resolution authorizing the city secretary to issue said permits. (1998 Code, sec. 71.037(a))
Sec. 13.02.122 Use of private hauler
The owner or person in charge of any premises may remove or contract for the removal of garbage or trash, or
both, otherwise than by the sanitation department, if the hauler complies with the requirements of this division.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.037(b))
Sec. 13.02.123 Scope of permit
A commercial hauler's permit may be issued for the collection of solid waste by a private hauler. Said permit
entitles the holder to collect, remove and dispose of garbage and/or trash, as defined in this article, from the
premises of others with their consent. (1998 Code, sec. 71.037(c))
Sec. 13.02.124 Permit fee; expiration of permit
(a) For each commercial hauler's permit, a minimum permit fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per year for
each vehicle based upon an assessment of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each thousand pounds of gross weight per
vehicle as evidenced by a valid weight ticket.
(b) All permits shall be issued for one (1) year and may be renewed upon meeting all terms of this division
and payment of the specified annual permit fee.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.037(d))
Sec. 13.02.125 Application for permit; requirements for issuance
Applications for permits shall be filed with the city secretary, stating the name and address of the applicant and
the type of permit applied for, and shall be issued upon meeting the following requirements:
(1) Before issuing an initial or renewal permit, the city secretary shall refer the application to the
superintendent of sanitation, who shall inspect the vehicle proposed to be used and shall certify to the
city secretary whether the vehicle complies with the requirements of this article, and the city
secretary shall issue or refuse the permit in accordance with such certification.
(2) No person shall hold a permit or do any act for which such permit is required without having in
effect a policy of public liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the state
in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for death or injury of any one (1)
person in one (1) accident, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for death or injury to more
than one (1) person in any one (1) accident, and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property
damage, and furnishing proof of said insurance to the city secretary.
(3) The applicant shall pay the applicable permit fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/420
(4) Applicants for commercial hauler permits shall, upon request, furnish a current financial
statement.
(5) The applicant shall provide the city secretary with a list of customer accounts and shall keep
said list current each month by delivering to the city secretary said list no later than the tenth day of
each month.
(6) The applicant shall present the city secretary with a signed contract, valid for the full term of
the permit issued, for the disposal, at a state licensed solid waste landfill, of all solid wastes collected
under the provisions of said permit.
(7) The applicant shall present the city secretary with a special municipal transporter route permit
or a municipal transporter route permit issued by the state commission on environmental quality, if
applicable.
(8) The applicant shall present the city secretary with a bond in the amount of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00), payable to the city. Said bond is required and shall be forfeited should the permittee fail
to service customers in a satisfactory manner or fail to meet other permit requirements for any cause
as provided in this division.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.037(e))
Sec. 13.02.126 Identification of vehicles
The city secretary shall assign an identifying number to each vehicle operated under a commercial hauler's
permit. All such vehicles used in the performance of the permittee's business shall have the company name and
city permit number displayed on the right-hand and left-hand doors of said vehicles. Letters and numbers shall
be at least three (3) inches and shall be either black on white or white on black. (1998 Code, sec. 71.037(f))
Sec. 13.02.127 Vehicle equipment and covering
Every permitted vehicle shall be fully enclosed or shall be enclosed at the sides and equipped with a tarpaulin
and methods of fastening the same so as reasonably to avoid spilling garbage or waste, disseminating odors, and
attracting insects. Such vehicle shall be kept closed or covered at all times when in use, except as may be
necessary for loading and unloading. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or allow his employee to
operate, any solid waste collection vehicle not complying with this section or to operate such vehicle without
having the tarpaulin in place and fastened as herein required. (1998 Code, sec. 71.037(g))
Sec. 13.02.128 Disposal of waste
No person shall dispose of any garbage or trash removed under a commercial hauler's permit except by carrying
it to a state licensed solid waste landfill. If said solid waste landfill shall be the city's solid waste landfill, then
said permit holder shall unload it at such place and in such manner as may be designated by the foreman or other
city employee in charge of the solid waste landfill, or by unloading it at such other place and in such manner as
may be directed by the superintendent of sanitation. No person shall unload any garbage or trash at the solid
waste landfill at any other time except as posted. Should the permittee dispose of said solid waste at any
unauthorized location, the permit may be revoked, bond forfeited, and all deposits retained. The permittee shall
maintain records for at least one year to document that waste was taken to an authorized solid waste facility.
Upon request, the permittee shall to furnish the city with adequate documentation regarding the destination of all
waste collected, including billing documents, to prove the proper disposal procedure is being followed. (1998
Code, sec. 71.037(h))
Sec. 13.02.129 Duties of drivers and permittee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/420
(a) The driver of any vehicle licensed hereunder shall immediately gather up and place in his vehicle any
garbage, trash, or other wastes which may be spilled from such vehicle in transit or spilled from the vehicle
while loading.
(b) No permit issued to any junk or salvage dealer of the city shall authorize any person to whom a permit is
issued to remove any such waste material from any container or receptacle, or in any manner interfere with such
container or receptacle.
(c) Should the permittee fail to service customers in a satisfactory manner or fail to meet other permit
requirements for any cause, the city may revoke the permit, cause forfeiture of bond, retain all deposits and use
the proceeds to defray city collection service expense to service the permittee's customers.
(d) In the event that an applicant for a permit desires to handle waste declared to be hazardous, infectious,
toxic, or harmful by federal or state law, then, in addition to the stated requirements, the applicant shall dispose
of all waste in a legal and proper manner and at a proper location for the type of harmful waste being handled by
the applicant.
(e) The permittee shall follow all requirements of subchapter C of the Municipal Solid Waste Management
Regulations as published and amended by the state commission on environmental quality.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.037(i))
Sec. 13.02.130 Revocation of permit
(a) For serious or repeated violation of any of the requirements of the preceding section, a permit thereunder
may be revoked by the sanitation superintendent after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided.
(b) After five (5) days' written notice, stating the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation, and an
opportunity to be heard by the council, any permit may be revoked or suspended at any time by the
superintendent of sanitation for violation of any provision of this article, or for failure to carry out any lawful
agreement for the removal of garbage or trash. The licensee may appeal to the council from the decision of the
superintendent of sanitation.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.037(j))
Sec. 13.02.131 Inspection of vehicles
All vehicles carrying garbage or trash may be inspected by the division of sanitation at any time to determine
whether they are properly equipped and kept covered and in a clean and sanitary condition. (1998 Code, sec.
71.037(k))
Sec. 13.02.132 Inspection of work performance
It is hereby made the duty of the superintendent of sanitation to make inspection trips at regular intervals to
determine whether or not garbage and trash are being properly collected, removed, and disposed of as required
by the provisions of this article, this code or any other applicable health regulations, and in the event it is found
that this article or other regulation is being violated, appropriate and timely action shall be taken to insure full
compliance with such provisions. (1998 Code, sec. 71.037(l))
Sec. 13.02.133 Limitations
A permit authorized by this division will not be a franchise, nor will it provide any exclusive area or class of
service, nor will the permit holder be authorized to make collections from single-family residences. (1998 Code,
sec. 71.037(m))
Sec. 13.02.134 Exceptions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/420
The provisions of this article requiring a permit for the collection and hauling of waste products shall not apply
to the following:
(1) Persons collecting waste oils and transporting them for proper disposal or recycling.
(2) Persons collecting used or scrap tires and transporting them for proper disposal or recycling.
(3) Persons collecting hazardous materials from locations within the city and transporting them
outside the city for proper disposal or recycling.
(4) Persons collecting and transporting building wastes from a single specific construction site
within the city limits and transporting them for proper disposal or recycling.
(5) Persons collecting agricultural wastes containing cotton seeds and/or burrs and transporting
them to a site outside the city.
(6) Persons collecting consumer products and materials intended for recycling, such as bottles,
newspapers, bundled cardboard, and other paper products and transporting them to a site for storage
and/or processing.
(7) Persons collecting medical wastes for proper disposal.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.037(n))
Secs. 13.02.135–13.02.170 Reserved
Division 5. Landfill Regulations
Sec. 13.02.171 Compliance
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, dump, unload or leave any garbage, rubbish, refuse or other
waste matter at the city solid waste landfill, except as provided in this article. (1998 Code, sec. 71.051)
Sec. 13.02.172 Payment of fees
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, dump, unload or leave any refuse at the city solid waste landfill
without the payment of prescribed fees and surcharges. (1998 Code, sec. 71.052)
Sec. 13.02.173 Transporter's certificate regarding nonallowable wastes
It shall be unlawful for any transporter of solid wastes, as defined in this article, to dump any refuse at the city
solid waste landfill without the presentation of a certificate that the transporter or hauler has so arranged his
routes to eliminate nonallowable wastes from the loads he transports to said landfill. The certificate shall also
state that the transporter will remove any nonallowable wastes dumped by him immediately after their discharge,
or that, at the option of the facility operator, he will pay any applicable surcharges to have the disposal facility
operator accomplish the required immediate removal for him. (1998 Code, sec. 71.053)
Sec. 13.02.174 Supervision of disposal; inspection of waste
(a) All garbage, refuse matter, or permitted waste material of any kind taken to the city solid waste landfill
shall be placed and deposited upon the solid waste landfill under the direction of, and shall be inspected by, an
authorized person under the sanitation department. Authorized landfill employees are not required to accept any
solid waste which they determine will cause problems in maintaining full and continuous compliance with this
article and any applicable federal or state statutes or regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/420
(b) The unloading of wastes in unauthorized areas is prohibited. Any waste deposited in an unauthorized area
shall be removed by the generator or transporter of the waste and disposed of properly.
(c) The unloading of prohibited wastes shall not be allowed. Any prohibited waste shall be returned promptly
to the transporter or generator of the waste.
(d) A working face monitor shall inspect each load and shall have the authority and responsibility to reject
unauthorized loads, have unauthorized material removed by the transporter and/or assess appropriate surcharges
and have the unauthorized material removed by on-site personnel.
(e) Screening of deposited waste materials may be conducted by landfill personnel as required by state
regulations. It shall be unlawful for any person transporting wastes to the landfill to evade said screening.
(f) Disposal of large, heavy, or bulky items which cannot be incorporated in the regular spreading,
compaction, and covering operations shall be in special collection areas for recycling.
(g) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with an authorized landfill employee in the discharge of his
duty.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.054)
Sec. 13.02.175 Persons allowed on landfill
Only employees of the city, city officials, city officers directing operations of the sanitation department and
private persons delivering garbage or other permitted solid waste materials to the city solid waste landfill are
allowed on the landfill. All other persons are prohibited therefrom. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain
on the landfill when ordered to leave by an authorized city employee engaged in the lawful enforcement of any
of the provisions of state law, state regulations or this article. (1998 Code, sec. 71.055)
Sec. 13.02.176 Acceptance of waste
The disposal of any and all wastes in the solid waste landfill shall be at the discretion of the city and the city
shall not be responsible for the acceptance of any wastes into said landfill for any reason whatsoever if the
acceptance is deemed to not be in the city's interest by the sanitation superintendent, or if it is determined that
acceptance will cause problems in maintaining full and continuous compliance with this article and/or any
applicable federal or state statutes or regulations. (1998 Code, sec. 71.056)
Sec. 13.02.177 Materials spilled along the route to landfill
(a) Transporters or drivers of vehicles transporting waste to the landfill shall not permit waste to blow or spill
from the vehicle transporting such wastes.
(b) Persons allowing wastes to be spilled along and within the right-of-way of any public access road serving
the landfill, or any city street or alley, shall be responsible for the cleanup of all such waste materials spilled
along said right-of-way. Assessments or additional fees may be charged for cleanup activities conducted by city
employees.
(c) Access to the landfill may be denied to any person allowing wastes to be spilled along and within the rightof-
way of any public access road serving the landfill, or any city street or alley, and said person may be required
to secure future loads as a condition for continued access to the landfill.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.057)
Sec. 13.02.178 Charges for disposal of waste
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/420
(a) Generally. Persons desiring to dispose of approved wastes at the city sanitary landfill shall pay the
following fees effective April 1, 1999:
Type of Waste Charge per Ton
Any wastes to be deposited in the type I pit including:
Municipal solid waste (MSW)
$30.00
Any wastes to be deposited in the type IV pit including:
Brush and yard wastes
Construction and demolition waste
$20.00
Type of Waste Charge per Ton
Materials not deposited in a pit including:
Metal and other recyclable material
$5.00
(b) Tires. The per-unit fee for recycling and disposal of tires shall be:
Automobile tires $1.00
Truck tires (7.5 x 20 to 17.5 x 25) $3.00
Larger truck tires $5.00
Tractor tires $5.00
Heavy equipment tires $10.00
The city reserves the right to refuse tires that may be too large or may be unsuitable for recycling or other readily
available disposal.
(c) Contaminated soils. Contaminated soils originating within the city limits and meeting standards set forth in
this article may be disposed of, if approved by the city manager, at the rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per ton.
(d) City residents. Residents of the city subject to regular residential sanitation collection charges may dump
approved residential wastes at the landfill at no charge, provided that they exhibit a paid-up sanitation service
receipt not more than one month old upon entering the landfill.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.058)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/420
(e) Each adult resident of the city, who is not then delinquent in the payment of such resident's regular
residential sanitation collection charges, may deposit not to exceed one ton per month, per residential property
address for which residential sanitation collection charges are made, of approved residential waste (not including
tires) at the landfill, at no charge, provided that such resident presents a valid photo identification showing the
residents address upon entering the landfill. Each adult resident of the county residing outside the city may
deposit not to exceed one ton per month of approved residential waste (not including tires) at the landfill at no
charge provided there is then in effect a landfill access agreement between the city and the county and provided
such residents present a valid photo identification showing the residents address upon entering the landfill. The
waste must be generated on property owned or rented by the resident and must be delivered to the landfill by the
resident. Approved residential waste includes those waste that would generally be categorized as type IV and
recyclable waste. (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
(f) County residents. Residents of Dawson County, subject to approval by an agreement between the city
council and the county commissioners court, may dispose of approved residential wastes at the landfill at no
charge, provided that they exhibit proof of residence in the county upon entering the landfill. Commercial and
agricultural wastes shall be charged at the regular rates, except as may be provided in said agreement.
(g) Governmental bodies or private firms. The city manager is authorized to enter into contract with any other
governmental body or agency or private firm for use of the sanitary landfill at rates to be negotiated, provided
that said rates shall not be lower than those charged to residents of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.058)
Sec. 13.02.179 Wastes requiring special handling
All waste requiring special handling by federal, state, or local regulation, if accepted, shall be charged for on a
basis of actual costs incurred by special handling. Said costs shall include all administrative, labor, equipment,
engineering, and property costs associated with accepting said wastes. (1998 Code, sec. 71.059)
Sec. 13.02.180 Burial of dead animals
A small animal carcass may be buried in the city solid waste landfill under the supervision of a designated
employee of the city, but all such animals shall be buried at a depth of not less than three (3) feet from the
surface of the earth to any part of the body of such carcass. A reasonable charge shall be collected for labor,
equipment and land use. The burial of large animal carcasses is prohibited. (1998 Code, sec. 71.060)
Sec. 13.02.181 Disposal of petroleum product contaminated soils
(a) No person shall dispose of any petroleum product contaminated soils or associated materials at the sanitary
landfill or place any of such products, soil, or other materials in a mechanized collection container without the
express permission of the sanitation superintendent.
(b) Only specified petroleum product contaminated soil wastes originating from property located within the
city limits may be deposited in the landfill. Any such wastes shall meet the requirements or standards for
disposal as promulgated by the state commission on environmental quality and shall be tested and certified as
meeting said requirements or standards by a certified laboratory. Only wastes tested and reported in an analysis
conducted for said soils shall be deposited in the landfill.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.061)
Sec. 13.02.182 Disposal of certain materials prohibited
No person shall dispose of any material or type of waste listed below, either in solution or solid form, at the city
solid waste landfill, or within the city limits, or within 5000 feet of its boundaries, to wit:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/420
(1) Any waste listed as a hazardous waste in 40 Code of Federal Regulations part 261, subparts C
and D, to include any volatile organic compounds (VOCs) for which required analytical procedures
provided in Environmental Protection Agency Report SW-846, Test Methods for Evaluating Solid
Waste, Third Edition, November, 1986, as revised December, 1987, include Method 8260, and 15
metals for which SW-846 provides either Method 6010 or a method from the 7000 series of methods.
(2) Any waste determined to be hazardous pursuant to section 335.504 of the Industrial Solid
Waste and Municipal Hazardous Waste Regulations promulgated by the state commission on
environmental quality.
(3) Any noxious or malodorous substance which, either singularly or by interaction with other
substances, is capable of causing objectionable odors or hazard to life.
(4) Any radioactive wastes (liquid or solid) greater than allowable releases specified by current
United States Bureau of Standards handbooks dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity,
and no transient concentration higher than 100 microcuries per liter shall be permitted.
(5) Any friable or regulated nonfriable asbestos waste. (Regulated asbestos-containing material as
defined in 40 CFR 61, as amended, includes friable asbestos material; category I nonfriable ACM
that has become friable; category I nonfriable ACM that will be or has been subjected to sanding,
grinding, cutting, or abrading; or category II nonfriable ACM that has a high probability of becoming
or has become crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by the forces expected to act on the
material in the course of demolition or renovation operations.)
(6) Hazardous waste. Any solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as
amended by the Resource and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq., as amended.
(7) Infectious waste. Waste containing pathogens or biologically active material which because of
its type, concentration, and quantity is capable of transmitting disease to persons exposed to the
waste.
(8) Liquid waste. Any waste material that is determined to contain “free liquids” as defined by
EPA Method 9095 (Paint Filter Test), as described in Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Wastes,
Physical/Chemical Methods (EPA Publication Number SW-846), including liquid septage and solid
material pumped from a septic tank, cesspool, or similar sewage treatment system. Containers
containing liquid waste shall not be accepted for disposal unless:
(A) The container is a small container similar in size to that normally found in household
waste;
(B) The container is designated to hold liquids for use other than storage;
(C) The waste is household waste.
(9) PCB waste. Those PCBs and PCB items that are subject to the disposal requirements of 40
CFR 761. Substances that are regulated by 40 CFR 761 include, but are not limited to, PCB articles,
PCB article containers, PCB containers, PCB-contaminated electrical equipment, PCB equipment,
PCB transformers, recycled PCBs, capacitors, microwave ovens, electronic equipment, and light
ballasts and fixtures.
(10) Special waste. Any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that because of its quantity,
concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties requires special handling
and disposal to protect human health or the environment. If improperly handled, transported, stored,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/420
processed, or disposed of or otherwise managed, it may pose a present or potential danger to human
health or the environment. Special wastes include, but are not limited to:
(A) Hazardous wastes from small generators that may be exempt from full controls under
state solid waste regulations;
(B) Class I industrial nonhazardous waste not routinely collected with municipal solid waste;
(C) Special waste from health care related facilities (refers to certain items of medical waste),
and includes infectious and pathological wastes from health care facilities, veterinary hospitals,
or laboratories;
(D) Municipal wastewater treatment plant sludges that have not been treated by one of the
processes prescribed in federal regulations under 40 CFR part 257, appendix II;
(E) Septic tank pumpings;
(F) Grease trap wastes and grit trap wastes, including the sediment accumulated by
carwashes, wash racks, and other types of vehicle washing facilities;
(G) Wastes from commercial or industrial wastewater treatment plants (except domestic
sewage); air pollution control facilities; and tanks, drums, or containers used for shipping or
storing any material that has not been listed as a commercial product in 40 CFR 261.33(e) or
(f);
(H) Slaughterhouse wastes;
(I) Dead animals, except certain small animals as provided in this article;
(J) Drugs, contaminated foods, or drink products, other than those contained in normal
household wastes;
(K) Pesticide (insecticide, herbicide, fungicide, or rodenticide) containers that have not been
triple rinsed;
(L) Discarded materials containing asbestos, except as provided in this article;
(M) Incinerator ash;
(N) Soil contaminated by petroleum products, crude oils, or chemicals;
(O) Used oil, except at state registered recycling sites;
(P) Light ballasts and/or small capacitors containing polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)
compounds;
(Q) Waste from oil, gas, and geothermal activities subject to regulation by the railroad
commission of the state when those wastes are to be processed, treated, or disposed of at a solid
waste management facility permitted under this article;
(R) Waste generated outside the boundaries of the state that contains:
(i) Any industrial waste;
(ii) Any waste associated with oil, gas, and geothermal exploration, production, or
development activities; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/420
(iii) Any item listed as a special waste in this subsection, except as provided in this
article;
(S) Any waste stream other than household or commercial garbage, refuse, or rubbish;
(T) Lead acid storage batteries, except at state certified recycling sites;
(U) Used oil filters from internal combustion engines, except at state certified recycling sites.
(11) Any whole used or scrap tire, except at state certified recycling sites.
(12) Any refrigerator, freezer, air conditioner or any other item containing chlorinated fluorocarbon
(CFC) unless all the CFC contained in that item is captured and sent to an approved CFC disposal
site or recycling facility. Items with ruptured lines or holes in the CFC unit shall not be accepted
unless the generator or transporter provides written certification that the CFC has been evacuated
from the unit and that it was not knowingly allowed to escape into the atmosphere.
(13) Any other waste which may be designated as a prohibited waste by the state commission on
environmental quality, the federal Environmental Protection Agency or any other federal, state or
local agency having jurisdiction to declare certain materials as hazardous or injurious to man or the
environment.
(14) Any other wastes which may be designated as special wastes by the state commission on
environmental quality and not allowed elsewhere herein.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.062)
Sec. 13.02.183 Industrial solid wastes
(a) Industrial solid wastes originating within the city limits, or within areas of the county covered by a landfill
services contract or agreement, may be accepted only under the following conditions:
(1) Class 1 industrial solid wastes are prohibited, except with prior written approval of the state
commission on environmental quality and a written contract approved by the city manager, provided
the acceptance of such waste does not interfere with site operation.
(2) Class 2 industrial solid wastes, except special wastes, may be accepted provided that the
acceptance of such waste does not interfere with site operation.
(3) Class 3 industrial solid waste may be accepted, provided the acceptance of such waste does not
interfere with the operation of the landfill.
(b) Any industrial waste for which there is insufficient information, either by process knowledge or analytical
data, shall automatically be classified as a class 1 industrial waste and shall not be disposed of in the landfill.
(c) Empty containers shall be classified according to the materials held in the container and any treatment
applied to the empty container. A container which has held a hazardous substance, a hazardous waste, or a class
1 waste is automatically classified as a class 1 waste. However, any such container may be classified as a class 2
waste if it has been emptied and cleaned as described in this section. A container which has held class 2 wastes
is classified as a class 2 waste.
(d) Paper, cardboard, food wastes, glass, aluminum foil, plastics, styrofoam and other types of food packaging
and general office trash is designated as “plant refuse” and classified as class 2 waste. Plant waste shall not
include oils, lubricants, oil filters, contaminated soils, sludges, wastewaters, or any other waste which would be
subject to the class 1 waste criteria.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/420
(1998 Code, sec. 71.063)
Sec. 13.02.184 Construction and demolition wastes
(a) Only construction and demolition wastes originating from property located within the city limits shall be
allowed to be deposited in the landfill, unless said disposal is allowed by a contract or agreement.
(b) Transporters or drivers of vehicles transporting construction and demolition waste to the landfill shall not
permit waste to blow or spill from the vehicle transporting such wastes.
(c) All construction and demolition wastes taken to the city solid waste landfill shall be placed and deposited
at the solid waste landfill under the direction of and shall be inspected by authorized landfill employees. Said
employees are not required to accept any construction and demolition wastes which they determine will cause
operational problems.
(d) The unloading of construction and demolition wastes in unauthorized areas is prohibited. Any construction
and demolition wastes deposited in an unauthorized area shall be removed and disposed of properly by the
person transporting said wastes.
(e) No construction or demolition wastes mixed or commingled with any other type of waste shall be accepted
at the landfill.
(f) Disposal of large, heavy, or bulky construction and demolition wastes which cannot be incorporated in the
regular spreading, compaction, and covering operations may be prohibited. The disposal of large and/or heavy
rocks, pieces of concrete or any other heavy material is prohibited. Landfill employees shall require that said
materials be broken into smaller pieces before disposal.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.064)
Sec. 13.02.185 Trees, brush and yard wastes
(a) Transporters or drivers of vehicles transporting trees, brush and yard wastes to the landfill shall not permit
waste to blow or spill from the vehicle transporting such wastes.
(b) All trees, brush and yard wastes taken to the city solid waste landfill shall be placed and deposited upon
the solid waste landfill under the direction of and shall be inspected by authorized landfill employees. Said
employees are not required to accept any trees, brush and yard wastes which they determine will cause
operational problems.
(c) The unloading of trees, brush and yard wastes in unauthorized areas is prohibited. Any trees, brush and
yard wastes deposited in an unauthorized area shall be removed and disposed of properly by the person
transporting said wastes. Trees, brush and yard wastes shall be deposited in an area designated for recycling of
said materials.
(d) No trees, brush or yard wastes mixed or commingled with any other type of waste shall be accepted at the
landfill.
(e) All trees and tree stumps taken to the landfill shall be trimmed free of branches and cut into lengths not to
exceed ten inches (10") in diameter and four feet (4') in length, and the weight of such lengths shall not exceed
sixty (60) pounds.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.065)
Sec. 13.02.186 Agricultural wastes
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/420
(a) Agricultural wastes are classified as industrial solid wastes and shall be disposed of according to the
provisions of this article providing for the disposal of industrial wastes. Only class 2 and class 3 industrial
wastes may be accepted, provided that the acceptance of said wastes does not interfere with site operation.
(b) Any agricultural waste which because of its concentration or physical or chemical characteristics is toxic,
corrosive, flammable, or a strong sensitizer or irritant, [or] a generator of sudden pressure by decomposition,
heat, or other means and may pose a substantial present or potential danger to human health or the environment
when improperly processed, stored, transported, or otherwise managed, or otherwise classified as a hazardous
waste or class 1 industrial waste, shall not be disposed of in the landfill.
(c) Empty containers shall be classified according to the materials held in the container and any treatment
applied to the empty container. A container which has held a hazardous substance, a hazardous waste, or a class
1 waste is automatically classified as a class 1 waste. However, any such container may be classified as a class 2
waste if it has been emptied and cleaned as described in this section. A container which has held class 2 wastes
is classified as a class 2 waste.
(1) Empty containers which have been used for pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, or rodenticides
may be disposed of at the landfill provided that:
(A) The containers are triple-rinsed prior to receipt at the landfill (triple rinse: to rinse a
container three times using a volume of solvent equal to ten percent of the volume of the
container or liner for each rinse);
(B) The containers are rendered unusable prior to or upon receipt at the landfill;
(C) The containers are covered at the end of the same working day they are received.
(2) Those containers for which triple-rinsing is not feasible or practical, such as paper bags or
cardboard containers, may be disposed of if:
(A) The generator of the wastes is a conditionally exempt small quantity generator;
(B) The amount of wastes does not exceed 220 pounds per month per generator; and
(C) The containers are covered at the end of the same working day they are received with at
least three feet of normal solid waste.
(d) Treated or coated seeds, burrs or hulls are automatically classified as a class 1 waste and shall not be
disposed of in the landfill.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.066)
Sec. 13.02.187 Wastes containing asbestos
(a) Wastes containing nonregulated asbestos-containing materials (non-RACM) may be accepted for disposal
at the landfill provided the wastes are placed on the active working face and covered at the end of the working
day. The following non-RACM may be accepted at the landfill upon inspection and approval by the sanitation
superintendent or an authorized landfill employee:
(1) Category I nonfriable asbestos, including:
(A) Gaskets;
(B) Packing;
(C) Resilient floor covering;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/420
(D) Asphalt roofing products; and
(2) Category II nonfriable asbestos, including:
(A) Transite asbestos shingles;
(B) Transite asbestos pipe; and
(C) Any nonfriable asbestos material not defined as category I that, when dry, cannot be
crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder by hand pressure.
(b) The following wastes containing regulated asbestos-containing materials (RACM), as defined in 40
Federal Regulations (CFR) part 61, may not be accepted for disposal at the landfill:
(1) All friable asbestos products that, when dry, can be crushed to a powder by hand pressure, and
shall include:
(A) All blown-in insulation;
(B) Some pipe wrapping;
(C) Some ceiling tiles; and
(2) Any asbestos-containing material from outside the boundaries of the state.
(c) The sanitation superintendent or any landfill employee is authorized to reject for disposal in the landfill
any asbestos-containing material that has a high probability of becoming or has become crumbled, pulverized, or
reduced to powder in the course of demolition or renovation operations; or which may become crumbled,
pulverized, or reduced to powder in the course of disposal or landfill operations. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail to remove any such materials rejected for disposal from the landfill when ordered to do so by any
authorized city employee. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any said materials so rejected within
the city limits, or within 5000 feet of its boundaries.
(d) It shall be unlawful to dispose of any material containing non-RACM in the landfill or to place or allow to
be placed any material containing non-RACM on any surface or roadway which is subject to vehicular traffic or
disposed of by any other means by which the material could be crumbled into a friable state.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.067)
Sec. 13.02.188 Wastes from health care related facilities
(a) Microbiological waste, blood, blood products, body fluids, laboratory specimens of blood and tissue, and
animal bedding from health care related facilities which have been treated on-site in accordance with the
provisions of 25 TAC 136(a) (section 1.136(a)) may be disposed of in the landfill as routine municipal solid
waste provided any markings which identify the waste as a special waste from health care related facilities are
covered with a label which identifies the waste as treated medical waste.
(b) Carcasses and body parts of animals designated as a special waste from health care related facilities,
recognizable human body parts, tissues, fetuses, organs and the products of human abortions, spontaneous or
induced, shall not be disposed of in the landfill.
(c) Sharps which have been treated by the following an approved methods may be disposed of in the landfill:
(1) Broken glassware and pipettes may be placed in puncture-resistant packaging;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/420
(2) Hypodermic needles, syringes with attached needles, scalpel blades, and/or razors shall be
placed in containers designed for sharps and encapsulated by addition of an agent to the container
which will solidify and encase the contents of the container with a solid matrix; and
(3) Sharps which have been treated by an approved method which incorporates grinding and/or
shredding in the process may be disposed of as routine municipal solid waste if the sharps have been
made unrecognizable and significantly reduced in ability to cause puncture wounds.
(d) Other regulated medical waste which has not been mixed or commingled with special wastes from health
care related facilities and which is not contained within recognizable biohazard bags may be discarded with
routine municipal solid waste provided a label has been affixed to the container which states that the waste
within the container is not a special waste from health care related facilities.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.068)
Sec. 13.02.189 Ownership of contents
All solid waste and other material deposited in the solid waste landfill is the property of the city, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to separate and collect, carry off or dispose of same, except under the direction of the
superintendent of sanitation. (1998 Code, sec. 71.069)
Secs. 13.02.190–13.02.220 Reserved
Division 6. Recycling and Resource Recovery
Sec. 13.02.221 Ownership of waste deposited in solid waste management system
All solid wastes and other materials lawfully deposited or otherwise introduced into the solid waste management
system of the city, including any dumpster or other collection point, become the property of the city, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to scavenge, salvage, separate and collect, carry off or dispose of same, except under
the direction of the superintendent of sanitation. (1998 Code, sec. 71.091)
Sec. 13.02.222 Salvaging of recyclable materials
(a) No person shall engage in the act of salvaging recyclable materials from the solid waste management
system of the city without a contractual agreement signed by the city manager.
(1) In order to safeguard the health, general welfare, and physical property of the people and to
protect the environment by encouraging the reduction in solid waste generation and the proper
management of solid waste, the city manager may contract with any number of persons for the
salvaging of recyclable materials for a period not to exceed one year.
(2) Said contract shall hold the city harmless from any act of the party obtaining said contract.
(3) Said contract shall provide for a payment to the city in an amount of not less than fifty dollars
($50.00), except that the city manager may waive said payment for certain nonprofit organizations.
Said payment shall be in relation to the amount of materials expected to be salvaged minus the cost
that may have been incurred by the city in the collection and disposal of said materials.
(4) If the city manager determines that it is in the best interest of the city to contract with a
nonprofit organization for the salvaging of certain materials, the city manager may authorize payment
to subsidize said salvaging activities.
(b) Salvaging shall not interfere with prompt sanitary disposal of solid waste or create a public health
nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/420
(c) All salvaged materials shall be removed from the collection site or sanitary landfill site at such intervals as
necessary to prevent an excessive accumulation of the material at the site.
(d) Class I and special wastes, as defined by the municipal solid waste regulations promulgated by the state
commission on environmental quality, shall not be salvaged.
(e) Pesticide, fungicide, rodenticide, and herbicide containers shall not be salvaged.
(f) Scavenging is not allowed.
(g) The following salvaging methods are allowed:
(1) Collection from the sanitary landfill by means of pre-disposal separation of salvageable
materials.
(2) Collection of materials at the source of initial disposal when said materials have been separated
from other materials to be disposed of by regular means.
(h) The following salvaging methods are not allowed:
(1) Collection from the sanitary landfill by means of removing materials from the working face of
the landfill or at any other secondary storage point containing materials for disposal in the working
face.
(2) Collection of materials from dumpsters or any other collection point containing garbage or
refuse mixed with said materials.
(1998 Code, sec. 71.092)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Purpose; scope
This article covers all aspects of water, wastewater and utilities administration and regulation under the authority
of the city and is enacted to implement the stated purpose of protecting the health, safety and welfare of the
people of the city. (1998 Code, sec. 72.001)
Sec. 13.03.002 Applicability of article
The provisions of this article shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the city and to any and all
territory subsequently annexed into said corporate limits and to the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as
specified, and shall apply to any individual, corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or
agency, business trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity, including all federal installations involved
in any aspect of the provision of drinking water and wastewater services within the city limits. (1998 Code, sec.
72.002)
Sec. 13.03.003 Applicability of state law
The provisions of chapter 402 of the Local Government Code, granting home-rule cities the power to operate
utility systems and to adopt rules and regulations relating to utility services; Health and Safety Code, section
341.002, prescribing the duties of the department of state health services relating to the regulation and control of
public drinking water systems, and the Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems as promulgated by the
state department of health shall apply and the city shall exercise all authority granted under said statutes; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/420
when it appears that a violation of said statutes or any rule, regulation, permit, license, or other order of an
appropriate state agency granted in said statutes occurs or is occurring within the jurisdiction or extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city, or is causing or will cause injury to or an adverse effect on the health, welfare or physical
property of the city or its inhabitants, then the city may cause a civil suit to be instituted in district court through
its own attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties, or both, as authorized in said statutes, against the
person who committed, is committing, or is threatening to commit the violation. (1998 Code, sec. 72.003)
Sec. 13.03.004 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and terms have the meanings ascribed to them by this
section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. In addition, other technical terms used shall have their
meanings or definitions listed in the latest edition of “Glossary, Water and Wastewater Control Engineering,”
prepared by a joint editorial board representing the American Public Health Association, the American Society
of Civil Engineers, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Foundation.
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms arranged, designed or occupied by a family, and shall include, but not be
limited to, a subordinate dwelling occupied as a garage apartment or a servant's quarters.
Apartment house. A building or portion thereof, or buildings, arranged, designed or occupied by three (3) or
more families.
Boarding house. A building or portion thereof, other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for five (5) or more
persons are served for compensation.
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under a standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C),
expressed in parts per million by weight.
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from
soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning three (3) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer. The extension from the public drain to the public wastewater system or other place of disposal.
City manager. The city manager or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
Commercial service. Water and wastewater services rendered to stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and
other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial activities.
Contamination. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water
which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
Cross-connection. A physical connection between a public water system and either another supply of unknown
or questionable quality, any source which may contain contaminating or polluting substances, or any source of
water treated to a lesser degree than in the treatment process.
Customer. A person legally connected to, consuming, and paying for service from the water supply or using the
wastewater or sewer system of the city.
Drinking water. All water distributed by the water system for the purpose of human consumption or which may
be used in the preparation of foods or beverages or for the cleaning of any utensil or article used in the course of
preparation or consumption of food or beverages for human beings, including all water supplied for human
consumption by any institution catering to the public.
Family. One (1) or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/420
Garbage. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage
and sale of produce.
Health hazard. Any conditions, devices or practices in the water supply system and/or its operation which may
create, or may create, [sic] a danger to the public health and well-being of the water customer.
Hotel. The space in a building designed for occupancy as a more or less temporary abiding place of individuals
who are lodged with or without meals, in which there are more than twelve (12) sleeping rooms, and in which,
as a rule, the rooms are occupied singly for hire, and provision is not usually made for cooking in any individual
apartment.
Industrial wastes. The liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Motel. The area, including a building or portion thereof, or buildings, where families, transients or tourists are
accommodated, and shall include, but not exclusively, a trailer camp.
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
One-family residence. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by one (1) family.
Person. An individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business
trust, partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
Premises. A tract of land with the buildings thereon, or a building or part of a building with its grounds or other
appurtenances.
Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been
shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public
authority.
Public utility. Any person engaged in regularly supplying the public within the city with some commodity or
service which is of special consequence and need, such as electricity, gas, transportation, and telephone service.
Rooming house. A building or portion thereof, other than a hotel, where five (5) or more persons are lodged for
compensation.
Sanitary sewer. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not
intentionally admitted.
Sewage. Means the same as “wastewater.”
Sewage treatment plant. Means the same as “wastewater treatment plant.”
Sewage works. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage.
Sewer. A pipe or conduit designed to collect and transport wastewater.
Sewer service. Means the same as “wastewater service.”
Storm sewer or storm drain. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and polluted industrial wastes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/420
Superintendent. The superintendent of water and wastewater of the city or his authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
Suspended solids. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids,
and which are removable by laboratory filtering.
Two-family residence. A detached building having separate accommodations for and occupied as a dwelling by
two (2) families.
Wastewater. Domestic or industrial waste carried in the drains of the sanitary sewer. The liquid and water-carried
industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together which may be present whether treated or untreated, [sic] which is contributed into or permitted to enter
the wastewater treatment plant, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.
Wastewater service. The collection, treatment, and disposal of domestic or industrial waste from the premises of
a person legally connected to, consuming, and paying for such service.
Wastewater service meter. A device intended to measure the amount of wastewater flowing through a
wastewater line for the purpose of determining the amount of wastewater used by a customer for billing
purposes.
Wastewater system. All property owned and controlled by the city, including its wastewater treatment plant,
mains and system and the organization used by the city in treating the wastewater generated by the inhabitants of
the city and vicinity, shall constitute and be known as the city wastewater system.
Water and wastewater department. Either the water and wastewater department of the city or the duly authorized
agents of said department.
Water and wastewater superintendent. Either the water and wastewater superintendent, his superiors, or his duly
authorized agents.
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
Water service. The delivery of water to the premises of a person legally connected to and paying for such
service.
Water service connection. A single-family residential unit or each commercial or industrial establishment to
which drinking water is supplied from the system.
Water service meter. A device intended to measure the amount of water flowing through a water line for the
purpose of determining the amount of water used by a customer for billing purposes.
Water superintendent. Means the same as “water and wastewater superintendent.”
Water system. All property owned and controlled by the city, including its plant, water supply, mains and system
and the organization used by the city in furnishing an adequate supply of water to the inhabitants of the city and
vicinity, shall constitute and be known as the city water system.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.011)
Sec. 13.03.005 Penalty
Any person, firm or individual who shall violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this article or
who shall fail to perform any act which this article imposes a duty to perform shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction shall be fined in a sum not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one thousand
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/420
dollars ($1000.00), and each and every day a violation exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.008)
Sec. 13.03.006 Assent to provisions by consumers
All of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in every contract between the water and
wastewater department and its consumers, and each consumer shall be charged with knowledge of the provisions
of this article and, by applying and accepting water from the water and wastewater department, to have assented
to the provisions hereof. (1998 Code, sec. 72.004)
Sec. 13.03.007 Efforts to obtain voluntary compliance
Nothing in this article shall prevent the city or its agents from making efforts to obtain voluntary compliance
through warning, conference or any other appropriate means. (1998 Code, sec. 72.009)
Sec. 13.03.008 Access to premises
The water and wastewater superintendent and employees of the water and wastewater department shall have
access at all reasonable hours to all premises supplied with water for the purpose of seeing that the terms of this
article applicable to water and wastewater usage are being observed, and refusal by any consumer shall result in
refusal of water supply from the city water system until such permission is granted. (1998 Code, sec. 72.005)
Sec. 13.03.009 Damaging or tampering with water or wastewater system
It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or in association with others, to willfully break, injure or tamper
with any part of the water or wastewater system of the city for any purpose whatsoever, or in any other manner
maliciously to interfere with or prevent the running and operation of such system and the water supply therein.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.006)
State law reference–Criminal mischief by tampering with public communications, public water, gas, or power supply, V.T.C.A., Penal
Code, sec. 28.03.
Sec. 13.03.010 Extensions
(a) Extensions inside city limits.
(1) All property inside the city limits as of February 15, 1959, will be entitled to water and sewer
extension of one hundred feet (100') per connection. The provision shall not prohibit the city from
extending water and wastewater service into areas and specific locations where water and wastewater
service would best serve the public welfare.
(2) The customer shall be responsible for furnishing and laying the necessary customer water
service pipe from the meter location to the place of consumption and shall keep the customer service
line in good repair. For new water service taps, the customer shall be required to install a customerowned
cut-off valve on the customer's side of the meter or connection. The customer shall be
responsible for furnishing and laying the necessary wastewater customer service line from the main
to the point of service, including installation of the service tap.
(b) Extensions outside city limits.
(1) It shall be unlawful to make any connection of water and wastewater services to any residence,
house, building or premises outside the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in subsection
(c) below.
(2) This section shall not affect or change any agreement or contract for providing water or
wastewater services entered into by the city on or before the effective date of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/420
(3) No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement
or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby water or wastewater services
may be accepted by the city subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern at rates set by the
city council.
(4) For meters outside the city limits for those who are connected directly to the Canadian River
Municipal Water Authority pipeline, users of city water shall pay one hundred fifty percent (150%) of
the established rate paid for similar customers inside the city limits.
(c) Permitted connections outside city limits.
(1) Connections of water and wastewater services may be made to a residence, house, building or
premises outside the corporate limits of the city, provided:
(A) The property to which the connection of water and wastewater service is to be made is
not contiguous to the corporate limits of the city;
(B) The owner of the property to which the connection of water and wastewater services is to
be made agrees to voluntarily annex the property into the city when and if the requirements of
annexation are met and the conditions for annexation exist; and
(C) The city, in its sole discretion, shall determine whether it is in the best interest of the city
that such connection of water and wastewater services be made.
(2) If a connection of water and wastewater services is made outside the corporate limits of the city
under this subsection, all of the provisions of subsection (a)(2) of this section shall apply to such
connection, and the rates to be paid to the city for such water and wastewater services shall be the
same as those established from time to time for other customers of water and wastewater services
outside the corporate limits of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.007)
Sec. 13.03.011 Exemptions
Any person may apply to the city council for an exemption or partial exemption to the provisions of this article,
and an exemption may be granted, after a public hearing and affirmative vote of the city council, if it is found
that:
(1) The violation occurring or proposed to occur does not constitute a danger to public health or
safety;
(2) The violation occurring or proposed to occur will not be for more than ninety (90) days;
(3) Compliance with the provision from which exemption is sought would produce serious
hardship without equal benefits to the public;
(4) If the exemption is granted, it would not constitute a violation of any other city ordinance or
federal or state law or regulation; and
(5) The violation occurring or proposed to occur does not involve a violation of the plumbing code
of the city.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.010)
Secs. 13.03.012–13.03.050 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/420
Division 2. Water Service*
Sec. 13.03.051 Generally
(a) All water service and water service connections shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this
article, the plumbing code of the city, and the Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems as promulgated
by the department of state health services.
(b) All residences, commercial businesses and all other entities located within the city limits are required to
use the city water and sewer facilities.
(c) There shall be no free service or use of the facilities permitted by anyone or any entity or business located
within or without the city limits.
(d) This article shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the law.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.021)
Sec. 13.03.052 Meters
(a) All water furnished by the water and wastewater department to its customers shall be measured by meters,
which shall be installed by the city on the premises of each customer. The size, type and right to own and control
all water service meters installed or used shall be determined by the water department.
(b) The water service meters installed for water customers shall remain the property of the city.
(c) The city may require certain commercial and industrial users to purchase, install and maintain specialized
water service meters if it is deemed in the best interests of the city by the water and wastewater superintendent.
(d) The city may require persons requiring temporary service for construction purposes to furnish, install and
maintain water service meters if it is deemed in the best interests of the city by the water and wastewater
superintendent.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.022)
Sec. 13.03.053 Unlawful use of water or water facilities
(a) Any person who intentionally by any means or device prevents water from passing through any meter
belonging to the water and wastewater department or used in conjunction with the supply of water to any
consumer by the water department to register the amount of water passing through meters, or intentionally
prevents a meter from duly registering the quantity of water supplied, or in any way interferes with its proper
action or just registration or without the consent in writing of the water and wastewater superintendent
intentionally diverts any water from any pipe of the city waterworks, or otherwise intentionally uses, or causes to
be used, without the consent of the water and wastewater department, any water produced or distributed by the
water and wastewater department with intent to defraud the city water system, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) The presence at any time of any device or pipes resulting in the diversion of water or preventing of its free
passage and registration by the meter or diverting the meter as above defined or resulting in the prevention of
water reaching the meter, or preventing the just registration of the meter of the taking of any water, except
through a meter as above set forth, shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on the part of the person
owning or having custody and control of the room, building, place or premises where such device or pipe is of
the existence thereof and knowledge of such existence to the person who would be benefited by the failure of the
water to be properly metered, and shall further constitute prima facie evidence of intention on the part of such
person to defraud the city water system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/420
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from the city water system without an application or
permission, or to turn on the city water for use on his premises after the same has been, for any reason, cut off,
except only in case of repairs, or before the same has been turned on by the city without having first secured
permission from the water and wastewater department to turn on the water at such place. If any person breaks or
damages a curb valve on his premises while turning water off or on, that person shall be liable for damages as
determined by the water and wastewater department.
(d) Any person, property owner or occupant, who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed one thousand dollars
($1,000.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense,
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
(e) In addition to the remedies provided for above, any person, property owner or occupant, who shall violate
the provisions of this section shall also be responsible for payment for the estimated amount of water taken in
violation of same, from the date of last reading of the water service meter on said person's place or premises, and
shall furthermore be responsible for the payment for any and all damages caused to the water and wastewater
system in the conduct of such acts. In the event the water service meter has been removed by said person or
persons or has been broken or damaged, then said person or persons shall be charged for the estimated amount of
water used during the period of time said meter was not registering the amount of water plus the cost of
repairing the meter, and water meter repair charges shall be determined by the water and wastewater
superintendent. No reconnection to the water and wastewater system shall be made until all monetary claims by
the city water system have been resolved or provision for resolution of such claims has been made to the
satisfaction of the director of finance.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.023)
Sec. 13.03.054 Taking water from hydrant
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any fire hydrant for the purpose of taking water therefrom,
except:
(1) By members of the fire department engaged in the suppression of fires or for training purposes;
(2) By employees of city departments engaged in city business who have made prior arrangements
with the water and wastewater superintendent for the delivery of said water; and
(3) By persons who have contracted with the director of finance for the bulk purchase of metered
or unmetered water for construction or other commercial or industrial purposes, and have made prior
arrangements with the water and wastewater superintendent for the delivery of said water.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.024)
Sec. 13.03.055 Repair or replacement of service pipes; relocation of meter
(a) The water and wastewater department reserves the right to make all repairs and replacements of service
lines or pipes from the main line to the water service meter, and it shall be unlawful for any other person to
repair or replace or attempt to repair or replace any such lines or pipes.
(b) The water and wastewater department reserves the right to relocate any meter if it is required because of
the relocation of any mains, connections, or extensions of the water and wastewater system, and may relocate
the meter at the most convenient location on the customer's service line.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.025)
Sec. 13.03.056 Temporary disconnection of water supply
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/420
The right is reserved by the water and wastewater department to temporarily disconnect and to reconnect
without notice the water supply to all customers for the purpose of making repairs, connections, extensions and
cleaning of mains, machinery, reservoirs or any part of the city water system. (1998 Code, sec. 72.026)
Sec. 13.03.057 Furnishing water to other persons
No consumer shall supply water to other persons or suffer them to take water, except for use on the premises,
without the permission of the water and wastewater department. Provided, however, water service may be
supplied to multifamily dwellings as set forth in this article. (1998 Code, sec. 72.027)
Sec. 13.03.058 Cross-connections
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Make or have made any cross-connection between piping receiving water from the city water
system and piping receiving water from any other source or storage, including private wells or
otherwise;
(2) Install, or permit the installation of, any plumbing fixture, device or other type of construction
which will provide a cross-connection between the city water system and a drainage system, soil or
waste pipe so as to permit or make possible the backflow of sewage or waste into the water supply
system;
(3) Install or permit inflow, so as to make a cross-connection, from the city water system to a
swimming pool or other storage of water to a point below overflow level.
(b) The existence of a cross-connection is hereby declared a nuisance and an immediate threat to the health,
welfare, and safety to the residents of the city, and the removal of any cross-connection is a matter of public
emergency.
(1) It shall be the duty of the water and wastewater superintendent to immediately and without
further notice disconnect the service connecting such piping with the city water system.
(2) After termination of water services, said services may be reconnected to the customer provided
that the customer obtains a plumbing permit and has the plumbing corrected so as to comply with the
provisions of this section. After the plumbing inspector has approved the plumbing and ascertained
that there is no longer a cross-connection, the water and wastewater department shall reconnect the
premises to the water system upon payment of a reconnection service charge.
(c) Any person desiring to use water from any other source in addition to the city water system may do so in
accordance with a method approved by the plumbing code of the city and section 337.206(g) of the Rules and
Regulations for Public Water Systems as promulgated by the department of state health services regulating
backflow and siphonage, and after inspection and approval by the plumbing inspector and water and wastewater
superintendent.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.028)
State law reference–Backflow prevention for water closet plumbing fixtures or other equipment, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec.
1301.501.
Sec. 13.03.059 Prohibited acts
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the city, to commit, assist in
committing or allow any of the following things or acts in the city:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/420
(1) To disturb, break, injure or tamper with, remove or relocate any water meter, water meter box,
or water meter dial; or attempt to manipulate any water meter in the city in any manner so as to affect
its registration; or in any other manner maliciously to interfere with or prevent the running and
operation of such system and the water supply therein;
(2) To open or close any gate valves or shutoffs thereof or to open the covers of same without the
permission of the water and wastewater superintendent;
(3) To cover over or conceal from view any water valve box, service or meter box with dirt, paving
material or any other substance after it has been set for service by the city;
(4) To retain possession of or refuse to deliver a water service meter or other appliance loaned to
that person by the water and wastewater department for the purposes of furnishing water through
same; and
(5) To go upon or ascend the stairway or steps on any elevated water storage tank or standpipe of
the water system, except by permission of the water and wastewater superintendent.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.029)
Sec. 13.03.060 Private water supply
That water well contractors shall be required to secure a permit from the plumbing inspector of the city prior to
construction and installation of a water well on any private property in the city; providing for a permit fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the issuance of said permit. (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
Secs. 13.03.061–13.03.100 Reserved
Division 3. Wastewater Service*
Sec. 13.03.101 Unlawful disposal of wastewater
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, living on or renting any property abutting or adjoining any street or
alley in which wastewater system pipes have been laid, except in the event such sewer pipe is not constructed in
a manner suitable for taking care of such wastewater or substance, to throw or allow to be thrown or deposited
on the surface of the ground or in any hole, cesspool or vault or in or under the surface of the ground, except for
the proper and necessary manuring of the soil, any water which has been used for domestic purposes, or any
liquid or solid filth, feces or urine. (1998 Code, sec. 72.041)
Sec. 13.03.102 Connection of sources of surface or drain water to sanitary sewer
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or have made any connection with the wastewater system of the city
that will permit any surface or drain water from the ground or from the roofs of any building or other structure to
drain into such wastewater system directly or indirectly; provided, however, that cellars may be connected with
such wastewater system when made in accordance with the regulations, plans and specifications of the city
inspector and under his supervision. (1998 Code, sec. 72.042)
Sec. 13.03.103 Injuring system; prohibited substances
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, break or remove any portion of a manhole, lamp hole, flush tank or
any part of the wastewater system or throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited in any wastewater
opening or receptacle connected with the wastewater system any garbage, offal, dead animal, or things
whatsoever except feces, urine and the necessary toilet paper and liquid or liquefied house waste. (1998 Code,
sec. 72.043)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/420
Sec. 13.03.104 Unlawful use of facilities
(a) Whoever intentionally, by any means or device, connects to the city wastewater system, or allows
wastewater to enter the city wastewater system, to avoid payment of wastewater charges shall be in violation of
this article and shall be fined for such violation as set out in this article. The existence of an unlawfully installed
wastewater tap shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge on the part of the person owning or having
custody and control of the room, building, place or premises where such device is located of such illegally
installed wastewater tap.
(b) Any person illegally using wastewater system facilities shall be billed for all wastewater system charges
which were evaded from the time the customer first connected to the wastewater system. The charge estimate
shall be made by the water and wastewater superintendent and shall be based on the established rate at the time
the violation was discovered.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.044)
Sec. 13.03.105 Meters
(a) The city may require certain residential, commercial and industrial users to purchase, install and maintain
specialized wastewater service meters if it is deemed in the best interests of the city by the water and wastewater
superintendent.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the city, to break, injure or
tamper with any wastewater meter, wastewater meter box, or wastewater meter dial, or attempt to manipulate
any wastewater meter in the city in any manner so as to affect its registration, or in any other manner to interfere
with or prevent the running and operation of such system.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to retain possession of or refuse to deliver a wastewater service meter
or other appliance loaned to that person by the water and wastewater department.
(d) The customer at whose instance and request the service has been supplied shall be primarily liable to the
city for any and all damage that may occur to said meter and protective cover box. In addition to any other
remedy the city may have to collect damages thereto, it may add such sums to the regular bill for water
consumption and, on failure to pay said amount when due, the city may discontinue the water service in the
same manner as provided for in cases where the water bill has not yet been paid.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.045)
Sec. 13.03.106 Damaging or tampering with wastewater works
No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the municipal wastewater works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (1998 Code, sec. 72.046)
Secs. 13.03.107–13.03.150 Reserved
Division 4. Discharge of Harmful Wastes*
Sec. 13.03.151 Purpose
This division sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection
and treatment system of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, part 403). (1998
Code, sec. 72.061)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/420
Sec. 13.03.152 Water and wastewater superintendent
The city manager shall appoint a water and wastewater superintendent, and such assistants as the city manager
may determine to be necessary, and it shall be the duty of the superintendent to see that certain provisions of this
division as pertaining to the use of the public wastewater system are carried out, to determine if the wastewater
collected by the wastewater collection system is treatable, and to supervise the treatment of the sewage. (1998
Code, sec. 72.062)
Sec. 13.03.153 Right of entry
The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this division. (1998 Code, sec. 72.063)
Sec. 13.03.154 Violations; penalty
(a) Any person found to be violating any provision of this division shall be served by the city with written
notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. If the offender
continues the violation after the expiration of the time stated, the city manager may prohibit the further use of
the wastewater system by the offender and may remove or close the offender's building wastewater and water
connections.
(b) Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1000.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a
separate offense.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense,
loss, or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.077)
Sec. 13.03.155 Legal action
If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater system contrary to
the provisions of this division or federal or state laws or regulations, the city may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in an appropriate court. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and all other expenses of litigation against the person
found to have violated this division or the rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder. (1998 Code, sec.
72.078)
Sec. 13.03.156 Remediation charges
If any person discharges wastewater, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater system contrary
to the provisions of this division or federal or state laws or regulations, the city may charge to and recover
reasonable expenses for remediation of the effects of said violation from the person found to have violated this
division or the rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. (1998 Code, sec. 72.079)
Sec. 13.03.157 Suspension of service
(a) The water and wastewater superintendent may suspend wastewater service when, in the opinion of said
superintendent, such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, cause
interference to the wastewater treatment plant, or otherwise cause the city to violate any condition of its
wastewater treatment plant operating permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/420
(b) Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater service shall immediately stop or eliminate the
condition or halt any further discharge into the wastewater collection system as specified by the water and
wastewater superintendent. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the superintendent may take such steps as deemed necessary, including the immediate severance of the
wastewater or sewer connection, to prevent damage to the wastewater treatment plant or endangerment to any
persons. The city may reinstate wastewater service upon proof of the elimination of said discharge.
(c) The water and wastewater superintendent may require a written statement from the customer causing the
harmful discharge, describing the causes of said discharge and the measures taken to prevent any further
occurrences.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.064(a)–(d))
Sec. 13.03.158 Making false statement or certification; tampering with monitoring device
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement, representation or certification in any
statement or document required pursuant to this division, or to falsify, tamper with, or knowingly render
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division. (1998 Code, sec. 72.064(e))
Sec. 13.03.159 Discharge of stormwater, surface water, etc., to wastewater collection system
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or
subsurface drainage waters to the wastewater collection system. (1998 Code, sec. 72.065)
Sec. 13.03.160 Discharge of polluted water into natural outlet
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge into any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with the appropriate discharge regulations as promulgated by the
state commission on environmental quality. (1998 Code, sec. 72.066)
Sec. 13.03.161 Prohibited wastes generally; maximum limits
(a) In cases where, in the opinion of the superintendent, the character of wastewater or other liquid or solid
wastes from any manufacturer or industrial plant, building or other premises is such that it will damage the
system or cannot be treated satisfactorily in the system, the city manager shall have the right to require such user
to dispose of such waste otherwise, and prevent it from entering the system.
(b) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the wastewater or
drainage system of the city, directly or indirectly, any of the following described matters, water or wastes:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F).
(2) Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100) parts per million by
weight of fat, oil or grease.
(3) Any hydrocarbons such as gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, motor oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
(5) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, clothing, feathers, tar,
plastics, plastic bags, razors, wood, paunch manure, or other solid or viscous substances capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with proper operation of the sewage
works.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/420
(6) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.0 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of
the sewage works.
(7) Any water or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance such as plating or heat treating
wastes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater
treatment plant.
(8) Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual
attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the wastewater treatment plant.
(9) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
(10) Any cyanide greater than 1.0 parts per million, as CN.
(11) Any hexavalent chromium greater than 1.0 [parts] per million.
(12) Any trivalent chromium greater than 10 parts per million.
(13) Any copper greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(14) Any nickel greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(15) Any cadmium greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(16) Any zinc greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(17) Any phenols greater than 12 parts per million.
(18) Any iron greater than 5 parts per million.
(19) Any tin greater than 1.0 parts per million.
(20) Any radioactive wastes greater than allowable releases as specified by current United States
Bureau of Standards handbooks dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity.
(21) Any other waste which may be designated as a special or prohibited waste by the state
commission on environmental quality, the department of state health services, the federal
Environmental Protection Agency or any other federal, state, or local agency having jurisdiction to
declare certain materials as hazardous or injurious to man or the environment and not allowed
elsewhere herein.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.067)
Sec. 13.03.162 Discharge of waste materials from poultry killing and processing plants, abattoirs and
slaughterhouses
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit or allow the discharge of blood, feathers,
entrails, heads, feet, stomach contents and other solid wastes resulting from the killing or processing of poultry
or other animals into the wastewater system of the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a poultry killing and/or processing plant
or to operate an abattoir or slaughterhouse within the corporate limits of the city from which waste materials
from its operation are discharged into the wastewater system of the city, except that such waste materials may be
discharged into the wastewater system of the city if such waste materials are first passed through a separator or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/420
indirect waste receptor, which shall effectively retain all blood, feathers, entrails, heads, feet, stomach contents,
and other solid wastes resulting from the killing or processing of poultry or other animals prior to the discharge
of liquid waste into the wastewater system and if, in addition to said separator or indirect waste receptor, said
waste materials are then passed through a fixed grate which must be bolted or securely fastened in place prior to
the discharge of any waste materials into the wastewater system of the city. All screens over drain troughs shall
be constructed of wire, not smaller than eighteen (18) gauge with eight (8) mesh to the inch, and all drain outlets
shall be covered with plates bolted or securely fastened in place.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.068)
Sec. 13.03.163 Discharge of toxic or poisonous substances
(a) Where the operation of a person, firm or corporation entails the discharge of water or wastes containing
toxic or poisonous substances, a written statement on a standard form provided by the city manager, setting forth
the nature of the operation contemplated or presently carried on, shall be filed with the city manager. The
statement shall contain the amount of water which will be used and its source, the proposed point of discharge of
acid wastes into the wastewater system of the city, the estimated amount to be discharged, and a fair statement
setting forth the expected bacterial, physical, chemical, and other known characteristics of said wastes.
(b) Within thirty (30) days of receipt of such statement, it shall be the duty of the city manager to make an
order stating such minimum restrictions as in the judgment of the superintendent may be necessary to guard
adequately against unlawful uses of the city's wastewater works.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.069)
Sec. 13.03.164 Discharge of septic tank wastes
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, empty or otherwise introduce the wastes from any septic tank,
cesspool, or chemical toilet or any similar receptacle for waste storage into the wastewater or sewer system of
the city, except that ordinary domestic wastes from small portable restrooms, campers, travel trailers or small
portable toilets intended for personal use may be disposed of at sites suitable or designated for the disposal of
same. (1998 Code, sec. 72.070)
Sec. 13.03.165 Interceptors
(a) Blood, grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing blood and grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity as approved by the plumbing code and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(b) Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.071)
Sec. 13.03.166 Approval of admission of certain wastes; preliminary treatment facility requirements
(a) The admission into the public wastewater system of any waters or wastes having any of the following
characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of the water and wastewater superintendent:
(1) A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 250 parts per million by weight;
(2) Containing more than 250 parts per million by weight of suspended solids;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/420
(3) Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section 13.03.161
of this division; or
(4) Having an average daily flow greater than five percent (5%) of the average daily wastewater
flow of the city.
(b) When necessary in the opinion of the water and wastewater superintendent, the owner shall provide, at his
expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
(1) Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 250 parts per million and the suspended solids to
250 parts per million by weight;
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for
in section 13.03.161 of this division;
(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes; or
(4) Meet any other requirements as specified by any applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
(c) Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment
facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the superintendent, and no construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.072)
Sec. 13.03.167 Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities
Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. (1998 Code, sec. 72.073)
Sec. 13.03.168 Control manholes
When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building wastewater line carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building wastewater lines to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at
all times. (1998 Code, sec. 72.074)
Sec. 13.03.169 Measurements, tests and analyses
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in
this division shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Sewage as prescribed by the state commission on environmental quality, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided for in section 13.03.168 of this division or upon suitable samples taken at said control
manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be
the nearest downstream manhole in the public wastewater system to the point at which the building wastewater
line is connected. (1998 Code, sec. 72.075)
Sec. 13.03.170 Special agreements for receipt of industrial wastes
No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between
the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted
by the city for treatment, subject to payment of a surcharge based on capital and operating cost. Such charge
shall be subject to change by the city council when capital and/or operating costs fluctuate. (1998 Code, sec.
72.076)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/420
Secs. 13.03.171–13.03.210 Reserved
Division 5. Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.03.211 Establishment
The service rates and charges for water and wastewater services shall be fixed by the city council, except as
provided elsewhere in this article. (1998 Code, sec. 72.091)
Sec. 13.03.212 Authority of city manager
The city manager shall have the authority to decide any question which may arise and which is not fully covered
by any of the provisions of this article and shall have the right to fix and determine any water rate not provided
for in this article, and said decision in such cases shall be final, subject to modification by official action of the
city council. (1998 Code, sec. 72.092)
Sec. 13.03.213 Connection to water and wastewater system
(a) Any person desiring to have premises under such person's control connected with the water and
wastewater system of the city shall make application for those services to the director of finance on a form to be
provided by the director. The application shall contain and constitute a contract on the part of the applicant to
pay the city for the use and benefit of the water and wastewater department for all charges for those services
provided by the city to that person or premises, and to abide by any regulations of the city relating to those
services as those regulations exist and may be amended.
(b) The water and wastewater superintendent may set certain policies for the time, manner, and method of
connection to the water and wastewater system as may be deemed necessary for the orderly and efficient use of
the department's resources.
(c) All methods of connection to the water and wastewater system shall be in compliance with all applicable
plumbing codes as may be in effect at the time of connection, and the water and wastewater superintendent may
require that remedial measures be taken to bring any connection into conformity with existing codes, if said
action is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of any person.
(d) The water and wastewater department may decline to serve an applicant which fails to be in compliance or
for the following reasons:
(1) If the applicant's installation or equipment is known to be inadequate or of such a character that
satisfactory service cannot be given;
(2) If the applicant is indebted to the city for the same kind of service as that applied for;
(3) For refusal to make a security deposit if the applicant is required to make a deposit under this
article.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.093)
Sec. 13.03.214 Discontinuance of service
(a) Notice. Any consumer desiring to discontinue the use of water shall give notice to the water department on
or before the date on which the service is to be discontinued and shall be liable for the use of water until such
notice is given and said service is disconnected. (1998 Code, sec. 72.094)
(b) Disconnection fees. The fee for disconnection of water service shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) but where
there has been an actual disconnection of service by removal of any metering device or disconnection of lines,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/420
there shall be charged and collected a disconnection charge of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for
disconnecting of water and one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) for disconnecting the sewer, except as
provided elsewhere in this section. (Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
(c) Exemptions from disconnection fee.
(1) Eligibility. The residential accounts of qualified persons shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section providing for the assessment of a disconnection fee. Persons may qualify by presenting to
the director of finance proof of eligibility based upon at least one of the following criteria:
(A) Age sixty-five or older.
(B) Age sixty or older and recipient of social security or other old-age or survivor benefits.
(C) Any person, married or unmarried, including those living alone, who is under a disability
for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under federal old-age, survivors' and
disability insurance or its successor.
In addition to the hereinabove mentioned criteria, the person making application for said
exemption must be the principal source of income for the household at which the account
in question is located. The account shall not be eligible for said exemption if the person
applying for the exemption is a temporary resident, boarder, or family member living with
owners or renters of the property who would not otherwise be eligible.
(2) Determination. The director of finance shall review all submitted proof and shall determine
eligibility for such exemption. The determination of the director of finance may be appealed to the
city manager, and upon a review of all submitted proof and a hearing of the applicant's grievance, the
city manager shall issue a determination, which shall be final.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.094)
Sec. 13.03.215 Liability for unpaid charges
(a) In cases of landlord/tenant relationships, the director of finance may require an additional deposit charged
against premises for which a tenant has left an unpaid balance, if the owner of the premises chooses not to be
liable for the unpaid balance.
(b) In cases where the premises have been disconnected from water or wastewater services under the authority
provided in section 13.03.218 of this code, the owner of the premises shall be liable for any charges for
reconnection of services.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.095)
Sec. 13.03.216 Water rates and charges
(a) Rate schedule.
(1) The minimum rate for water, which shall be charged all customers, except as otherwise
provided, shall be $32.25 per month effective October 1, 2016. (Ordinance O-18-16, sec. 5, adopted
8/30/16)
(2) Next two thousand gallons (each 1,000) shall be $3.90.
(3) Each 1,000 gallons above three thousand shall be $3.25.
(Ordinance O-12-11, sec. 4, adopted 9/13/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/420
(4) A surcharge fee based on the water meter size is assessed for capital improvement project -
rehabilitation and maintenance of the water elevated storage tanks. Rates are as follows:
Meter Size Fee
3/4" $2.00
1" $3.00
1-1/2" $4.00
2" $5.00
3" $6.00
4" $7.00
8" $8.00
(Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
(5) Increase of 10% on consumption rates related to the prison. (Ordinance O-18-16, sec. 5,
adopted 8/30/16)
(b) Automatic adjustment of rates. The city manager shall have the authority to adjust the water rate schedule
as appropriate to reflect passed-on charges by the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority and/or the City of
Lubbock, including but not limited to volume charges, treatment charges, and bond debt issuance.
(c) Minimum rates for multifamily units. In calculating the minimum rate to be charged apartment houses,
townhouses, or other multifamily living units, each unit shall be deemed a residential unit and subject to a
minimum rate charge for each unit equal to fifty percent (50%) of the established minimum rate for water.
(d) Discount for multifamily units. In calculating the rate to be charged apartment houses, townhouses, or
other multifamily living units or multiple residences on one meter, the total rate may be set at the rate of eightyfive
percent (85%) of the rates established elsewhere in this division provided the customer applies with the
finance director for this rate and provides information satisfactory to the finance director with regard to the
vacancy rate during the past year for units on that customer's account.
(e) Customers outside city limits. For meters outside the city limits, users of city water shall pay two hundred
twenty-five percent (225%) of the established rate for similar customers inside the city limits.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.096)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/420
Sec. 13.03.217 Wastewater service rates and charges
(a) Minimum rate. The minimum rate for wastewater service, which shall be charged all customers, except as
otherwise provided, shall be: (1) residential: $23.75; and (2) commercial: $30.00; per month effective October 1,
2014. (Ordinance O-18-14, sec. 4, adopted 9/9/14)
(b) The city, through its water and wastewater department, shall charge and collect, and every customer shall
pay, for wastewater service furnished to the customer, whether or not the city meter is the only source of billing
of water used by the user, the amount calculated by application of the following rates for all billing cycles on or
after October 1, 2009:
Amount of Wastewater Rate
Residential (based on water consumption):
First 7,000 gallons (minimum) $23.75
Commercial (based on water consumption):
First 10,000 gallons (minimum) $30.00
10,001 gallons to 50,000 gallons $28.00
50,001 gallons to 51,000 $50.05
51,001 gallons to 100,000 gallons $70.90
100,001 gallons to 101,000 $92.50
101,001 gallons and over $122.85
(Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11; Ordinance O-12-11, sec. 5, adopted 9/13/11)
(c) Users providing own water. Where the user provides all or part of his own water, and it is disposed of
through the city wastewater disposal system, the water not metered on the city water system shall be metered the
same as if the water was procured from the city with the same rates for installation and rules concerning the
water meters as if the water was purchased from the city, with the exception that no charge is made for the water.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/420
(d) Minimum rate for multifamily units. In calculating the minimum rate to be charged apartment houses,
townhouses, or other multifamily living units, each unit shall be deemed a residential unit and subject to a
minimum rate charge for each unit.
(e) Service outside city limits. For service outside the city limits, users of city wastewater service shall pay
two hundred twenty-five percent (225%) of the established rate for similar customers inside the city limits.
(f) Nonprofit multifamily units. Nonprofit multifamily residential units will be charged according to
commercial wastewater rates.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.097)
Sec. 13.03.218 Authority to disconnect service
The city shall retain the right to disconnect water and wastewater service in the following circumstances:
(1) Upon request of the user;
(2) Upon termination of service;
(3) Upon failure of the user to properly meter non-city water;
(4) Where a known dangerous condition related to the type of service provided exists, for as long
as the condition exists;
(5) Where service is connected without authority by a person who has not made application for
service;
(6) Where service has been reconnected without authority following termination of service for
nonpayment; or
(7) In instances of tampering with the water and wastewater department's meter or equipment,
bypassing the same, or other instances of diversion as defined in this article.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.098)
Sec. 13.03.219 Payment; late charge
The rates and charges fixed and prescribed in this article shall be due and payable in the office of the director of
finance on or before the tenth (10th) day after billing. In the event that such rates and charges are not received
within 10 days from such due date, the director of finance shall assess and collect a penalty of ten percent (10%)
of the amount so due and payable. (1998 Code, sec. 72.099)
Sec. 13.03.220 Disconnection of service for nonpayment; collection of unpaid charges
(a) Disconnection for nonpayment. In the event that any user or customer of the water and wastewater systems
does not pay the rates and charges within thirty (30) days from the date originally billed, the director of finance
shall cause the water and/or wastewater service to be disconnected until such rates and charges are paid,
including any penalty assessed for late payment.
(b) Past due debts. In the event that any user or customer of the water and wastewater systems does not pay
the rates and charges and the service is discontinued for nonpayment, the debt shall be considered past due.
Within thirty (30) days from the date of discontinuance of service, the director of finance shall deduct an amount
equal to the debtor's security deposit, if any, and shall institute a civil suit to secure payment of a sum in the
amount of any remaining debt plus any interest and legal costs incurred in obtaining a judgment against the
debtor in a court of proper jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/420
(1998 Code, sec. 72.100)
Sec. 13.03.221 Resumption of service after disconnection
Upon payment of the amount past due and delinquent, any penalty, any judgment and court costs incurred in the
collection of a past due account, and a security deposit as required, water and wastewater service may be
resumed. (1998 Code, sec. 72.101)
Sec. 13.03.222 Returned check charge
A charge not to exceed thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be collected when a customer's check is returned by the bank
unpaid because of insufficient funds or any other reason. April 1, 2005.
Sec. 13.03.223 Charge for temporary turn-off and turn-on
A charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be collected for each turn-off and each turn-on requested by a customer
and made by the city for any reason. October 1, 2009.
Sec. 13.03.224 Charge for out-of-cycle meter reading
A charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be collected for each time a customer request and the city makes an out-ofcycle
meter reading. However, if the meter is read for a customer as a recheck on the regular reading and the
reading was found to be in error, there will be no charge.
(Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
Sec. 13.03.225 Estimation of usage upon failure of water meter to register correctly
(a) Should any water meter fail to register correctly the amount of water used by a consumer since the
previous reading, the water and wastewater department shall estimate the consumption based on previous usage.
(b) Any such estimation of previous usage may be based on an average of the three previous months, or upon
the same month in the previous year, or the water and wastewater superintendent may submit an estimate of
usage to the director of finance if it is determined that consumption of an amount of water in excess of either of
these methods of estimation has occurred.
(c) The method of estimation to be used for any such consumption shall be determined by the director of
finance. The determination of the director of finance may be appealed to the city manager, and upon a review all
submitted evidence of usage and a hearing of the applicant's grievance, the city manager shall issue a
determination, which shall be final.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.105)
Sec. 13.03.226 Responsibility for leakage
(a) All property owners, their agents and tenants shall be held responsible as consumers for loss of water due
to leakage in pipe or plumbing inside the discharge side of the meter or on the property, and if this water is not
paid for according to the rates then in effect, when it becomes due, the water service shall be cut off and not
turned on again until all claims are paid or adjusted to the satisfaction of the water and wastewater department.
(b) In the event of any change in tenant or consumers in rented property, and there exist, at the time,
arrearages for past leakage, the landlord and property owner shall be held accountable for payment for this
leakage before service will be extended and water furnished to the second tenant, unless said landlord and owner
can provide either evidence of repair from a plumber licensed to work in the city or certification from the
plumbing inspector that the leak was repaired in accordance with city plumbing codes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/420
(1998 Code, sec. 72.106)
Sec. 13.03.227 Billing adjustments
(a) Customers experiencing water leaks and high bills.
(1) Any church and/or residential city water customer who experiences a water leak and abnormal
water bill is eligible for an adjustment on the customer's water bill if the following conditions are
met:
(A) The customer experienced a water leak and can provide either evidence of repair from a
plumber licensed to work in the city or certification from the plumbing inspector that the leak
was repaired by the resident homeowner in accordance with city plumbing codes;
(B) The water consumption increased at least fifty percent (50%) over the prior month or
comparable month in the previous year;
(C) The customer has not had an adjustment to a bill in the past twelve (12) months.
(2) If these conditions are met, the director of finance is authorized to make an adjustment on the
customer's account in the following manner:
(A) The average consumption shall be based on the monthly water consumption during the
two (2) past months and the same three (3) month period of the prior year, if the customer
received city service during that period of time. Only water service shall be affected by any
adjustment, not wastewater or sanitation services. The difference between the average
consumption and consumption during the billing period in which the leak occurred shall be the
amount of leakage.
(B) If the above conditions are met, the director of finance is authorized to make an
adjustment on the customer's account by deducting the cost for one-half (1/2) of the leakage
amount as described above. The customer may also be authorized to pay the current amount
(based on average consumption and wastewater and sanitation charges) and one-third of
remaining cost of the leakage amount at the time of the adjustment and continue to pay the
current bill and another one-third (1/3) of the leakage amount each month until fully paid
without the addition of a penalty for late payment.
(3) If incomplete billing records exist to compute the consumption defined herein, the finance
director and the water superintendent may make appropriate estimates to allow the completion of the
adjustment.
(b) Customers with incorrect meter readings.
(1) A residential city water customer who experiences an abnormal water bill due to an incorrect
meter reading is eligible for an adjustment on the customer's water bill if the water and wastewater
superintendent determines that:
(A) The customer's high bill was due to an incorrect meter reading during previous months;
and
(B) The current reading is determined to be correct for the amount of water actually used.
(2) The director of finance is authorized to:
(A) Waive the payment of any:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/420
(i) Late charge penalty; or
(ii) Fee for re-reading the customer's meter; and
(B) Allow the customer up to six (6) months to pay the balance without interest or penalty.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.107)
Sec. 13.03.228 Tapping charges for installation of water meter
(a) The following charges shall be assessed and collected from the customer for the installation of a water
meter:
Type of Service Fee
Standard service: One inch (1") tap; one inch (1") poly service, 3/4 x 5/8 meter $700.00
Standard service with one inch (1") meter $800.00
One and one-half inch (1-1/2") tap, service and meter $1,000.00
Utility director will assess charges a 2" tap or greater based on labor and supplies.
(b) Services and taps two inch (2") and larger shall be charged on the actual documented costs required for
installation of the meter.
(c) Said fees are exclusive of any charges pertaining to pavement cuts in streets or alleys. These charges shall,
if applicable, be in addition to the tapping and meter fees at rates to be established by the city manager. October
1, 2008.
(Ordinance O-11-18 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 13.03.229 Paving cut charges for taps
(a) A charge for paving cut on water and wastewater taps is hereby set as follows:
(1) Paved streets and alleys: $75.00 per square yard.
(2) Brick streets and alleys: $100.00 per square yard.
(Ordinance O-03-11, sec. 2, adopted 3/15/11)
(b) A surcharge of $50.00 per cubic yard may be applied to all excavations in excess of six feet (6') in depth.
All paving cuts shall be repaired in accordance with the paving cut guidelines issued by the city manager. (1998
Code, sec. 72.109)
Sec. 13.03.230 Security deposit
(a) A security deposit may be required from a person, as a condition precedent to furnishing water, wastewater
and solid waste collection services, in the form of money deposited by said person for said services, as security
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/420
for full and faithful payment of all rates, charges and fees owing and to become owing, including damages to
city-owned meters and other appurtenances.
(b) At the discretion of the director of finance, no deposit shall be required from those persons who need said
services if:
(1) They own the property on which service is to be furnished; or
(2) They have previously established service with the city and are seeking to establish service and
have not:
(A) Been terminated for nonpayment of said service charges within the past four (4) years;
and
(B) Failed to make a timely and complete payment of said service charges within the past
two (2) years.
(c) However, a person is ineligible for an exemption if:
(1) Their service has been terminated for nonpayment of said service charges within the past four
(4) years; or
(2) They have failed to make a timely and complete payment of said service charges within the
past two (2) years.
(d) Customers who have their service terminated for nonpayment of said service charges shall be required to
post a deposit prior to resumption of said services and shall not be eligible for a further exemption for three (3)
years.
(e) Customers who fail to make timely and complete payments of said service charges more than two (2)
times within a one (1) year period may be required, at the discretion of the director of finance, to post a deposit
and shall not be eligible for a further exemption for two (2) years.
(f) Customers who have a current account in good standing may add a second account without paying a
deposit, provided they agree in writing to authorize the city to apply all charges and penalties and discontinue
service to the first account in case of a failure to make a timely payment or for a nonpayment on the second
account.
(g) The amount of said deposit shall be a sum of money equal to two (2) average monthly bills for service
furnished, or to be furnished, as estimated by the city, except as otherwise provided herein. In case a customer's
normal consumption actually proves to exceed appreciably the amount of the deposit, the city may, at its option,
require the customer to deposit an additional amount of money equal to bills for two (2) consecutive months, and
customer agrees in such case to deposit with the city such additional amount of money. In no case will the
deposit for any one (1) service be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) per service. Minimum deposits for the
following types of businesses shall be:
(1) Service stations:
(A) With carwash: $75.00.
(B) Without carwash: $50.00.
(2) Restaurants: $100.00.
(3) Motels: $200.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/420
(h) A refund may be made at termination of service, less any amount which is due and owing to the city.
When such service is discontinued such deposit not consumed in bills due for such service shall be returned to
such depositor, his heirs or legal representatives.
(i) The depositor shall not have a lien on such money deposited and the city has a contractual right to apply
said amount to the depositor's bill. However, said deposit shall become the property of the city if no claim of
refund is made within four years of said discontinuance of service unless said customer can show a disability or
other reason which would prevent the making of a timely request for refund.
(1998 Code, sec. 72.110)
Sec. 13.03.231 Transfer of account to another address
Any user or customer desiring to transfer their present account to another address shall pay a $10.00 fee. In the
event that the user or customer is delinquent on their water bill, the user or customer must pay their past due bill
before the account is transferred. (1998 Code, sec. 72.111)
ARTICLE 13.04 WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 13.04.001–13.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Drought Contingency Plan
Part I. In General
Sec. 13.04.031 Policy; purpose and intent; scope
(a) Declaration of policy. In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water
supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and
preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other
water supply emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the
delivery and consumption of water.
(b) Purpose and intent. Water uses regulated or prohibited under this water supply emergency management
article are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other
emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to
penalties as defined in section 13.04.091 of this article.
(c) Drought contingency plan. This article shall serve as the drought contingency plan as required under the
provisions of section 11.1272 of the Water Code of the state.
(d) Public involvement. Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the plan was
provided by the city by means of public hearing prior to the meeting.
(e) Public education. The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including
information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the
drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. The information will be provided by means of press
release or utility bill inserts.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/420
(f) Coordination with regional water planning groups. The service area of the city is located within the Llano
Estacado Planning Group (region “O”) and Canadian River Municipal Water Authority. The city secretary is
hereby authorized and directed to provide a copy of the plan to same.
Sec. 13.04.032 Authority of mayor and city manager
(a) Officers designated. The following officer of the city shall have the authority to initiate or terminate
drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this article:
(1) The mayor, acting under authority granted as emergency management director in section
1.05.006(a) of this code; or
(2) The city manager acting under the authority granted as emergency management coordinator in
section 1.05.006(b).
(b) Implementation authorized. These officers are hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable
provisions of this article upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health,
safety and welfare.
Sec. 13.04.033 Applicability
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the
city. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in this article includes individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, and all other legal entities.
Sec. 13.04.034 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and
water gardens.
Commercial and institutional water use. Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and
nonprofit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants,
and office buildings.
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the
loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so
that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
Customer. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city.
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking,
bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution.
Even-numbered address. Street addresses, box number or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and
locations without addresses.
Industrial water use. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms
having greater usability and value.
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly
or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way
and medians.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/420
Nonessential water use. Water uses that are not essential nor required of the protection of public, health, safety,
and welfare, including:
(1) Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise
provided under this plan;
(2) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle;
(3) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or
other hard-surfaced areas;
(4) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire
protection;
(5) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(6) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type
pools;
(7) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to
support aquatic life;
(8) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice
directing the repair of such leak(s); and
(9) Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than
firefighting.
Odd-numbered address. Street addresses, box number, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9.
Secs. 13.04.035–13.04.060 Reserved
Part II. Drought and Emergency Contingency Stages and Procedures
Sec. 13.04.061 Water emergency contingency stage implementation
(a) Responsibility. The director of utilities or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand
stage of this article. Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by
means of publication conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or
termination of each in the official newspaper of the city, local radio and through the cable television local
organization channel.
(b) Triggering criteria. The triggering criteria described below are based on analysis of the vulnerability of the
water source under drought of record conditions and any identifiable limitations of production and/or delivery
systems.
(1) Stage 1 - Mild water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to comply with the
requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section 13.04.034
when the water supply available is less than eighty percent (80%) of flow capabilities, or when
the director of utilities determines that a “mild shortage condition” exists.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/420
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 1 may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed
as triggering events have ceased to exist as determined by the director of utilities.
(2) Stage 2 - Moderate water shortage conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a twenty-five percent (25%) reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section 13.04.034 when the
water supply available is less than seventy-five percent (75%) of flow capabilities, or when the
director of utilities determines that a “moderate water condition” exists based on: [sic]
(C) Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use
restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(i) Irrigation of landscape areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation system
shall be limited to even-numbered days for customers with a street address ending in an
even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8), and odd-numbered days for water customers with a street
address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9). Irrigation of landscape areas is limited
to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00
midnight. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by means
of hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or drip
irrigation system.
(ii) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a
positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any tine on the
immediate premises of a commercial carwash or commercial service station. Further, such
washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the
public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles
used to transport food and perishables.
(iii) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading
pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.
(iv) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or
ponds are equipped with a recirculation system.
(v) Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities, or
other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of
water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under
special permit from the city.
(vi) The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited:
a. Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts,
or other hard-surfaced areas;
b. Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection;
c. Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/420
d. Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having
been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s).
(D) Requirements for termination. Stage 2 may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed
as triggering events have ceased to exist as determined by the director of utilities upon
termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative.
(3) Stage 3 - Severe water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section 13.04.034 when the
director of utilities determines that a “severe water crisis condition” exists based on:
(i) An analysis of water supply availability under drought of record conditions may
indicate that there is an immediate risk of water supply shortage;
(ii) That there exists severe facility capacity limitations; or
(iii) Emergency conditions such as supply source contamination exists.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 3 may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed
as triggering events have ceased to exist as determined by the director of utilities upon
termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative.
(4) Stage 4 - Critical water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses for stage 4 of this plan when the water supply
is less than 50% of flow capabilities or when the director of utilities determines that a critical
water condition exists.
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist or as determined by the director of
utilities.
(5) Stage 5 - Emergency water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirement for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and restrictions for stage 5 of this plan when the director of utilities or his/her designee,
determines that a water supply emergency exists based on:
(i) Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause
unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service; or
(ii) Natural or manmade contamination of the water supply source(s).
(B) Requirements for termination. Stage 5 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist or as determined by the director of
utilities.
(6) Stage 6 - Water allocation.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the water
allocation plan prescribed in section 13.04.034 of this plan and comply with the requirements
and restrictions for stage 5 of the plan when: [sic]
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/420
(B) Water rationing. In the [event] that water shortage conditions threaten public health,
safety, and welfare, the director of utilities is hereby authorized to ration water according to the
following water allocation plan:
(i) Single-family residential customers.
a. The allocation to residential water customers residing in a single-family
dwelling shall be as follows:
Persons per Household Gallons per Month
1 or 2 6,000
3 or 4 7,000
5 or 6 8,000
7 or 8 9,000
9 or 10 10,000
11 or more 12,000
b. “Household” means the residential premises served by the customer's meter.
“Persons per household” includes only those persons currently physically residing at
the premises and expected to reside there for the entire billing period. It shall be
assumed that a particular customers household is comprised of two (2) persons
unless the customer notifies the city of a greater number of persons per household on
a form prescribed by the director of utilities. The director of utilities shall give
his/her best effort to see that such forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or made
available to every residential customer. If, however, a customer does not receive
such a form, it shall be the customer's responsibility to go to the city offices to
complete and sign the form claiming more than two (2) persons per household. New
customers may claim more persons per household at the time of applying for water
service on the form prescribed by the director of utilities.
c. When the number of persons per household increases so as to place the
customer in a different allocation category, the customer may notify the city on such
form and the change will be implemented in the next practicable billing period. If
the number of persons in a household is reduced, the customer shall notify the city in
writing within two (2) days. In prescribing the method for claiming more than two
(2) persons per household, the city secretary shall adopt methods to ensure the
accuracy of the claim. Any person who knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal
negligence falsely reports the number of persons in a household fails to timely notify
the city of a reduction in the number of persons in a household shall be fined not less
than $25.00. Residential water customers shall pay the following surcharge:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/420
1. $10.00 for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation.
2. $25.00 for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation.
3. $75.00 for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation.
4. $100.00 for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation.
Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(ii) Commercial customers.
a. A monthly water usage allocation shall be established by the director of
utilities, or his/her designee, for each nonresidential commercial customer other than
the industrial customer who uses water for processing purposes. The nonresidential
customer's allocation shall be approximately 75% of the customer's usage for
corresponding month's billing period for the previous 12 months. If the customer's
billing history is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for
which there is a record shall be used for any monthly period for which no history
exists. Provided, however, a customer, whose monthly usage is less than 1,000
gallons, shall be allocated 750 gallons.
b. The director of utilities shall give his/her best effort to see that notice of each
nonresidential customer's allocation is mailed to such customer. If, however, a
customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to
contact the city to determine the allocation. Upon request of the customer or at the
initiative of the director of utilities, the allocation may be reduced or increased if the
designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water usage, one
nonresidential customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another
nonresidential customer, or other objective evidence demonstrates that the
designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A customer may appeal
an allocation established hereunder to the mayor and city council. Nonresidential
commercial customers shall pay the following surcharges:
1. $20.00 per thousand gallons for first 1,000 gallons over allocation.
2. $50.00 per thousand gallons for second 1,000 gallons over allocation.
3. $150.00 per thousand gallons for third 1,000 gallons over allocation.
4. $200.00 per thousand gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over
allocation.
The surcharges shall be cumulative.
(C) Requirement for termination. Water allocation may be rescinded when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist or determined by the director of
utilities.
Sec. 13.04.062 Drought response stages
The director of utilities or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily
basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 13.04.061 of this plan, shall determine
that a mild, moderate, severe, critical emergency or water shortage condition exists and shall implement the
following actions upon publication of notice in a newspaper of general circulation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/420
(1) Stage 1 - Mild water shortage condition.
(A) Goal. Achieve a voluntary reduction in total water use.
(B) Supply management measures. Measures, if any, to be implemented to manage limited
water supplies and/or reduce water demand may include reduced or discontinued flushing of
water mains, activation and use of an alternative supply source(s); and use of reclaimed water
for nonpotable purposes.
(C) Voluntary water use restrictions.
(i) Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas
to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with a street address ending in an even number
(0, 2, 4, 6, or 8), and Saturdays and Wednesdays for water customers with a street address
ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9), and to irrigate landscapes only between the
hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to midnight on designated watering days.
(ii) All operation of the city adhere to water use restrictions prescribed for stage 2.
(iii) Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or
discontinue water use for nonessential purposes.
(2) Stage 2 - Moderate water shortage conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a 25% percent reduction in daily water demand, etc.
(B) Supply management measures. Measures, if any, to be implemented to manage limited
water supplies and/or reduce water demand may include reduced or discontinued flushing of
water mains, activation and use of an alternative supply source(s); reduced or discontinued
irrigation of public landscaped areas, and use of reclaimed water for nonpotable purposes.
(C) Water use restrictions for demand reduction. Under the threat of penalty for violation, the
following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons:
(i) Irrigation of landscape areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation system
shall be limited to even-numbered days for customers with a street address ending in an
even number (0, 2, 4, 6, 8), and odd-numbered days for water customers with a street
address ending in an odd number (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9). Irrigation of landscape areas is limited
to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00
midnight. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by means
of hand-held hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less, or drip
irrigation system.
(ii) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when
allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a
positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the
immediate premises of a commercial carwash or commercial service station. Further, such
washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the
public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles
used to transport food and perishables.
(iii) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading
pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/420
hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight.
(iv) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or
ponds are equipped with a recirculation system.
(v) Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities, or
other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of
water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under
special permit from the city.
(vi) Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is
prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours 12:00 midnight and
10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. However, if the golf course utilizes
a water source other than that provided by the city, the facility shall not be subject to these
regulations.
(vii) All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request of
the patron.
(viii) The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited:
a. Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts,
or other hard-surfaced areas;
b. Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection;
c. Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
and
d. Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having
been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s).
(3) Stage 3 - Severe water shortage conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a 35% percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Water use restrictions for demand reduction. All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in
effect during stage 3 except:
(i) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between
the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight
and shall be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation or
permanently installed automatic sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is
prohibited at all times.
(ii) The watering of golf course tees is prohibited unless the golf course utilizes a water
source other than that provided by the city.
(iii) The use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants under
special permit is to be discontinued.
(4) Stage 4 - Critical water shortage conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a 50% percent reduction in daily water demand.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/420
(B) Water use restrictions for demand reduction. All requirements of stage 2 and 3 shall
remain in effect during stage 4 except:
(i) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between
the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall
be by means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of
hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems are prohibited at
all times.
(ii) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial carwash and commercial service
stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare is
prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial carwashes and commercial
service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and
between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(iii) No application for new, additional, expanded, or increased-in-size water service
connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains, or water service facility of
any kind shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby
suspended for such time as this drought response stage or a higher-numbered stage shall
be in effect.
(5) Stage 5 - Emergency water shortage conditions.
(A) Goal. Achieve a 75% percent reduction in daily water demand.
(B) Water use restrictions for demand reduction. All requirements of stage 2, 3 and 4 shall
remain in effect during stage 5 except:
(i) Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited.
(ii) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other
vehicle is absolutely prohibited.
(6) Stage 6 - Water allocation. In the event that water shortage conditions threaten public health,
safety, welfare, and the director of utilities is hereby authorized to allocate water according to the
following water allocation plan:
(A) Single-family residential customers.
(i) The allocation to residential water customers residing in a single-family dwelling
shall be as follows:
Persons per Household Gallons per Month
1 or 2 6,000
3 or 4 7,000
5 or 6 8,000
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/420
7 or 8 9,000
9 or 10 10,000
11 or more 12,000
(ii) “Household” means the residential premises served by the customer's meter.
“Persons per household” includes only those persons currently physically residing at the
premises and expected to reside there for the entire billing period. It shall be assumed that
a particular customer's household is comprised of two (2) persons unless the customer
notifies the city of a greater number of persons per household on a form prescribed by the
director of utilities. The director of utilities shall give his/her best effort to see that such
forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or made available to every residential customer. If,
however, a customer does not receive such a form, it shall be the customer's responsibility
to go to the director of utilities office to complete and sign the form claiming more than
two (2) persons per household. New customers may claim more persons per household at
the time of applying for water service on the form prescribed by the director of utilities.
When the number of persons per household increases so as to place the customer in a
different allocation category, the customer may notify the director of utilities on such form
and the change will be implemented in the next practicable billing period. If the number
of persons in a household is reduced, the customer shall notify the director of utilities in
writing within two (2) days. In prescribing the method of claiming more than two (2)
persons per household, the director of utilities shall adopt methods to ensure the accuracy
of the claim. Any person who knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence falsely
reports the number of persons in a household or fails to timely notify the city, director of
finance of a reduction in the number of persons in a household shall be fined not less than
$100.00 and not more than $500.00.
(iii) Residential water customers shall pay the following surcharge:
a. $10.00 for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation.
b. $25.00 for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation.
c. $75.00 for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation.
d. $100.00 for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation.
Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(B) Commercial customers. A monthly water allocation shall be established by the director of
utilities, or his/her designee, for each nonresidential commercial customer other than an
industrial customer who uses water for processing purposes. The nonresidential customer's
allocation shall be approximately 75% percent of the customer's usage for corresponding
month's billing period for the previous 12 months. If the customer's billing history is shorter
than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for
any month period for which no history exists. Provided, however, a customer whose monthly
usage is less than 1,000 gallons, shall be allocated 750 gallons. The director of utilities shall
give his/her best effort to see that notice of each nonresidential customer's allocation is mailed
to such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the
customer's responsibility to contact the director of utilities to determine the allocation. Upon
request of the customer or at the initiative of the director of utilities, the allocation may be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/420
reduced or increased if, (1) the designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's
normal water usage; (2) one nonresidential customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to
another nonresidential customer; or (3) other objective evidence demonstrates that the
designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A customer may appeal an
allocation established hereunder to the mayor of city manager. Nonresidential commercial
customers shall pay the following surcharges:
(i) $20.00 per thousand gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(ii) $50.00 per thousand gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(iii) $150.00 per thousand gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(iv) $200.00 per thousand gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation.
Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(C) Industrial customers. A monthly water allocation shall be established by the director of
finance, or his/her designee, for each industrial customer, which uses water for processing
purposes. The industrial customer's allocation shall be approximately 90% percent of the
customer's water usage baseline. Ninety (90) days after the initial imposition of the allocation
for industrial customers, the industrial customer's allocation shall be further reduced to 80%
percent of the customer's water usage baseline. The industrial customer's water baseline will be
computed on the average water use for the 12-month period ending prior to the date of
implementation of stage 2 of the plan. If the industrial water customer's billing history is shorter
than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for
any monthly period for which no billing history exists. The director of finance shall give his/her
best effort to see that notice of each industrial customer's allocation is mailed to such customer.
If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to
contact the director of finance to determine the allocation, and the allocation shall be fully
effective notwithstanding the lack of receipt of written notice. Upon request of the customer or
at the initiative of the director of utilities, the allocation may be reduced or increased, (1) if the
designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water use because the
customer had shutdown a major processing unit for repair or overhaul during the period; (2) the
customer has added or is in the process of adding significant additional processing capacity; (3)
the customer has previously implemented significant permanent water conservation measures
such that the ability to further reduce water use is limited; (4) the customer agrees to transfer
part of its allocation to another industrial customer; or (5) if other objectives evidence
demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A customer
may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the director of finance. Industrial customers
shall pay the following surcharges:
Surcharges shall be cumulative.
(i) $20.00 per thousand gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(ii) $50.00 per thousand gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(iii) $150.00 per thousand gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(iv) $200.00 per thousand gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation.
The surcharges shall be cumulative. As used herein, “black rate” means the charge to the
customer per 1,000 gallons at the regular water rate schedule at the level of the customer's
allocation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/420
Secs. 13.04.063–13.04.090 Reserved
Part III. Enforcement and Variances
Sec. 13.04.091 Enforcement; penalty
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of
this article, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time
pursuant to action taken by city manager or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this article.
(b) Any person who violates this plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars (500.00). Each day
that one or more of the provisions in this plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is
convicted of three or more distinct violations of this plan, the director of finance shall, upon due notice to the
customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services
discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, hereby
established at one hundred dollars ($100.00), and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing service. In
addition, suitable assurance must be given to the director of finance that the same action shall not be repeated
while the plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the direct
[district] court.
(c) Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the
property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation
occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of
the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he/she did not
commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and
proof that a violation, committed by a child occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a
rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he/she
proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this plan
and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation.
(d) Any police officer, or any other law enforcement employee of the city, may issue a citation to a person
he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this article. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall
contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, the offense charged, and shall direct him/her to
appear in the municipal court on the date shown on the citation for which the date shall not be less than 3 days
nor more than 5 days from the date the citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the
citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent
or employee of the violator, or to a person over 14 years of age who is a member of the violator's immediate
family or is a resident of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in the municipal court to enter
a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of this article. If the alleged violator fails to appear in the municipal
court, a warrant for his/her arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest
warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in the municipal court before all other
cases.
Sec. 13.04.092 Variances
(a) The city manager or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses
otherwise prohibited under this article if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an
emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person
requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/420
(1) Compliance with the article cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the
water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect.
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in
water use.
(b) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this article shall file a petition for variance with
the city manager within 5 days after the particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for
variances shall be reviewed by the city manager, or his/her designee, and shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Purpose of water use.
(3) Specific provision(s) of the article from which the petitioner is requesting relief.
(4) Detailed statement as to how the specific provisions of the article adversely affects the
petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with
the article.
(5) Description of the relief requested.
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(7) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take
to meet the intent of this article and the compliance date.
(8) Other pertinent information.
(c) Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the
city manager or his/her designee:
(1) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(2) Variances granted shall expire when the provisions of this article are no longer in effect, unless
the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements.
(d) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this article occurring prior to the
issuance of the variance.
(Ordinance O-03-14 adopted 1/21/14)
Secs. 13.04.093–13.04.120 Reserved
Division 3. Water Conservation Plan
Sec. 13.04.121 Introduction
(a) The city owns, operates and manages the public water supply system. The city council approves all
operating expenditures and improvements annually. Operations personnel take care of the day-to-day
management and operational requirements.
(b) The city waterworks system serves approximately 5,150 connections. The majority of these connections
are within the city limits. However, a few of the customers live outside the corporate limits of the city. The
waterworks system covers approximately 4.426 square miles.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/420
(c) Over the past several years the city has experienced very moderate growth. However, the city's water
works system has not been exceeded in its available capacity to supply the customers' demand. Purchased supply
through the Canadian River Municipal Water Authority, along with groundwater capacity has served the city and
its citizens quite well.
(d) Wastewater is currently treated to primary standards and applied to agricultural land as irrigation water.
(e) In the South Plains of Texas, wastewater is often disposed on land as irrigation water to conserve the
groundwater sources in the area. The area, being heavily agricultural, relies on irrigation water to provide crop
production. The South Plains Underground Water District has provided research and assistance to the farmers in
the district to show them efficient water use techniques to conserve the underground water resources. Both
supply, pumping and application techniques have been instituted and the Ogallala aquifer has seen saturated
thicknesses increase over recent years due to the improved conservation techniques.
(f) The city is aware of the need to conserve water and has been instrumental in providing water use reduction
methods within the city. The city, in implementing this plan, will, in effect, increase the life of their existing
groundwater supply and increase the treatment capacity of their wastewater treatment facility.
(g) The city has set a goal of per capita water use reduction of 5%. This shall be an annual goal for the city.
The peak water use occurs in the summer when people are irrigating crops and watering yards and gardens. An
educational program shall be initiated to show how to achieve the results of irrigation without wasting the water
being applied.
Sec. 13.04.122 Public involvement
The city holds regular council meetings on the third Tuesday of every month at 5:30 p.m. These meetings are
open to the public and the public is encouraged to attend and participate in the city's government process.
Persons are encouraged to present concerns and comments to the council at these meetings, to help the
councilmembers in their decision making process. In addition, the city is a member of the Canadian River
Municipal Water Authority which holds regular board meetings.
Sec. 13.04.123 Conservation goals
The water conservation plan outlined has the overall objective of reducing water consumption in the city service
area. It has the added advantage of reducing the amount of wastewater needing treatment and disposal. Although
regional planning for the water supply is an important aspect of water conservation planning, it also focuses on
measures that specifically reduce the amount of water used and, ultimately, on the amount of wastewater
produced. Such measures will have the effect of extending the time until additional water and wastewater
treatment capacity must be provided. The city has set a goal of per capita water usage reduction of 5% as an
annual goal.
Sec. 13.04.124 Water conservation plan
(a) Education and information. The city shall adopt a two-phase education and information program. The
program will be a two-year design that will emphasize the educational and informational aspects within the first
year. During the second year, annual reminders will be given to the public, school children and civic groups. The
city will provide water conservation materials to inform the system users of the ways to conserve water. The
following are methods for informing the system users:
(1) First year program.
(A) Educational materials will be provided to all users of the system at city hall when their
monthly water bill is paid. In addition, the city will have one (1) mail out of material during the
first year program. The mail out will be a fact sheet about the adoption of the water
conservation plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/420
(B) Newspaper releases shall be published in the local newspaper of general circulation in the
city as part of the first year plan. Two (2) news releases each year shall be published to inform
the public of the water conservation plan in the city. If emergency conditions occur and/or
supply problems are encountered, these news releases shall be published immediately and the
public will be informed of the situation.
(C) Other water conservation activities such as water education programs in the school will
be promoted by the city. In addition, the city will provide speakers, information, handouts and
other materials as needed to promote the water conservation within the city and surrounding
area. Tips for water conservation shall be printed on the monthly water bills at least two (2)
times per year.
(D) All new connections shall be provided with information on water conservation methods
and water saving devices for the home.
(E) Contracts with other political subdivisions.
(i) Should the opportunity ever present itself for the city to provide water under
contractual agreement to another political subdivision, the accepting subdivision shall
adopt this water conservation plan prior to receiving any water. Otherwise, the accepting
political subdivision shall already have in effect a plan of their own that has been
approved by the state water development board.
(ii) The city shall include similar provisions for any existing contracts in effect at the
time of the writing and for acceptance of this plan. Currently, the city has no contracts
with other political subdivisions.
(F) Water conservation literature. Information concerning water conservation literature is
available from the state water development board. Included in the literature are subject areas of
agricultural and municipal conservation as well as state water resources and planning literature
and audio-visual materials. This pre-printed information will be the basis for public education
and is available from the following agency:
Texas Water Development Board
P.O. Box 13231, Capitol Station
Austin, Texas 78711-3231
(2) Second and subsequent years activities; long-term public information.
(A) During the second and subsequent years, the city shall include information on the
customer's utility bill reminding the users of the need for conserving water at least three (3)
times per year. During the year, the city shall have available to all metered customers
information informing them of the status of the water conservation activities and the current
status of the efforts exhibited by the users for the most previous past six (6) months.
(B) Water conservation material shall be made available to schools, secondary and
elementary, for the children to take home. Public speakers shall be made available to various
organizations to promote water conservation.
(C) As previously stated, newspaper articles shall appear at least twice per year informing the
public of the water conservation plan in the city.
(b) Plumbing codes. The city has adopted a plumbing code which has several provisions pertaining to water
conservation. This code is strictly enforced by the inspection and water department.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/420
(c) Retrofit program. Customers in existing buildings, which do not have water saving devices, should be
encouraged to replace their old plumbing fixtures. The informational material provided to them will help
acquaint them with the types of devices and the advantages of installing them in their buildings. The city will
encourage local plumbing suppliers to stock water saving devices for new and retrofit installations.
(d) Water rate structures. The city is exploring a water rate schedule that encourges water conservation
practices. Currently the rate structure has a base rate for 1st 1,000 gallons used and a step rate per thousand
gallons charge for all water used over the 2nd 1,000 gallons. A 3rd step rate charge per thousand gallons is
calculated for all water used after 3,000 gallons. The rate structure shall be adjusted as the requirements for
operating the system and capital improvement costs increase. Monthly bills are prepared from meter readings in
the system and the excess rate is calculated based on the amount of water metered.
(e) Meters. The current water system meters approximately 100% of the water used. Operations personnel are
equipped to test all meters that appear to be excessively high or low based on the previous months' readings.
Incorporated into the water conservation plan, is a case-by-case meter testing system.
(f) Water conservation landscaping. In order to reduce the demands placed on the water system by landscape
and garden watering, the city, through its information and education program, will encourage customers and
local landscaping companies to utilize water saving practices during installation of landscaping and gardens for
residential and commercial institutions.
(g) Leak detection and repair. The current system has a leak detection program which will be maintained. The
program includes the following:
(1) Monthly water use is recorded and previous months are compared to the existing readings to
confirm excessively high increases or decreases from the previous month.
(2) Monitoring of elevated tanks and ground storage tanks which would indicate a major break in
the distribution system.
(3) Visual inspection of wells, ground storage tanks, and water meters by operations personnel, to
watch for situations that would indicate leaks in the system.
(4) An adequate maintenance staff available for repair of leaks.
(h) Recycling and reuse. The city currently reuses their wastewater as irrigation water on agricultural land
adjacent to the wastewater treatment plant. With the construction of our new activated sludge treatment plant,
the city will now have the option of irrigating public parks and golf courses with the treated effluent.
Sec. 13.04.125 Implementation and enforcement
The water conservation plan will be enforced by the following methods:
(1) Service taps will not be allowed for customers who do not meet the requirements of the water
conservation plumbing fixtures. An inspector for the city will be responsible for verifying that the
new customer complies with the plumbing ordinance.
(2) The informational material provided to customers will show the cost saving advantages to those
who retrofit their buildings with water saving fixture.
(3) The city inspector will not approve new construction unless it has met the proposed plumbing
code.
(4) The water and wastewater superintendent shall assume the role of inspector and the city
inspector shall be in charge of enforcement of the plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/420
Sec. 13.04.126 Conservation plan monitoring
Consumption data and status of water conservation will be reviewed annually.
Sec. 13.04.127 Public information suggestions
Suggestion on ways to save water which may be included in public information are listed below:
(1) Bathroom.
(A) Take a shower instead of filling the tub and taking a bath. Showers usually use less water
than tub baths.
(B) Install a low-flow showerhead which restricts the quantity of flow at 60 psi to no more
than 3.0 gallons per minute.
(C) Do not use hot water when cold will do. Water and energy can be saved by washing
hands with soap and cold water; hot water should only be added when hands are especially
dirty.
(D) Reduce the level of the water being used in a bathtub by one or two inches if a shower is
not available.
(E) Turn water off when brushing teeth until it is time to rinse.
(F) Do not let the water run when washing hands. Instead, scrub and then turn back on again
to rinse. A cut-off valve may also be installed on the faucet.
(G) Shampoo hair in the shower. Shampooing in the shower takes only a little more water
than is used to shampoo hair during a bath and much less than shampooing and bathing
separately.
(H) Hold hot water in the basin when shaving instead of letting the faucet continue to run.
(I) Test toilets for leaks. To test for a leak, a few drops of food coloring can be added to the
water in the tank. The toilet should not be flushed. The customer can then watch to see if the
coloring appears in the bowl within a few minutes. If it does, the fixture needs adjustment or
repair.
(J) Use a toilet tank displacement device. A one-gallon plastic milk bottle can be filled with
stones or with water, recapped, and placed in the toilet tank. This will reduce the amount of
water in the tank but still provides enough for flushing. (Bricks which some people use for this
purpose are not recommended since they crumble eventually and could damage the working
mechanism, necessitating a call to the plumber). Displacement devices should never be used
with new low-volume flush toilets. Install a new low-volume flush toilet that uses 3.5 gallons or
less per flush when building a new home or remodeling a bathroom.
(K) Install faucet aerators to reduce water consumption.
(L) Never use the toilet to dispose of cleansing tissues, cigarette butts, or other trash. This
can waste a great deal of water and also places an unnecessary load on sewage treatment plant
or septic tank.
(2) Kitchen.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/420
(A) Use a pan of water (or place a stopper in the sink) for rinsing pots and pans and cooking
implements when cooking rather than turning on the water faucet each time a rinse is needed.
(B) Never run the dishwasher without a full load. In addition to saving water, expensive
detergent will last longer and a significant energy saving will appear on the utility bill.
(C) Use the sink disposal sparingly, and never use it for just a few scraps.
(D) Keep a container of drinking water in the refrigerator. Running water from the tap until it
is cool is wasteful. Better still, both water and energy can be saved by keeping cold water in a
picnic jug on a kitchen counter to avoid opening the refrigerator door frequently.
(E) Use a small pan of cold water when cleaning vegetables rather than letting the faucet run.
(F) Use only a little water in the pot and put a lid on it for cooking most food. Not only does
this method save water, but food is more nutritious since vitamins and minerals are not poured
down the drain with the extra cooking water.
(G) Use a pan of water for rinsing when handwashing dishes rather than running a faucet.
(H) Always keep water conservation in mind, and think of other ways to save in the kitchen.
Small kitchen savings from not making too much coffee or letting ice cubes melt in a sink can
add up in a year's time.
(3) Laundry.
(A) Wash only a full load when using an automatic washing machine (32 to 59 gallons are
required per load).
(B) Use the lowest water level setting on the washing machine for light loads whenever
possible.
(C) Use cold water as often as possible to save energy and to conserve the hot water for uses
which cold water cannot serve. (This is also better for clothing made of today's synthetic
fabrics).
(4) For appliances and plumbing.
(A) Check water requirements of various models and brands when considering purchasing
any new appliance that uses water. Some use less water than others.
(B) Check all water line connections and faucets for leaks. If the cost of water is $1.00 per
1,000 gallons, one could be paying a large bill for water that simply goes down the drain
because of leakage. A slow drip can waste as much as 170 gallons of water each day, or 5,000
gallons per month, and can add as much as $15.00 per month to the water bill.
(C) Learn to replace faucet washers so that drips can be corrected promptly. It is easy to do,
costs very little, and can represent a substantial amount saved in plumbing and water bills.
(D) Check for water leakage that the customer may be entirely unaware of, such as a leak
between the water meter and the house. To check, all indoor and outdoor faucets should be
turned off, and the water meter should be checked. If it continues to run or turn, a leak probably
exists and needs to be located.
(E) Insulate all hot water pipes to avoid the delays (and wasted water) experienced while
waiting for the water to “run hot.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/420
(F) Be sure the hot water heater thermostat is not set too high. Extremely hot settings waste
water and energy because the water often has to be cooled with cold water before it can be used.
(G) Use a moisture meter to determine when house plants need water. More plants die from
over-watering than from being on the dry side.
(5) Out-of-door use.
(A) Water lawns early in the morning during the hotter summer months. Much of the water
used on the lawn can simply evaporate between the sprinkler and the grass.
(B) Use a sprinkler that produces large drops of water, rather than a fine mist, to avoid
evaporation.
(C) Turn soaker hoses so the holes are on the bottom to avoid evaporation.
(D) Water slowly for better absorption, and never water in high winds.
(E) Forget about watering the streets or walks or driveways. They will never grow a thing.
(F) Condition the soil with compost before planting grass or flower beds so that water will
soak in rather than run off.
(G) Fertilize lawns at least twice a year for root stimulation. Grass with a good root system
makes better use of less water.
(H) Learn to know when grass needs watering. If it has turned a dull gray-green or if
footprints remain visible, it is time to water.
(I) Do not water too frequently. Too much water can overload the soil so that air cannot get to
the roots and can encourage plant diseases.
(J) Do not over-water. Soil can absorb only so much moisture and the rest simply runs off. A
timer will help, and either a kitchen timer or an alarm clock will do. An inch and one-half of
water applied once a week will keep most Texas grasses alive and healthy.
(K) Operate automatic sprinkler systems only when the demand on the town's water supply is
lowest. Set the system to operate between four and six a.m.
(L) Do not scalp lawns when mowing during hot weather. Taller grass holds moisture better.
Rather, grass should be cut fairly often so that only 1/2 to 3/4 inch is trimmed off. A better
looking lawn will result.
(M) Use water can or hand water with the hose in small areas of the lawn that need more
frequent watering (those near walks or driveways or in especially hot, sunny spots.)
(N) Learn what types of grass, shrubbery, and plants do best in the area and in which parts of
the lawn, and then plant accordingly. If one has a heavily shaded yard, no amount of water will
make roses bloom. In West Texas, attractive arrangements of plants that are adapted to arid or
semi-arid climates should be chosen.
(O) Consider decorating areas of the lawn with rocks, gravel, wood chips, or other materials
now available that require no water at all.
(P) Do not “sweep” walks and driveways with the hose. Use a broom or rake instead.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/420
(Q) Use a bucket of soapy water and use the hose only for rinsing when washing the car.
Sec. 13.04.128 Public utility profile
The utility profile and other documentation pertaining to the water conservation plan shall be kept on file in the
office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 13.05 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL*
Sec. 13.05.001 Introduction
(a) The city has the responsibility to supply potable water to its customers. In the exercise of this
responsibility, the city shall implement, administer, and maintain an ongoing backflow prevention and crossconnection
control program to protect the city's system from the hazards originating on the premises of their
customers and from temporary connections that may impair or alter the water in the public water systems. The
return of any water to the city's system, after the water has been used for any purpose on the customer's premises
or within the customer's piping system, is unacceptable and opposed by the city.
(b) Every source of contamination or possible contamination from any contaminant which originates from or
is located at a residential or commercial establishment, which is connected to any public water supply or which
provides water to the public shall be equipped with the protection required under the provisions of this article.
(c) The property owner shall provide the city with an annual inspection report, preformed by a tester certified
by TCEQ, for each cross-connection prevention assembly.
(d) All costs associated with the installation, testing, repair, overhaul, or replacement of a cross-connection
control assembly shall be the responsibility of the customer.
Sec. 13.05.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. If a word or term in the article is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other
technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the most recent edition of the International
Plumbing Code and/or USC Manual of Cross-Connection Control, tenth edition. The following definitions shall
apply to this article:
Air gap. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or
appurtenance and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other assembly. An approved air
gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim
of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other assembly in no case less than one inch.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB). An
assembly used to prevent backsiphonage in nonhealth hazard conditions. This assembly cannot be tested and
cannot prevent backpressure backflow.
Auxiliary supply. Any water source or system other than the public water system that may be available in the
building or on the property, including groundwater or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation or any other
purpose.
Backflow. The flow in the direction of opposition to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids,
gases, or substances into the water system.
Backflow prevention assembly. Any effective assembly, including but not limited to, reduced pressure
assemblies, double check valves and vacuum breakers, approved by the water superintendent and used to
prevent water of unknown quality in private plumbing facilities from flowing back into the water system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/420
Backpressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply
pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of
flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source.
Backsiphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixture or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.
Boresight or boresight to daylight. Providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in
vaults through the use of an unobstructed drainpipe.
Commercial establishment (commercial). A property or location, whether leased or owned, which is used
primarily for but not limited to, industrial, manufacture, production, storage, wholesaling or retailing of services,
RV parks, schools, churches, daycare facilities, pet grooming facilities, salons, clinics, hotels, etc., which is or
may be placed in the flow of commerce or any property or location which is used primarily for the provision of
any service.
Commercial use. Water used by any persons other than a residential customer of the water supply and includes
all uses not specifically included in residential uses.
Contaminants. Any foreign material, solid or liquid, or gas, not common to the potable water supply which
makes the water unfit or undesirable for human consumption.
Contamination. The admission of contaminants into the potable water supply system.
Cross connection. A physical connection between a public water system and either another supply of unknown
or questionable quality, any source including, but not limited to garden hoses, unapproved piping connecting one
structure to another, which may contain contaminating or polluting substances, or any source of water treated to
a lesser degree in the treatment process.
Cross-connection control assembly. Any nationally approved or recognized assembly placed upon any
connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture of any tank,
receptacle, equipment or assembly, which is designed to prevent nonpotable, used, unclean, polluted and
contaminated water, or other substances, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any
condition or set of conditions.
Customer service inspection (CSI). A TCEQ mandated examination of the private distribution facility for the
purpose of providing or denying water service. The inspection is limited to the identification and prevention of
cross connections, potential contaminants hazards, and illegal lead materials.
Customer service inspector. The person who is licensed by the TCEQ or its designated agent as a certified
customer inspector, or licensed by the state board of plumbing examiners as a plumbing inspector or as a water
protection specialist.
Degree of hazard. Health hazard or nonhealth hazard as determined by the evaluation of the conditions within a
system by the executive director of the TCEQ:
(1) Health hazard. A cross connection, potential cross connection, or other situation involving any
substance that could cause death or illness, spread disease, or has a high probability of causing such
effects if introduced into the potable drinking water. The following list, including but not limited to,
contains common hazards and other hazards that may be determined by the city to require premises
isolation with a reduced pressure zone (RPZ):
(A) Carwash.
(B) Multi-storied building - 3 floors or more.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/420
(C) Animal hospital.
(D) Auxiliary water supply.
(E) Building containing a reclaimed water system.
(F) Commercial or industrial irrigation.
(G) Commercial laundry.
(H) Cooling tower.
(I) Dental office.
(J) Doctor's office.
(K) Food and beverage processing plant.
(L) Food establishments.
(M) Funeral home and mortuary.
(N) Green house or nursery.
(O) Hospitals - parallel system required.
(P) Commercial irrigation systems.
(Q) Laboratories, including medical, dental, research and labs at educational facilities.
(R) Manufacturing plant.
(S) Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, and fabrication plants.
(T) Petroleum processing or storage facilities.
(U) Plants using radioactive materials.
(V) Premises where inspection is restricted or exempted.
(W) Rendering plant.
(X) Sewage lift stations sewage treatment plants.
(Y) Steam plants.
(2) Nonhealth hazard. A cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance
that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance, or be aesthetically
objectionable, if introduced into the potable drinking water.
Double check detector backflow prevention assembly or double check detector (DCDA). An assembly composed
of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved
double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow.
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check (DC). An
assembly which consists of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/420
seated shut-off valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test
ports.
Fire line tester. A tester who is employed by a state-approved fire line contractor and is qualified to test
backflow prevention assemblies on fire lines only.
General tester. A tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial,
industrial or irrigation service except fire lines.
Hose bibb vacuum breaker (HBVB). An assembly that consists of a spring-loaded check valves that seals against
an atmospheric outlet when the water supply is turned on. When the supply is turned off, the assembly vents to
atmosphere, thus protecting against backsiphonage in nonhealth hazard conditions.
Mobile unit. Any operation which may have the potential to introduce contaminates into a potable water system
from a mobile source. These include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles,
street-cleaning vehicles, hydro-jets, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and pest-control vehicles.
Nonresidential use. Water used by any persons other than a residential customer of the water supply and includes
all uses not specifically included in residential uses.
Person. Any individual, business, private, or public corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity,
firm, industry, or other entity.
Point-of-use isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at
which the actual or potential cross connection exists.
Potable water supply. Any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.
Premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and
structures located on it.
Premises isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water
system and the water user.
Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or pressure vacuum breaker (PVB). An assembly which
provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against backpressure
backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an atmospheric vacuum breaker and can
be used with downstream resilient seated shut-off valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge
gate valves and resilient seated test ports which allow the full testing of the assembly.
Public water system or system. Any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public
domestic use. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process
of producing, treating, storing or conveying water for public consumption.
Recreational vehicle (RV). A self-contained trailer or vehicle that is used for recreational, work or living.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or reduced
pressure assembly or reduced pressure zone (RP). An assembly containing two independently acting approved
check valves together with a hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve
located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include
properly located resilient seated test ports and a tightly closing resilient seated shut-off valve at the end of the
assembly.
Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure detector (RPDA). An
assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/420
specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall
register accurately for very low rates of flow.
Residential use (residential). Water used by any persons other than a commercial customer of the water supply
and includes all uses not specifically included in commercial uses.
Service connection. The point of delivery at which point the physical responsibility of the water transfers from
the city to the customer.
Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SVB). An assembly containing an independently operating, internally
loaded check valve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check
valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly closing
resilient seated shut-off valves attached at each end of the assembly.
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
Tester. A person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with
TCEQ.
Thermal expansion. Heated water that does not have the space to expand.
Used water. Water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the
service connection.
Sec. 13.05.003 Protection required; installation
The backflow prevention assemblies required under this article shall be from the approved list of the University
of Southern California or as determined by the city. Each backflow prevention assembly shall have been
approved by the city prior to installation. Failure to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow
prevention assembly may result in the backflow prevention assembly failing to meet final approval by the city.
The city shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the
city. The assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but the representative is in no way
limited to the following circumstances:
(1) The nature and extent of any activity of the premises, or the materials used in connection with
any activity of the premises, or materials stored on the premises, could contaminate or pollute the
potable water supply.
(2) Premises having one or more potential cross connections.
(3) Internal cross connections are present that are not correctable.
(4) Intricate plumbing arrangements that are present which make it impractical to ascertain
whether cross connections exist.
(5) There is restricted entry so that inspections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure
that cross connections do not exist.
(6) Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to
accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the judgment of the city.
(7) A fire suppression system that is connected to the city's water system.
(8) All new construction if deemed necessary in the CSI. The type of assembly required will be
determined by the degree of hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/420
(9) When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not
determined or could change.
(10) Any used water returns system.
(11) A premises isolation assembly shall be required in the event a point-of-use assembly has not
been tested or repaired as required by this article.
(12) Premises isolation may be required if it is determined that additions or alterations have been
made to the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits.
(13) All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank.
(14) Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the city deems
necessary to retrofit.
(15) Premises isolation will be required if there is an active well on the premises.
Sec. 13.05.004 Customer service inspection
(a) Pursuant to TCEQ water system regulations, a CSI for cross-connection control shall be performed by the
city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Water service to a newly constructed facility or previously nonexisting premises.
(2) After any material improvement to building(s) or premises.
(3) Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises.
(4) The city deems it necessary.
(b) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility(ies) until after the CSI is
completed.
(c) Temporary water service which poses a potential cross-connection threat to the potable water supply shall
be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly.
(d) All CSI's shall be performed by the city.
(e) A CSI certificate shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to new construction, on
any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that cross connections or other potential
contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private water
distribution facilities.
(f) As unacceptable plumbing practices are discovered, they shall be promptly eliminated to prevent possible
contamination of the water supplied by the public water system. The existence of a serious threat to the integrity
of the public water supply shall be considered sufficient grounds for immediate termination of water service.
Service can be restored only when the source of potential contamination no longer exists or until sufficient
additional safeguards have been taken.
(g) Copies of properly completed inspection certifications shall be kept on file by the water superintendent
and made available, upon request, for TCEQ review. These certifications shall be retained for a minimum of ten
(10) years and shall certify that:
(1) No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of
contamination exists. Potential sources of contamination are isolated from the public water system by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/420
an air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly in accordance with all local state and
federal laws and the rules and regulations found in this article. Additionally, all pressure relief valves
and thermal expansion assemblies shall be in compliance with all local state and federal laws.
(2) No cross connection between the public drinking water supply and a private water source
exists. Where an actual air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private water
supply, an approved RP is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and
testing by a recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.
(3) No connection exists which would allow the return of water used for condensing, cooling or
industrial processed back to the public water supply.
(4) No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8.0% (percent) lead exists in private plumbing
facilities installed on or after July 1, 1988.
(5) No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2% (percent) lead exists in private plumbing
facilities installed on or after July l, 1988.
(6) No plumbing fixture is installed which is not in compliance with all local state and federal
laws.
(h) The CSI requirements are not considered acceptable substitutes for and shall not apply to the sanitary
control requirements.
Sec. 13.05.005 Customer classifications
(a) Commercial connections.
(1) An RP shall be the minimum protection for all new or existing commercial connections which
utilize the city's potable water supply unless approved by the water superintendent.
(2) Additional assemblies may be required at point-of-use according to the degree of hazard as the
city deems it necessary.
(b) Fire hydrant connections. An approved RP shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters
which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other uses which would pose a
potential hazard to the public water supply.
(1) It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter
to abide by the conditions of this article. All fire hydrant water meter rentals shall meet the current
requirements as provided for by the city.
(2) Only city fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed
to be used within the city's boundaries.
(3) Deposit fee for fire hydrant water meter with backflow prevention assembly. The deposit fee
for fire hydrant water meters with backflow assemblies shall be $1,000.00 (one thousand dollars).
(4) All nonapproved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use in the city will be confiscated
and enforcement action taken against the responsible party.
(5) Before use of a fire hydrant water meter an inspection of the connection shall be performed by
the city.
(c) Fire suppression systems. All new or existing fire lines which utilize the city's potable water supply shall
have installed an approved backflow prevention assemblies according to the degree of hazard. An approved DC
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/420
or RP shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems.
(1) It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by
the conditions of this article. In the event of any changes to the plumbing system, it is the
responsibility of the property owners to notify the city. All costs associated with the purchase,
installation, testing and repair of a DC or RP assembly is the responsibility of the property owner and
persons in charge of any premises.
(2) All assemblies required on fire line suppression systems shall abide by the rules and regulations
found in this article, with the exception that all testing on fire line suppression systems shall be
completed by a licensed and registered fire line tester.
(d) Irrigation systems. All commercial irrigation systems and irrigation systems that contain mechanical
injection stations shall be required to have RPs. Residential irrigation systems shall be required to have a
minimum of DC.
(e) Mobile units. The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless such
connection is protected by an air gap or an RP. Prior approval and annual testing of any backflow prevention
assembly shall be provided to the city before connection to any potable water system.
(f) Multiple connections. Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or
fire protection will be required to install a backflow assembly on all service lines to the premises. The type of
assembly will be determined by the degree of hazard in the event of an interconnection between services.
(g) Recreational vehicles.
(1) An HBVB shall be the minimum protection for all new or existing RV connections which
utilize the city's potable water supply.
(2) All connections to a public or private line shall be a nontoxic supply line.
(h) Residential service connections. Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been
determined to have an actual or potential cross connection shall be required to eliminate the actual or potential
cross connection and may be required to have an approved backflow assembly installed in accordance with this
article.
(i) Grounds to disconnect. Any cross-connection control assembly that is not tested annually by a qualified
tester with the results of the test provided to the city shall be grounds to disconnect water service to an assembly.
(Ordinance O-02-13 adopted 1/22/13)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/420
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT†
Sec. 14.02.001 Appointment
(a) Appointment of board. The mayor shall appoint a board of adjustment consisting of five (5) members and
three (3) alternate members for a term of two (2) years subject to the approval by a majority of the city council.
Any such member or alternate member is removable for cause by the city council. The chairman of such board
shall have authority to call any alternate member to sit on said board in the absence of a regular member.
(b) Appointment to vacancies. The mayor shall fill vacancies by the appointment of a suitable person to serve
out the unexpired term of any member whose place on the board has become vacant for any cause subject to
approval by a majority of the city council.
(c) Ex officio member. The building inspector shall be an ex officio member of the zoning board of
adjustment without the power to vote and as an ex officio member shall act as secretary of the board and as such
shall administer all applications for appeal, special exceptions and variances received, serve all notices required,
and keep and maintain all records and files of the board.
(1998 Code, sec. 21.021)
Sec. 14.02.002 Exceptions to zoning regulations
The board may make exceptions to the terms of this chapter which are in accordance with its general purpose
and intent and in accordance with the general and special rules so as to render full justice and equity to the
general public. (1998 Code, sec. 21.022)
Sec. 14.02.003 Rules of proceedings
The board may adopt rules consistent with this chapter to govern its proceedings. (1998 Code, sec. 21.023)
Sec. 14.02.004 Meetings
Meetings of the board are held at the call of the chairman or at times the board determines. All meetings of the
board are open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of its meetings, show votes and keep a record of its
examinations and other official actions. The board shall file all minutes in the office of the board as a public
record. (1998 Code, sec. 21.024)
Sec. 14.02.005 Witnesses
The chairman, or acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. (1998 Code,
sec. 21.025)
Sec. 14.02.006 Appeals
(a) In general. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the municipality affected by any zoning decision of an administrative officer.
(b) Appeal deadline. A person may appeal only within fifteen (15) days after a decision has been rendered by
an administrative officer.
(c) Appeal procedure. The appeal is filed with the officer from whom appeal is taken and with the board of
adjustment. The person appealing shall specify the grounds of appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken
shall transmit to the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(d) Effect of appeal. Appeal stays all proceedings of the action appealed from, unless, after notice of appeal
has been filed, the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board that because of facts stated in the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/420
certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. The board of adjustment or a
court of record, may on due cause shown, stay the proceedings by restraining order.
(e) Notice of appeal. The board of adjustment shall give the public ten (10) days' notice of any hearing with
one (1) advertisement in a local newspaper. The day of appearance of the advertisement is not included in the ten
(10) day period. The board of adjustment shall give notice to any parties of interest, including all property
owners within two hundred feet. Any party may appear in person, by attorney or by agent at the hearing.
(f) Appeal fee. The person requesting a hearing shall pay to the building inspector a fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) to cover the cost of advertisement and notices at the time of making the request for appeal.
(1998 Code, sec. 21.026)
Sec. 14.02.007 Powers
The board of adjustment may:
(1) Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter or ordinance upon which the
board is required to pass under this chapter.
(2) Authorize upon appeal in special cases, variances from the terms of the ordinance that will not
be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, the literal enforcement of the
provisions of the chapter or ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this
chapter is observed and substantial justice done.
(3) Revise or reform, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought
to be made, in conformity with the provisions of chapter 211 of the Local Government Code with all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(1998 Code, sec. 21.027)
Sec. 14.02.008 Vote of board
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board is necessary to revise any order, requirement, decision or
determination of any administrative official, or to decide in favor of the application on any matter upon which it
is required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variance in the ordinance or chapter. (1998 Code, sec.
21.028)
Sec. 14.02.009 Appeal to court
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment or any
taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the municipality may present to a court of record, a petition,
duly verified setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality.
The appellant shall present the petition to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the decision in the
office of the board. (1998 Code, sec. 21.029)
Sec. 14.02.010 Special exceptions
When in its judgment the public convenience and welfare will not be substantially or permanently injured, the
board of adjustment may in a specific case, after public notice and a public hearing authorize special exceptions
to this chapter as follows:
(1) Permit the location of a state or municipal building, aviation field, public utility plant, athletic
field or philanthropic institution in any district; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/420
(2) Permit the reconstruction of a building occupied as a nonconforming use, or permit the
extension of a nonconforming use; or
(3) Permit in any district a modification of the requirements of this chapter as the board of
adjustment may deem necessary to secure an appropriate development of a lot where adjacent to a lot
on two or more sides there are buildings that do not conform to these regulations; or
(4) Permit modification of the yard, lot area or lot width regulations as may be necessary to secure
an appropriate improvement of the lot where the lot was separately owned at the time of the passage
of this chapter, and is not adjacent to another lot of the same ownership, and where the lot is of a size
that it cannot be improved without modification.
(1998 Code, sec. 21.030)
ARTICLE 14.03 ZONING ORDINANCE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.03.001 Purpose
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been prepared in accordance with a
comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
inhabitants of the city, and have been made with consideration to the character of the respective districts and the
peculiar suitability of each for particular uses with the view of conserving the value of buildings and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city, and best promoting the health, safety, morals
and general welfare of its inhabitants.
Sec. 14.03.002 Definitions
Certain words in this article are defined as follows:
Accessory building. An accessory building is a small detached building such as a garage, servant's house,
greenhouse or storehouse used in connection with the main building and located upon the same lot as the main
building.
Accessory use. An accessory use is a use subordinate to and incidental to the primary use of the main building or
to the primary use of the premises.
Alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages means alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of 1%
of alcohol by volume which is capable of use for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted and includes
but is not limited to wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any liquor produced in whole or in part by the process of
distillation, including all dilutions or mixtures of them, ale, malt liquor, tequila, mescal, habanero, barreteago,
wine and vinous liquor and beer and any mixed beverage composed in whole or part of an alcohol beverage in a
sealed or unsealed container of any legal size, as each of the above terms are defined by the Alcoholic Beverage
Code of the State of Texas; definitions of which are incorporated herein and made part hereof just as though the
definitions were copied verbatim at this point.
Alley. An alley is a public thoroughfare not over twenty (20) feet in width.
Apartment. An apartment is a unit within an apartment house in which one family lives.
Apartment house. An apartment house is a dwelling containing accommodations for three (3) or more families
living independently of each other for which rent is paid.
Boarding house. A boarding house is a dwelling in which both food and lodging may be obtained for payment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/420
Building. A building is a structure enclosing a space within walls or covered with a roof.
Commission. The commission is the city planning and zoning commission of Lamesa, Texas.
Containerized housing units (CHU). Shipping container fabricated into a living quarters.
Council. The council is the city council of Lamesa, Texas.
Depth of lot. The depth of a lot is the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
District. A district is a section of the City of Lamesa for which the regulations governing the areas, heights or
uses of buildings or lots are uniform.
Dwelling. A dwelling is a building in which a person or persons reside.
Dwelling, multiple. A multiple dwelling is a building having accommodations for three (3) or more families
living independently of each other.
Dwelling, single-family. A single-family dwelling is a detached building having accommodations for only one
family.
Dwelling, two-family. A two-family dwelling is a detached building having separate accommodations for only
two (2) families.
Family. A family is one person living alone or a group of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
occupying a living unit as an individual housekeeping organization.
Floor area. The square feet of all floor space within the outside line of walls and including the total of all space
on all floors of a building. It does not include porches, garages, or space in a basement or cellar not used for
dwelling purposes.
Garage, private. A private garage is a building with a capacity for not more than five (5) motor-driven vehicles
for private storage only.
Garage, public. A public garage is a building used for housing motor-driven vehicles while vehicles are repaired
for operation, or kept for pay, hire or sale.
Garage, storage. A storage garage is a building except those defined as a private or public garage, used for the
storage of automobiles.
Height. Height is the vertical distance between the established grade line at the street lot line and the highest
point of the roof's surface if a flat surface, to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level
between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roofs. If there is not an established grade line at the street lot line,
then the measurement is taken from the average natural ground level. In measuring the height of a building, the
following structures are excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, tanks, water towers, radio and
TV towers, ornamental cupolas, domes, spires, signs and parapet walls.
Home occupation. A home occupation is an accessory use of a dwelling unit, conducted entirely within the
dwelling unit or in an accessory building on the premises, carried on by one or more persons, all of whom reside
within the dwelling unit, and where no persons are employed other than resident or domestic help, provided that:
(1) The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes
and does not change the character thereof or adversely affect the uses permitted in the residential
district of which it is a part;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/420
(2) There shall be no outside storage of any kind; and that any indoor storage, construction,
alterations, or electrical or mechanical equipment used shall not change the fire rating of the
structure;
(3) The use may increase vehicular traffic flow and parking by no more than one additional vehicle
at any one time, and shall not involve the use of more than one commercial vehicle for delivery of
materials to or from the premises, or the parking of same on or adjacent to the property;
(4) No more than one room or twenty-five (25) percent of the gross area of one floor of said
residence, whichever is less, shall be used for such purpose. Use of accessory buildings for these
purposes is prohibited, except for storage. Such accessory storage buildings shall be limited to one
structure of no more than 120 square feet in area;
(5) No use shall create noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire
hazard, or any other hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than that usually
experienced in an average residential occupancy in the district in question under normal
circumstances wherein no home occupation exists; and
(6) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, either by the
use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one sign, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, non-illuminated, and
mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; and
(7) No stock in trade shall be displayed where it is visible from outside of the premises.
(8) The following occupations may be conditionally considered as home occupations:
(A) Auto repair as a home occupation; provided that:
(i) No accessory buildings may be constructed which would be contrary to the
provisions of this code;
(ii) No more than one automobile be repaired on the site at any one time;
(iii) Such repair work must be confined to an enclosed garage or a driveway;
(iv) Such repair work must be confined to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
and
(v) All other provisions governing home occupations be complied with.
(B) Home beauty shop, where one or more members of a family engage in the business
practice or the trade of hair dressing or cosmetology under a license issued by the state, within a
residential dwelling; provided that:
(i) The home beauty shop comply with the provisions governing customary home
occupations, except that such building modifications may be made to comply with the
requirements of state law;
(ii) In relation to the services rendered as a home beauty shop no more than one
operator's chair, three (3) dryers and one sink be utilized and installed within the area of
the residential dwelling devoted to this purpose; and
(iii) All provisions of state law governing the layout and equipment of such an
establishment shall be complied with.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/420
(C) Day nurseries or babysitting facilities, unlicensed or licensed by the state, provided that
the residence is owner occupied and providing care for not more than six (6) children under 14
years of age for less than 24 hours a day, and that no one from outside the home is employed,
and that all other provisions governing customary home occupations are complied with.
(D) Foster home, provided that the residence is owner occupied and not more than six (6)
children are kept at any one time.
Hotel. A hotel is a building used for temporary occupancy by persons traveling in which the parking is not in
close proximity to the rooms.
Interior court. An interior court is a space which is uncovered but which is partly or wholly enclosed by
buildings or walls.
Living unit. A living unit is a room or rooms occupied by a family and includes a kitchen, toilet, and bath
facilities.
Lodging house. A lodging house is a building in which a room may be rented for permanent occupancy but
which has no facilities for cooking meals.
Lot. A lot is a parcel of property as is shown on recorded plats or a legal description describing a particular
parcel of land within the city.
Lot, corner. A corner lot is a lot situated at the junction of two (2) or more streets.
Lot lines. A lot line is the line bounding a lot.
Manufactured building. A structure, building assembly or system of subassemblies manufactured for installation
or erection as a finished building or as part of a finished building, which shall include, residential, commercial,
institutional, storage, and industrial structures. The term includes buildings not intended for human habitation
such as lawn storage buildings and storage sheds manufactured and assembled off site.
Manufactured home, trailer or mobile home. A manufactured home or mobile home within the meaning of this
article and the code adopted hereby shall be the same as defined in article 3.06 of this code relating to
manufactured home standards.
Modular home. A sectionalized prefabricated building or house consisting of one or more sections or modules,
constructed off site and delivered for installation.
Motel. A motel is a building or group of buildings with three (3) or more quarters to be used for temporary
occupancy by persons traveling by automobiles and have accommodations for parking the automobiles in close
proximity to the quarters occupied by the owner of the automobile.
Nonconforming use. A nonconforming use exists when a building is occupied by or devoted to a use that does
not conform to the regulations of the use district in which it is situated.
Office building. An office building is a building designed for the office of professional, commercial, industrial,
religious, public or semi-public uses or organizations provided that no goods, wares or merchandise are prepared
or sold on the premises.
Parking space. A parking space is an area on a lot sufficient in size to store one automobile (not less than nine
(9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long) connected to a public street or alley by a driveway not less than ten (10)
feet wide and so arranged as to permit ingress and egress of the automobile at all times without moving any
other automobile parked adjacent to the parking space.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/420
Person. A person includes but is not limited to any natural person, partnership, corporation, organization,
association and any legal entity capable of owning or using land. A person includes both the male and female
genders and includes both the singular and plural number.
Place. A place is an open unoccupied space reserved for purposes of access to abutting property.
Private club. A private club is a group of individuals, consisting of at least three (3), who have associated
themselves together by agreement or organization, for the purpose of carrying on some lawful endeavor. The
ultimate control of the private club must be in its members, with each member having an equal vote; a private
club shall also mean any club, whether registered with the State of Texas or not, with a membership of one or
more persons that stores, possesses, or mixes on the club premises any alcoholic beverage and/or serves for onpremises
consumption alcoholic beverages by the drink in sealed, unsealed or broken containers.
Public building. A public building is a building owned or used exclusively by the city, county, state or federal
governments.
Rental storage or mini-warehouse rental units, including recreational vehicle and boat storage units. A structure
or structures not to exceed twenty-five feet (25') in height, intended or used for rental to the public for the
storage of nonhazardous personal property; and complying with the following provisions:
(1) Outside storage of any type shall be prohibited, except:
(A) For recreational vehicles and boats; and
(B) That all outside storage areas shall be behind a screening fence on all sides of the area six
(6) feet in height; property shall not be stored to exceed the height of the screening fence; all
storage areas and fencing shall conform with all applicable setback distances for the real estate;
and
(2) No person shall occupy or use any recreational vehicle or boat stored on the premises as living
or sleeping quarters; and
(3) When any such proposed use is adjacent to any residentially zoned district, on either side or to
the rear, even if separated by a street or alley, the following conditions shall apply:
(A) A six (6) foot solid screening fence shall be installed and permanently maintained. A
solid wall of a building shall constitute adequate screening;
(B) The maximum building height shall not exceed that of adjacent residential buildings; and
(C) The minimum front yard and side yard building setbacks shall conform to existing
residential buildings in the block and shall otherwise conform to the setback requirements for
zone R-1.
Stable, private. A private stable is a stable with a capacity less than four (4) horses, mules or other domestic
animals.
Stable, public. A public stable is a stable with a capacity for four (4) or more horses, mules or other domestic
animals.
Story. A story is the portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next
above or the space between the floor and the ceiling.
Story, half. A half story is an attic under a gabled or hipped roof with wall plates not more than two (2) feet
above the finished floor of the attic.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/420
Street. A street is a public thoroughfare more than twenty (20) feet wide.
Structural alteration. A structural alteration is any change in the supporting members of a building, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
Structure. A structure is anything which is constructed, including but not limited to, any building, tower,
concrete work or post.
Trailer, camping. A camping trailer is a living unit built and fabricated as a mobile home, but not designed for
long-term occupancy, and less than thirty-five (35) feet in length and ten (10) feet in width.
Yard. A yard is an open space on the same lot as a building; unoccupied and unobstructed by a structure. Yard
width or depth is the shortest horizontal distance from a lot line to the main building.
(1) Front yard. The area from one side lot line to the other side lot line and between the main
building and the street on which the lot fronts. On corner lots, the front yard faces the shortest street
dimension of the lot except that if the lot is square or almost square, i.e. has dimensions in a ratio of
from 3.2 to 3.3 then the front yard may face either street.
(2) Rear yard. The rear yard is the area from one side lot line to the other side lot line and from the
main building to the rear lot line. The rear yard is on the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
(3) Side yard. The area from the front yard line to the rear yard line and from the main building to
a side lot line is called the side yard.
Sec. 14.03.003 Building inspector's duties
The building inspector shall administer and enforce this article.
Sec. 14.03.004 Zoning map
Boundaries of the districts referred to in section 14.03.051 of this article are established and adopted as shown
on the attached map. This map is the “zoning map,” and the zoning map and all notations, references, and
information thereon are part of this article.
(1) Zoning map filed. The city secretary shall keep on file in his office an original zoning map
showing all the changes, amendments or additions. The building inspector shall keep in his office
duplicate copies of the zoning map showing all the changes, amendments or additions.
(2) Determining boundaries. If definite distances in feet are not shown on the zoning map, and if
the exact location of the district boundary lines are not certain, but it is intended that the district
boundary lines were to be along existing street, alley or platted lot lines, the building inspector may
determine the location of the district boundaries. If any streets and alleys on the ground differ from
the streets and alleys shown on the zoning map, the building inspector may apply the district
designations on the map to the streets or alleys on the ground in a manner as to conform to the intent
and purposes of this article.
(3) Vacated streets or alleys. If any street is vacated, the particular zoning applying to the property
abutting on that street or alley is extended to the centerline of the vacated street or alley.
(Ordinance O-01-15 adopted 1/20/15)
Sec. 14.03.005 Penalties for violations
(a) Violation is misdemeanor. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor. A person upon conviction shall be fined in a sum not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/420
Each day the violation is continued, or is allowed to continue to exist is a separate offense.
(b) Violators. The owner or owners of any building or property or part thereof where any thing in violation of
this article shall be placed or shall exist, any architect, builder, contractor, agent, attorney, person, firm or
corporation employed in connection therewith and who have assisted in the commission of the violation, are
guilty of a separate offense, and on conviction thereof, they shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(c) Other corrective measures. The building inspector may also, in case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used
in violation of this ordinance, institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use to restrain, correct, or abate the violation, to
prevent the illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the premises.
(1998 Code, sec. 23.005)
Sec. 14.03.006 Savings clause
(a) Effect of invalidity. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this article is adjudged
by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, that invalidity shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder of this article.
(b) Effect on pending cases. The provisions of this article do not apply to cases pending in the courts of this
state at the time this article becomes effective.
(1998 Code, sec. 23.006)
Secs. 14.03.007–14.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Districts
Sec. 14.03.051 Zoning districts
(a) Division into districts. In order to restrict and regulate the different land uses the city is divided into
different classes of districts designations as:
“R-1” District: Single-family residences, garden homes
“R-2” District: Two-family residence (duplex)
“R-3” District: Apartment district, multifamily dwellings
“M-1” Manufactured home district
“M-2” Manufactured home park, recreational vehicle park
“C-1” Local retail district
“I-1” Light industry district
“I-2” Heavy industry district
(Ordinance O-01-15 adopted 1/20/15)
“PD” Planned development district (Ordinance O-1-18, sec. 3, adopted 2/20/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/420
(b) Use of land. A person may use the land or building in each of the above classified districts in the city only
for the purposes described. Any other use of land or building in district or districts is unlawful and in violation of
this article. A person may not erect, reconstruct, enlarge, structurally alter or move a building or structure unless
it conforms to the regulations for the district in which the building or structure is located.
(c) Zoning map. The boundaries of each district are shown upon the map, which accompanies (on file in
secretary's office) and is made a part of this article and is designated as the “zoning map.” The zoning map and
all markings, notations, references and other information shown on the zoning map are part of this article.
(d) One building on one lot. If a person erects, enlarges or structurally alters a building, he may locate no
more than one main building on one lot, except as may be otherwise provided by this article.
(e) Annexed property. All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Lamesa is subject to the restrictions of an
R-1 District until otherwise changed by an amendment to the article.
Sec. 14.03.052 Regulations for “R-1” districts
In the “R-1” district, there may be any of the following:
(1) One-family dwellings.
(2) Garden homes.
(3) Public parks, playgrounds, etc.
(4) Customary home occupations (with specific use permit).
(5) Churches.
(6) Public schools and educational institutions.
(7) Accessory buildings (garages, storage buildings, servant's quarters).
(8) Boarding or lodging houses. May include:
(A) A foster care type residential facility as defined in section 242.002(6) of the Health and
Safety Code that:
(i) Provides room and board to fewer than five persons who:
a. Are not related within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity to the
proprietor; and
b. Because of their physical or mental limitations, or both, require a level of care
and service suitable to their needs that contributes to their health, comfort and
welfare; and
(ii) Is not required to be licensed by the state[.]
(B) An establishment that furnishes, in addition to food, shelter, and laundry, only baths and
massages and is not required to be licensed by the state.
(9) Fire stations, police stations, pumping stations, lake, water supply reservoir, filter bed, water
tank, tower, or bridges.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/420
(10) Electrical facilities and electrical energy facilities, transformers, relay and substations, poles,
wires, and electrical transmission and distribution appurtenances, but not including office buildings
or storage facilities.
Sec. 14.03.053 Regulations for “R-2” districts
In the “R-2” district, there may also be:
(1) Two-family dwellings (duplexes).
(2) Nonprofit religious, educational institutions.
(3) Clubs, lodges, and fraternities, where the chief activity is not a business.
(4) Accessory buildings incidental to above uses.
Sec. 14.03.054 Regulations for “R-3” districts
In the “R-3” district, there may also be:
(1) Apartment houses.
(2) Multifamily dwellings.
(3) Hospitals and clinics (other than hospitals and clinics of a veterinarian).
(4) Libraries and museums.
(5) Mortuary.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Nursing homes. May include:
(A) A convalescent and nursing home institution as defined in section 242.002 of the Health
and Safety Code.
(B) A continuing care facility as defined in section 246.002 of the Health and Safety Code.
(C) A personal care facility as defined in section 247.002 of the Health and Safety Code.
(D) A special care facility as defined in section 248.002 of the Health and Safety Code.
(8) Accessory buildings incidental to the above uses.
Sec. 14.03.055 Regulations for “M-1” district
In the M-1 district there may also be:
(1) HUD code manufactured homes.
(2) Manufactured homes.
(3) Mobile homes.
(4) Containerized housing units.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/420
(5) Modular homes.
(6) Manufactured buildings.
(7) Accessory buildings incidental to the above uses.
Sec. 14.03.056 Regulations for “M-2” district
In the “M-2” district there may also be:
(1) Manufactured home parks.
(2) Mobile home parks.
(3) Recreational vehicle parks.
(4) Accessory buildings incidental to the above uses.
Sec. 14.03.057 Regulations for “C-1” district
In the “C-1” district there may also be:
(1) Auto sales–repair.
(2) Auto service station–minor repairs.
(3) Bank.
(4) Barber shop–beauty shop.
(5) Bakeries–bottling works.
(6) Beer and liquor sales (when legal).
(7) Bowling alley.
(8) Business or commercial school–dancing or music studio.
(9) Building materials–storage.
(10) Bus station.
(11) Cleaning-pressing shop.
(12) Cemetery.
(13) Children's nursery or kindergarten; including a day-care center and a group day-care home as
defined by law.
(14) Catering establishment.
(15) Cold storage plant.
(16) Drugstore.
(17) Dry goods store.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/420
(18) Dentist.
(19) Department stores.
(20) Electric shop.
(21) Florist shop.
(22) Feed store–no manufacturing.
(23) Fabric shop.
(24) Farm equipment.
(25) Furniture dealer.
(26) Grocery store.
(27) Garage storage and repair.
(28) Gift shop.
(29) Glass shop–plate, window, auto, etc.
(30) Hotels and motels.
(31) Hardware stores.
(32) Insurance agents.
(33) Irrigation system and equipment.
(34) Jewelers.
(35) Laundry–dry cleaning.
(36) Locker plants.
(37) Lumberyards.
(38) Monument sales.
(39) Music dealers.
(40) Office buildings.
(41) Office supplies.
(42) Optometrist.
(43) Paint store.
(44) Pet shop.
(45) Photography studio.
(46) Plumbing shop.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/420
(47) Printing shop.
(48) Restaurant, cafe.
(49) Retail store.
(50) Retail ice.
(51) Studio–artist, dancing, music.
(52) Sales–showroom.
(53) Shoe repair shop.
(54) Secondhand store (entirely inside building).
(55) Theaters–no drive-in.
(56) TV-radio sales and repair shop–TV cable company.
(57) Tire sales and repair shop.
(58) Trailer sales and service.
(59) Taxicabs.
(60) Telegraph.
(61) Telephone company.
(62) Trading stamp company.
(63) Used auto sales.
(64) Upholsterers.
(65) Variety stores.
(66) Washateria and self-serve laundry.
(67) Welding equipment (sales).
(68) Wrecker service as defined in section 4.08.001 of this code.
(69) Cabinet or carpenter shop.
(70) Contractors - plant and storage.
(71) Sales, repair, and fabrication of gin fans and processing equipment for agricultural products.
(72) Renal storage or mini-warehouse rental units, including recreational vehicles and boat storage
units.
Sec. 14.03.058 Regulations for “I-1” districts
In the “I-1” district, there may also be:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/420
(1) Ice manufacture.
(2) Sash and door manufacture.
(3) Storage warehouses.
(4) Wholesale houses.
(5) Clothing manufacture.
(6) Hatchery.
(7) Public kennel.
(8) Mattress manufacture.
(9) Prefab house manufacture.
(10) Produce market.
(11) Roofing manufacturing shop.
(12) Drive-in theaters.
Sec. 14.03.059 Regulations for “I-2” districts–Additional uses permitted
In the “I-2” district, there may also be:
(1) Blacksmith shop.
(2) Machine shop.
(3) Planning mill.
(4) Welding shop.
(5) Asphalt storage.
(6) Brick-tile manufacture.
(7) Canning plant.
(8) Central mix plant–concrete or paving materials.
(9) Concrete block plant.
(10) Cheese manufacture.
(11) Coal yard.
(12) Cotton gins.
(13) Cotton storage.
(14) Dairy products manufacture.
(15) Disinfectants and insecticide manufacture and storage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/420
(16) Freight terminal.
(17) Grain elevator.
(18) Livestock loading pens.
(19) Monument manufacture.
(20) Oil reclamation plant.
(21) Oil well equipment service and supplies.
(22) Pharmaceutical manufacture.
(23) Petroleum-bulk storage.
(24) Paper products manufacture.
(25) Railroad shops.
(26) Steel prefab and storage.
(27) Vegetable packing plant.
(28) Warehouse–cotton.
(29) Fertilizer–storage and blending.
Sec. 14.03.060 Same–Prohibited uses; uses for which approval required
(a) Regulations. In the “I-2” district, there may be any use except:
(1) Building for residential use and mobile homes, and manufactured homes except quarters for
caretakers and similar personnel;
(2) Junkyards, salvage and scrap operations, and automobile wrecking yards as defined in section
396.001(1) of the Texas Transportation Code, not surrounded by a solid fence at least six feet high
located within building lines.
(b) Approval required. A person shall obtain separate council approval before a building or occupancy permit
is issued for:
(1) Acid manufacture.
(2) Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacturing.
(3) Distillation of bone.
(4) Explosives manufacturing or storage.
(5) Fat rendering.
(6) Fertilizer manufacturing.
(7) Gas manufacturing.
(8) Garbage, offal, or dead animals, reductions or dumping.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/420
(9) Glue manufacturing.
(10) Petroleum, or its products, refining.
(11) Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores.
(12) Stockyards or slaughter of animals.
(c) Inspection. Before granting separate approval, the council shall refer applications to the chief of the fire
department and the commission for study and investigation, and report within thirty (30) days to the council.
Secs. 14.03.061–14.03.100 Reserved
Division 3. General Requirements
Sec. 14.03.101 Manufactured and mobile homes located by special permit
(a) Location in residential zones. A person may locate a manufactured home or a mobile home in the “M-1”
district as prescribed by the planning and zoning commission after obtaining a permit from the building
inspector.
(b) Permit requirements. A person locating a manufactured home or a mobile home in an “M-1” district may
obtain a permit from the building inspector as required in section 3.06.006, allowing the installation of
manufactured housing, providing the conditions are met as follows:
(1) The lot for the occupancy of a single manufactured home or a mobile home unit provides an
area not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet and width not less than fifty (50) feet.
(2) Only one manufactured home or a mobile home unit be placed on the lot as the primary
building.
(3) The owner of the manufactured home or a mobile home shall comply with state, county, and
city sanitation regulations.
(4) Comply with “M-1” regulations.
Sec. 14.03.102 Nonconforming uses
(a) Existing use. Any person making lawful use of land existing at the time of the passage of this article,
although the usage does not conform to the provisions of this article.
(b) Destruction of a building. If a building is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or other casualty, a
person may rebuild only under the provisions of this article, with the following exceptions:
(1) A residence may be rebuilt on a remaining foundation and attached to remaining utilities
without regard to section 14.03.104, yard regulations.
(2) A building in the “C-1” district may be rebuilt after destruction without regard to section
14.03.105, parking.
(3) If a building is not destroyed more than sixty percent (60%), a person may reconstruct the
building, and the person may use the building for the purposes which existed at the time of the
destruction.
(c) Buildings under construction. No person shall be required to change any plans, construction or designated
use of a building actually under construction at the time of the passage of this article if the entire building will be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/420
completed within one year from the day of passage of this article. No person shall be required to change any
plan, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued and the entire
building will be completed within six (6) months of the day of passage of this article in the boundary of a
district.
Sec. 14.03.103 Building heights
Maximum building heights are as set forth in table 1:
Table 1. Table Showing Maximum Building Heights
Zoning District “R-1” “R-2”“M-
1”
“R-3” “M-2” “C-1” “I-1” “I-2”
Building height
maximum
25 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft. 35 ft.
Sec. 14.03.104 Yard regulations
(a) General. Front yard regulations, rear yard regulations, side yard regulations, and lot area regulations are
governed by the distance and areas set forth in table 2:
Table 2. Table Showing Minimum Lot Area, Minimum Front Yard Depth, Minimum Side Yard Distance
Zoning District “R-1” “R-2”
“M-1”
“R-3” “M-2” “C-1” “I-1” “I-2”
Minimum lot area 6,000 sq. ft. 6,000 sq. ft. plus 1,500 sq. ft.
per units in excess of one. *(M-
2 shall conform to minimum
requirements for RVs and
manufactured homes.)
None None None
Front yard depth - minimum (measured
from front of property line or must
conform with existing building in block)
25 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. None None
Side yard
Corner lot (street side) 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft.
Minimum inside distance
(measured from property
line)
5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/420
Side yard - Inside lot minimum distance 5 ft. on each
side
5 ft. on each side 5 ft. on
each side
5 ft. on each
side
5 ft. on
each side
(b) Yards with two front streets. Any person who builds on a lot fronting on two (2) non-intersecting streets
shall provide a front yard on both streets.
(c) Yards on corners. Any person who builds on corner lots in:
(1) “R” or “M” districts shall provide a yard along the street side of the lot of at least fifteen (15)
feet in width, except that in cases of separate tracts which are less than seventy-five (75) feet in
width, twenty percent (20%) of the width of the lot is sufficient, if the usable width of the corner lot
is not less than thirty (30) feet.
(2) “C” and “I” districts shall provide a yard along the side street of the tract which is equal in
width to the depth required for the front yard of the adjacent tract. If the area adjacent to the rear yard
of a corner lot in an “R” district has not developed or the preliminary plat for the area has not been
approved, the person building on the corner lot shall provide a side yard along the side street side of
at least fifteen (15) feet.
(3) “C” and “I” districts that rear upon an “R” district shall provide a ten (10) foot yard along the
side street side.
(d) Mixed requirements.
(1) If a block frontage is divided among districts with different front yard requirements, a person
building in these districts shall provide the deepest frontage yard required for any one of the districts.
(2) If a lot is in a “C” or “I” district and is next to an “R” district, a person who builds on a lot in
the “C” or “I” district shall provide for side or rear yard required in the “R” district.
(3) A person may build more than one commercial or industrial building on a lot in the “C” or “I”
districts if the required yards are maintained around main buildings.
(4) Any person who locates a dwelling, except a hotel, in “C” districts shall provide the yards
required in the “R-2” districts.
(5) A person may build two or more related multifamily, hotel, motel, or institutional buildings on
a lot; provided that:
(A) The required yards be maintained around the group of buildings; and
(B) Buildings that are parallel, or that are within forty-five (45) degrees of being parallel, are
separated by a horizontal distance that is at least equal to one-half (1/2) the height of the highest
building, or fifteen (15) feet, whichever is greater.
(6) A person may repair or remodel parts of existing buildings that violate yard regulations, but
shall not reconstruct or structurally alter existing buildings, except as provided in section 14.03.102.
(7) Any person who builds churches or public buildings in an “R-1” or “R-2” district shall provide
front and rear yards of fifty (50) feet and side yards of twenty-five (25) feet, exclusive of parking
areas.
(e) Usage of yards. Any person required to provide a yard on a lot surrounding a building in “R-1,” “R-2” and
“M-1” districts shall use these yards only for landscaping, walkways, and driveways necessary for access to
parking areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/420
Sec. 14.03.105 Parking
Any person who builds a building in the city shall provide parking as follows:
(1) Dwellings: One parking space for each living unit in the building for “R-1,” “R-2,” and “M-1”
district.
(2) Multiple dwellings and apartments: One and one-half (1-1/2) parking spaces for each living
unit for multiple dwellings and apartments.
(3) Hotels: One parking space for each guest room or suite of the first twenty (20) individual guest
rooms or suites for hotels; one additional parking space for each two (2) guest rooms or suites in
excess of twenty (20) and not exceeding forty (40); one additional parking space for each four (4)
guest rooms or suites in excess of forty (40); plus one additional parking space for each four (4)
patron seats in rooms open to the nonresident public; plus one parking space for each two hundred
(200) square feet of display or ballroom area; plus one parking space per employee.
(4) Motels: One parking space for each bedroom unit for motels, plus one additional parking space
for each four (4) patron seats of facilities open to the nonresident public, plus one parking space for
each two hundred (200) square feet of display area or ballroom area; plus one parking space per
employee.
(5) Lodging houses: One parking space for each two (2) rental rooms for lodging houses.
(6) Places of public assembly: One parking space for each four (4) seats provided for places of
public assembly, including auditoriums and theaters.
(7) Schools: One parking space per classroom, plus three (3) extra parking spaces, for elementary
schools; one parking space per classroom, plus six (6) extra parking spaces, for junior high schools;
one parking space per classroom, plus sixteen (16) extra parking spaces, for senior high schools.
(8) Hospitals: One parking space for each hospital bed, plus one parking space per employee, for
hospitals.
(9) Institutions, clubs, lodges, and public buildings: One parking space for each five hundred (500)
square feet of floor area, plus one parking space per employee, for institutions, clubs, lodges, and
public buildings.
(10) Other uses: One parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor space, plus one
parking space per employee, for all uses except those above specified when located in the “C-1”
district.
(11) Commercial uses in the “I” district: One parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet
of floor space, plus one parking space per employee, for commercial uses in the “I” district.
(12) Manufactured home parks and recreational vehicle parks: One parking space for each site
provided.
Sec. 14.03.106 Private clubs and retail alcoholic beverage sales prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to
(1) Sell or possess for the purpose of selling any alcoholic beverage in any R-1, R-2 or M-1
districts of the city;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/420
(2) Locate, operate or maintain a private club within an R-1, R-2, or M-1 district and no private
club shall ever be located within an R-1, R-2, or M-1 district and no special exception, variance or
special permit shall ever be authorized so as to permit the location of a private club within an R-1, R-
2, or M-1 district;
(3) Sell or possess for purposes of selling any alcoholic beverage within 300 feet of any church or
school located within the city or within 300 feet of any church or school located within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(4) Locate, operate, or maintain a private club within 300 feet of any church or school located
within the city or within 300 feet of any church or school located within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
on conviction shall be assessed a fine not to exceed $200.00. Each separate sale or possession for the purpose of
selling shall be considered a separate violation of this ordinance and each day a person operates or maintains a
private club in violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate offense under this ordinance.
(Ordinance O-01-15 adopted 1/20/15)
State law references–Authority of city to prohibit sale in residential areas, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code; secs. 109.31, 109.32;
sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
Secs. 14.03.107–14.03.150 Reserved
Division 4. Amendments
Sec. 14.03.151 Changes and amendments
(a) Application. Any person desiring a change in the provisions of this article or in the zoning map may make
application for a change to the building inspector. The application shall be upon a form prescribed and furnished
by the building inspector.
(b) Hearing set. The building inspector shall consider the application and shall set a date for a public hearing
on the proposed change.
(c) Fee. If the application is set for public hearing by the zoning commission, the applicant shall pay a fee in
the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) to defray publication costs and administrative expenses incurred in handling
the application.
(d) Notice of commission hearing. The building inspector shall give notice of the date and place of hearing to
be published in a newspaper of general circulation in this city at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing. The
building inspector shall also give written notice of the public hearing to be served upon all owners of property or
to the person rendering the property for city taxes affected by the proposed changes of classification and to all
owners of property or to the person rendering the property for city taxes within two hundred (200) feet of any
property affected within ten (10) days before any hearing is held. The building inspector may serve notice by
depositing it properly addressed and postage paid in the city post office.
(e) Final report to council. The zoning commission shall submit to the city council a final report containing its
recommendations on the proposed changes it approves.
(f) Review by council. If the zoning change is denied by the zoning commission, the applicant may within ten
(10) days after denial of the change by the zoning commission file a request in writing with the city secretary,
requesting that the city council review the acts of the zoning commission. The city council shall conduct a public
hearing upon the final report and may adopt, modify or reject the report.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/420
(g) Notice of final report hearing. Upon receipt of a final report from the zoning commission in which a
change is recommended, the city secretary shall set the hearing on the report before the city council at the
earliest practicable regularly scheduled city council meeting. The city secretary shall give notice of the date and
place of hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in this city at least fifteen (15) days before
the meeting. The city secretary shall give written notice of the public hearing to be served upon all owners of
property or to the person rendering the same for city taxes affected by such proposed change and to all owners of
property or to the persons rendering the same for city taxes located within two hundred (200) feet of any
property affected thereby not less than ten (10) days before the hearing. The city council may serve the written
notice by depositing it properly addressed and postage paid in the city post office.
(1998 Code, sec. 23.051)
Sec. 14.03.152 Approval of specific use permits
(a) Application. Upon application for a zone change, the planning and zoning commission may recommend a
zone change or a specific use permit zone change. An applicant may request a specific use permit at the time of
application and the commission may consider a specific use permit in lieu of a zone change.
(b) Public hearing required. The city council may, after public hearing and proper notice and after
recommendation by the planning and zoning commission containing such requirements and safeguards as are
necessary to protect adjoining property, authorize the specific use of any property in any district.
(c) Site plan. If the use proposed in a specific use permit application will require additional construction or
modifications to the site, a site plan may be required by the building inspector.
(1) Number of copies. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan. The plan and analysis
information shall be on a single sheet; additional sheets may be used for details and perspective
views.
(2) Site plan drawing. The site plan shall be a line drawing clearly describing the project, and shall
include adequate labeling and dimensioning of all fundamental features of the project. An appropriate
title shall identify the project and its nature, and the title shall include the legal description of the
property together with north point and date, and shall be drawn to engineer scale.
(3) Features required. Typical features which shall be included are: property lines; right-of-way for
streets, alleys, and easements; ordinance building lines; building setback lines; curblines; parkways,
sidewalks; driveway openings; buildings and/or structures; open space, the number and size of
parking spaces; street; street names; section lines; building heights in feet and stories; size and height
of signs; garbage collection facilities including necessary easements; service areas; visual screening;
and landscaping.
(4) Time of submittal. The site plan shall be submitted at the time the application for zone change
or specific use permit is made. If a site plan is conditionally approved by the planning and zoning
commission a corrected site plan shall be filed with the city inspector not less than ten (10) days after
the commission's action.
(e) Planning and zoning commission recommendation. Before recommending that a specific use permit for the
premises under consideration be granted, the planning and zoning commission shall determine that such uses are
harmonious with and adaptable to buildings, structures, and uses of abutting property and other property in the
vicinity of the premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations as to requirements for the paving
of streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress to public streets, provisions for drainage, adequate
off-street parking and protective screening and open space.
(f) Permit is an amendment to the zoning ordinance. Every specific use permit granted under these provisions
shall be considered as an amendment to the zoning ordinance as applicable to such property under consideration.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/420
In granting such permit, the city council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the owner or
grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the city inspector for the use of the building on such
property pursuant to such specific use permit; such conditions shall not be construed as conditions precedent to
the granting of a specific use permit, or the change in zoning of such property, but shall be construed as
conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy.
(g) Agreement in writing. No specific use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner and grantee of
the specific use permit shall in writing accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the terms of the
specific use permit, in such form as may be approved and provided by the city zoning commission.
(h) Building permit. A building permit shall be applied for and secured within twenty-four (24) months from
the time of granting of the specific use permit.
(i) Board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse, or modify
any decision, determination, or ruling with respect to the granting, extension, revocation, modification or any
other action taken relating to such specific use permits.
(j) Zoning map. When the city council authorizes granting of a specific use permit, the zoning map shall be
amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditions and limited uses.
(k) Suit for abatement. Suit for abatement of any violation may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction
in Dawson County, Texas.
(1998 Code, sec. 23.052)
Sec. 14.03.153 Appeals and variances
Any person desiring a special exception or aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the
municipality [or] affected by any zoning decision of an administrative officer may make an appeal to the board
of adjustment as provided in section 14.02.006 of this code. (1998 Code, sec. 23.053)
Secs. 14.03.154–14.03.200 Reserved
Division 5. Wind Energy Systems
Sec. 14.03.201 Purpose
The purpose of the City of Lamesa's wind energy systems regulation is to promote the safe, effective, and
efficient use of wind energy systems installed for on-site production and personal consumption of electricity.
(Ordinance O-08-08, sec. 1 (A), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 14.03.202 Definitions
ANSI. The American National Standards Institute. ANSI coordinates the development of voluntary consensus
standards in the United States. The institute oversees the creation, promulgation, and use of thousands of norms
and guidelines that directly impact homes and businesses in nearly every sector.
Certificate of operation. A document that is issued by the city [that] authorizes the applicant to operate a wind
energy system.
dB(A). The sound pressure level in decibels. The (A) refers to the weighted response scale as defined by ANSI
and designed as a method for weighting the frequency spectrum to mimic the human ear.
dB(x). The sound pressure level in decibels with a flat response from 10 Hz to 10,000 Hz. It is intended to
measure those sounds outside of the dB(A) weighting scale that are still considered annoying to the resident, the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/420
community, or the potential safety of nearby residents. See table B-1 below.
Decibel. The sound intensity I expressed in decibels above the standard threshold of hearing (TOH) I0. The
expression is
and is used to express the magnitude or relative change in sound pressure and/or sound intensity referenced to an
ambient or some baseline level.
A 3 dB change is a 2X (2 times) change in audio level.
A 6 dB change is a 4X (4 times) change in audio level.
A 9 dB change is an 8X (8 times) change in audio level.
A10 dB change is a 10X (10 times) change in audio level.
A 20 dB change is a 100X (100 times) change in audio level.
Generator or alternator. Usually but not limited to an electromechanical device sized for specific use and used
for the production of electricity. See Turbine.
Inspection. A regular and/or periodic assessment of the wind energy system for the purpose of code compliance,
operation and safety.
Kilowatt-hour. The kilowatt-hour (symbolized kWh) is a unit of energy equivalent to one kilowatt (1 kW) of
power expended for one hour (1 h) of time.
Sound pressure. The amplitude of the sound energy when transmitted through a unit area in a specified direction.
The pressure of the sound can be measured using a receiver device such as a sound pressure meter.
Sound pressure level. The sound pressure mapped to a logarithmic scale with reference to noises typically found
within a community, and reported in decibels (dB). See table B-2 below.
Threshold of hearing or TOH. The lowest audible signal perceptible by a person without the use of mechanical
or electrical devices.
Tower height. The sum of the height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower or structure or supporting
method used to support the turbine, plus, the maximum vertical height of the wind turbine blades, casings, or
vane, whichever is higher.
Turbine. All the integral parts of a wind energy system used for the production of electricity, including the
blades, generator or alternator, casings, governors, and vane.
Type 1 - Residential wind energy system. A wind energy conversion system that converts wind energy into
electricity through the use of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics having a
rated capacity of not more than that specified in table E-1.
Type 2 - Commercial wind energy systems. Designed to generate more electricity than permitted in table E-1 or
what is necessary for on-site consumption by the consumer.
Utility grid wind energy system. A wind energy system that was designed, built and certified to transmit excess
electricity back to the electric utility grid.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/420
Watt-hour. The watt-hour (symbolized Wh) is a unit of energy equivalent to one watt (1 W) of power expended
for one hour (1 h) of time. The power consumption of energy in homes and businesses is usually measured in
kilowatt-hours. Each 1000 watt-hours of energy consumed is equal to one kilowatt-hour.
Table B-1. Sound Pressure Levels Relative to dB(x) Flat Response
Example Noise Source Intensity Intensity Level # of Times Greater
Than TOH
Threshold of hearing (TOH) 1*10-12 W/m2 0 dB 100
Rustling leaves 1*10-11 W/m2 10 dB 101
Whisper 1*10-10 W/m2 20 dB 102
Mosquito buzzing 1*10-8 W/m2 40 dB 104
Normal conversation 1*10-6 W/m2 60 dB 106
Busy street traffic 1*10-5 W/m2 70 dB 107
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/420
Vacuum cleaner 1*10-4 W/m2 80 dB 108
Large orchestra 6.3*10-3 W/m2 98 dB 109.8
Walkman at maximum level 1*10-2 W/m2 100 dB 1010
Front rows of rock concert 1*10-1 W/m2 110 dB 1011
Threshold of pain 1*101 W/m2 130 dB 1013
Example Noise Source Intensity Intensity Level # of Times Greater
Than TOH
Military jet takeoff 1*102 W/m2 140 dB 1014
Instant perforation of
eardrum
1*104 W/m2 160 dB 1016
(Ordinance O-08-08, sec. 1 (B), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 14.03.203 Specific use permit
(a) Type 1 residential wind energy systems may be permitted by specific use permit in all zoning
classifications where residential structures are permitted, subject to the recommendations and regulations set
forth in section 14.03.204. The procedures for consideration of an application for a specific use permit may be as
specified in section 14.03.151 [14.03.152] of the city's zoning ordinance.
(b) Type 2 commercial grid wind energy systems may be permitted by specific use permit in all commercial
and industrial zoning classifications where residential structures of any sort are not allowed. The procedures for
consideration of an application for a specific use permit may be as specified in section 14.03.151 [14.03.152] of
the city's zoning ordinance.
(Ordinance O-08-08, sec. 1 (C), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 14.03.204 General regulations and requirements
The following general regulations apply to all wind energy systems located within any zoning district. Preexisting
wind energy systems lawfully in existence at the time of the enactment of this division shall be required
to meet the requirements established herein should any part of the pre-existing system require replacement.
(1) Wind energy systems. “Type 1” systems may be permitted within residentially zoned areas of
the city. “Type 2” systems may be permitted in commercial or industrial zoned areas of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/420
(2) Specific use permit required. A specific use permit must be obtained prior to the construction
or installation of a wind energy system. An application for specific use permit must be accompanied
by:
(A) The appropriate permit fee as established in the City of Lamesa Code of Ordinances,
section 3.03.054(b), Construction permit fee.
(B) A legal notice and publication fee of $250.00.
(C) A site plan of the proposed wind energy system at a scale of 1" = 30'. The site plan
should be on a single 8.5" x 11" sheet and include:
(i) A legal description of the property where the wind energy system is proposed;
(ii) Site location must not be less than 0.5 acre per wind energy system unit.
(iii) A site plan view layout of the proposed wind energy system clearly showing:
a. The proposed location of the system.
b. All components of the system including:
1. Generation capability.
2. Tower rating.
3. Wind and ice loading ratings.
4. Underwriters' Laboratory Listing.
5. National Electrical Code compliant.
6. Lightning arrestor or protection methods.
7. Man traps.
8. Kill switches.
9. Manufacturer's specifications for the system and the recommended
application for same.
10. Site plan.
A. Distances to property lines as measured from the base of the tower.
B. Required setbacks and easements.
C. Easement authorizations as required.
D. Adjacent land uses and zoning designations.
E. Existing structures on the site.
F. Natural features such as watercourses and trees.
(D) Elevation drawings showing:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/420
(i) The design and height of the proposed wind energy system.
(ii) Detailed drawings of all system components.
(iii) Concept for screening or required landscaping of the base of the tower or support
structure.
(E) A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in sufficient detail to allow for
a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National Electrical Code. Note
that manufacturer's claims may be insufficient and additional compliance data or material may
be requested at the discretion of the city.
(F) Standard installation drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base,
and footings. Note that manufacturer's claims may be insufficient and additional compliance
data or material may be requested at the discretion of the city.
(G) Evidence of notice to utility company as required by subsection (12) below.
(H) Proof of insurance coverage as required in subsection (14) below.
(3) Construction Standards. The wind energy system must be designed and installed according to
the manufacturer's recommendations that cover the range of winds and ice loads for this region.
Additionally, all components, structures, and constituents of the wind energy system shall comply
with applicable state and local building codes and the current edition of the National Electrical Code.
(4) Maximum height. The tower or supporting structure shall comply with the following:
(A) The maximum height shall not exceed the distance between the base of the tower and 1:1
aspect ratio from all property lines, setbacks, easements, and commercial power lines.
Specifically the tower or structure shall be set back at least 1 foot for each foot in height of the
tower structure.
(B) Additionally, no tower height shall exceed the tower height recommended by the
manufacturer or the distributor of the wind energy system.
(5) Location and setback. The tower structure of a wind energy system must be at least 30 feet
from any primary structure and may be no closer to the property line than the highest point of the
system, including the maximum height of any blades when attached thereto. No part of the wind
energy system, including blades or guy wire anchors, may extend closer than 10 feet to property line
or within any required yard setback.
(6) Primary structure required on lot. A wind energy system may be erected on a lot, not less than
one half (1/2) acre, only after a primary structure has been constructed on the lot. A wind energy
system may not be constructed on a vacant lot. If an occupied primary structure is removed from a lot
or property, a wind energy system must be removed from said property if a replacement primary
structure is not completed within a period of twelve (12) months. In any case, once a primary
structure is removed or deemed to be a health hazard by the city inspector an approved wind energy
system must cease operation except to provide power necessary for the construction of a replacement
primary structure.
(7) Sound pressure levels. Sound pressure levels shall not exceed 60 decibels (dBA) as measured
from any offending property line (usually from a point downwind).
(8) Lights. All lighting not required by the FAA is prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/420
(A) When obstruction lighting is required by the FAA, such lighting shall not exceed the
minimum requirements of said agency.
(B) A tower structure may be artificially lighted only with steady-burning red obstruction
lights (FAA type L-810) or flashing red obstruction lights (FAA type L-864) flashing no faster
than 20 flashes per minute.
(C) Flashing red obstruction lights (FAA type L-864) flashing faster than 20 flashes per
minute, medium intensity flashing white obstruction lights (FAA type L-865 or L-866), high
intensity flashing white lights (FAA type L-856 or L-857) or dual flashing red obstruction lights
and medium intensity flashing white obstruction lights (FAA types L-864/L-865) may be used
only when the FAA specifies that the specific lighting pattern is the only lighting pattern
acceptable to promote aviation safety and refuses applicant's request for authorization to use the
lighting required by the city herein.
(D) Upward lighting, floodlights, seasonal lighting or other lighting not strictly required by
the FAA is prohibited.
(9) Signs. No advertising or other signs shall be allowed on a wind energy system.
(10) Prohibited in easements. No portion of a wind energy system shall be placed in easements
unless authorized by the easement holder.
(11) Screening. A wind energy system shall be screened from view from adjoining properties by
solid fencing or evergreen plants to a height of at least six (6) feet. Screening shall be maintained in a
good condition and landscaping shall be healthy.
(12) Notice to utility company on grid-interconnected systems.
(A) No grid-interconnected wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has been
given that the appropriate utility company has been informed of and has given a written consent
to customer's installation of a grid-connected customer-owned generator.
(B) Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement. No off-grid system may go on
grid without compliance with subsection (12)(A) above.
(13) City building codes/safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of a wind energy
system, the owner of such system must ensure that it is maintained in compliance with all provisions
of the City of Lamesa's building code and zoning regulations. If, upon inspection, the city concludes
that a wind energy system fails to comply with such codes and regulations and/or constitutes a danger
to persons or property, then upon written notice to the owner of the wind energy system:
(A) The owner shall immediately shut down the wind energy system;
(B) The owner shall have thirty (30) calendar days to bring such system into compliance with
applicable standards and request an inspection;
(C) Failure to bring such system into compliance within 30 days shall constitute grounds for
dismissing the certificate of operation. For a fee, the owner shall have up to 60 additional days
to reapply;
(D) After 90 days, failure to bring such system into compliance shall constitute grounds for
the removal of the wind energy system at the owner's expense; and
(E) This notice requirement shall not preclude immediate action by the building official as
allowed by law if public safety requires such action.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/420
(14) Insurance required. Owners of any wind energy system must at all times maintain insurance in
an amount of not less than $500,000.00 liability per turbine device, and insurance that covers loss to
the wind turbine and all other wind energy system components due to wind, hail, or other loss. Proof
of such insurance coverage must be provided to the city at the time application is made for a building
permit. Annually, the city inspector will verify the owner's wind energy system continued liability
insurance coverage as required.
(15) Contained on property. No part of a wind energy system may extend beyond the property
lines or required building lines of the lot on which the wind energy system is located.
(16) State or federal requirements. All wind energy systems must meet or exceed current standards
and regulations of the FAA and any other agency of the state or federal government with the
authority to regulate wind energy systems. If such standards and regulations are changed, and if the
controlling state or federal agency mandates compliance, then the owners of the wind energy system
governed by this division shall bring such wind energy system into compliance with such revised
standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and
regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency.
(17) Maintenance. A wind energy system shall be maintained at all times, including, but not
limited to, mechanical and electrical systems and subsystems, painting, fencing as required in
subsection (11) above, structural integrity, and landscaping.
(18) Removal of unsafe wind energy system. Wind energy systems that have, due to damage, lack
of repair, or other circumstances, become unstable, lean significantly out-of-plumb, or pose a danger
of collapse shall be shut down immediately upon notification from the building official/city inspector.
If the wind energy system is not made safe or removed within 60 days of notification from the city,
the city may remove the wind energy system and place a lien upon the property for the costs of the
removal. However, the city inspector may order immediate action to prevent an imminent threat to
public safety or property.
(19) Abandonment.
(A) At such time as an owner plans to abandon or discontinue, or is required to discontinue,
the operation of a wind energy system, such owner must notify the city by certified U.S. mail of
the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given
no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations.
(B) In the event that an owner fails to give notice of intent, the wind energy system shall be
considered abandoned if not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months.
(C) Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the person who constructed the wind
energy system or the person who operated the wind energy system or the property owner shall
physically remove the wind energy system within 90 days from the date of abandonment or
discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:
(i) Removal of the tower, turbine and all other components of the wind energy system;
and
(ii) Transportation of the tower, turbine and all other components of the wind energy
system to an appropriate disposal site.
(D) The owner of the wind energy system shall pay all site reclamation costs deemed
necessary and reasonable to return the site to its pre-construction condition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/420
(E) If a party as stated in subsection (C) herein fails to remove a wind energy system in
accordance with this section, the city shall have the authority to enter the subject property and
physically remove the “system.” Costs for the removal of the “system” shall be charged to the
landowner of record in the event the city must remove it and the city may place a lien on the
property for such costs of removal.
(F) Failure to remove an abandoned wind energy system as required by this section shall
constitute a violation and be subject to the penalties prescribed herein.
(Ordinance O-08-08, sec. 1 (D), adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 14.03.205 Wind energy system sizing guidelines
(a) A wind energy system should be sized to meet the needs of the resident. A typical home may consume
from 1000 kWh to upwards of 8000 kWh in a month, and is variable with the seasons, dependent on the
construction methods used to build the home, and the consumer's personal demand.
(b) It is recommended that a wind energy system should be sized to meet no more than the average demand of
the applicant. The applicant's power bill or that of a neighbor can be used to baseline the monthly kWh average.
A neighbor's home must be of similar size.
(c) Sizing of the generator's hourly output in kWh is determined by dividing the average monthly
consumption by 720 (720 = 24 hours in a day times 30 days in a month). Proposed systems that are larger than
what is recommended in table E-1 may require consideration beyond a typically sized system. For this reason an
applicant desiring to install a system that has a generation capability greater than 5000 kWh per month requires
pre-approval by the city inspector.
Table E-1. Relative Power Generation Capacity Per Hour for Average Need
Resident Monthly
Average
Consumption in
kWh
Capacity for 50%
of Residential
Average Need
kW
Capacity for 75%
of Residential
Average Need kW
Capacity for
100% of
Residential
Average Need
kW
Capacity for
150% of
Residential
Average Need kW
1000 0.7 1.0 1.4 2.1
2000 1.4 2.1 2.8 4.2
3000 2.1 3.1 4.2 6.2
4000 2.8 4.2 5.5 8.3
5000 3.5 5.2 6.9 10.4
Note: The italicized ratings require pre-review and approval of the city inspector prior to submission.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/420
(Ordinance O-08-08, sec. 1 (E), adopted 8/5/08)
Secs. 14.03.206–14.03.300 Reserved
Division 6. Planned Development Districts
Sec. 14.03.301 Purpose
(a) Purpose. A planned development district (PD district) is a specialized zoning district designed specifically
for certain land developments. PD district are intended to implement generally the goals and objectives of the
city's comprehensive plan but allows for the incorporation of regulations, uses and requirements that may vary
from a single use zoning district. PD districts are intended to be utilized by the city on specific projects to give
developers the flexibility they need for complicated projects while still protecting and encouraging the most
appropriate use of land throughout the city that best promotes the health, safety, morals and general welfare of
its by meeting one or more of the following purposes:
(1) To provide for a superior design of lots or buildings;
(2) To protect or preserve existing historical buildings, structures, features or places;
(3) To provide an appropriate balance between the intensity of development and the ability to
provide adequate supporting public facilities and services;
(4) To provide amenities or features that would be of special benefit to the property users or
community;
(5) To provide for increased recreation and open space opportunities for public use and preserve
natural amenities and environmental assets; and
(6) To meet or exceed the goals and standards of the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance.
(b) PD districts are established by ordinance and not through agreements with individual property owners.
(c) Each PD district shall be a freestanding zoning district in which the land uses, regulations, and
requirements are outlined in an ordinance adopted by the city council and are tailored to fit the physical features
of the site and to achieve compatibility with existing and planned adjacent uses. In the adopting ordinance, the
city council may incorporate minimum standards by making reference to a standard zoning district as provided
for elsewhere in this chapter.
Sec. 14.03.302 Scope
This division applies to all property within the incorporated municipal boundaries of the city.
Sec. 14.03.303 Minimum standards for all PD districts
(a) Ordinance required. Minimum standards proposed for the PD district must be incorporated within an
ordinance adopted by the city council. In the adopting ordinance, the city council may incorporate minimum
standards by making reference to a standard zoning district.
(b) Approval process. The following steps, at a minimum, shall be utilized in reviewing and approving a
request for a PD district:
(1) Pre-application conference with city manager;
(2) Application for PD district filed with city's building official;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/420
(3) Application administratively approved by the city manager;
(4) Zoning amendment process followed in accordance with section 14.03.151;
(5) Council submission following final report from zoning commission; and
(6) Council approval by ordinance.
(c) Base district. A base zoning district will be established for each PD district and, unless otherwise specified
in the ordinance approving the PD district, the PD district shall conform to the standards and regulations of the
base zoning district.
(d) Minimum development size. The minimum allowable size to be eligible for a PD district is five (5) acres.
(e) Height regulations. Unless otherwise provided by the PD ordinance, height regulations for uses shall be
those established within the city's zoning regulations for the base zoning district.
(f) Concept plan. All PD districts shall have a concept plan that serves as the basis for the PD district. The
plan shall depict the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including, without limitation:
(1) Means of ingress and egress;
(2) Utility services;
(3) Structures and buildings;
(4) Landscaping and open spaces;
(5) Thoroughfares, streets and rights-of-way; and
(6) Any other information required by this division.
A concept plan is not required to have an engineer's seal.
(g) Site plan. PD district ordinances shall require an engineered development plan that shows all
improvements on each individual site, parcel, or lot within the PD district. The purpose of a site plan is to assure
that the development of the sites, parcels and lots within the PD district are consistent with the approved concept
plan. The site plan may be in addition to or in conjunction with any subdivision, platting or improvement plan
requirements that may apply to the PD district as determined by the city manager or their designee. No
development shall begin and no building permit shall be issued for any land within a PD district until a site plan
that is substantially consistent with the concept plan has been approved.
Sec. 14.03.304 Preapplication conference
(a) Meeting. Unless the PD district designation is initiated internally by city staff, all parties interested in
applying for a PD district designation shall first contact the city manager and schedule a pre-application
conference. The city manager may include any additional city staff or consultants the city manager deems
necessary in order to evaluate the PD district designation request. The city manager may require additional
meetings with interested parties as part of the application process.
(b) Requirements for meeting. Parties interested in applying for a PD district designation should bring as
much information as necessary to clearly convey the intended use of the property and to reasonably inform the
city manager of the intended use of the property.
(c) City manager designee. While not required, the city manager may designate a primary contact for
interested parties to communicate directly with during the PD district designation approval process. This person
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/420
may be someone on city staff or a consultant for the city. Regardless of whether the city manager designates a
primary contact, the city manager shall be copied on all written communication and documents during the PD
district designation approval process.
(d) Additional information. The city manager or the city manager's designee may require information and data
for specific concept plans. This information data may include but is not limited to: geologic information, water
yields, flood data and hydrological studies, environmental information, traffic impact analysis, road capacities,
market information, historic structure(s) and/or land, economic data for the proposed development, hours of
operation, elevations and perspective drawings, lighting, and similar information.
Sec. 14.03.305 Application requirements for PD district
(a) No application requesting a PD district designation shall be accepted by the city until the following items
have been submitted to the city by the applicant:
(1) A completed city application form as developed by the city manager that shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
(A) The name, resident address, business address, e-mail address, telephone number and
other necessary contact information of the applicant;
(B) The name, resident address, business address, e-mail address, telephone number and
other necessary contact information of the property owner if different than the applicant; and
(C) The name business address, e-mail address, telephone number and other necessary
contact information of any architect, engineer, surveyor and/or developer the applicant is using
to assist the development of the property.
(2) Sufficient information establishing the applicant as the lawful owner of the property subject to
the PD district designation or if the applicant is not the owner of record, a statement from the
property owner giving authorization to the applicant to file the request to amend the zoning to a PD
district;
(3) A legal description of the property under consideration that includes a survey, which also
shows that such property includes the minimum acreage required for a PD district.
(4) A concept plan as required by section 14.03.306;
(5) A designation of the base zoning district for the proposed PD district;
(6) A description of any development standards or requirements that are different from those in the
base zoning district;
(7) A description of any variances from the requirements of this division being requested and basis
for such variance;
(8) A description of how the proposed PD district will continue to meet the listed goals of the city's
comprehensive plan;
(9) A development schedule outlining a timetable for completion of the entire project.
(10) A copy of all proposed deed restrictions, provisions, or covenants which govern the use,
maintenance, and continued protection of the PD district and any of its common areas, if applicable.
(11) The required application fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/420
(b) Applications submitted to city's building official. All applications shall be submitted to the city's building
official or their designee. Any applications that clearly fail to contain any of the items listed above may be
rejected by the city's building official. Any such rejection by the city's building official shall state in writing the
basis for the rejection.
(c) Administrative review of applications. Upon official submission of a complete application for PD district
approval, the city manager and any other member of the city staff or any consultant retained by the city, as
determined by the city manager, shall commence a technical review of the application. The city shall review the
application and shall ascertain its compliance with these and other applicable city regulations. Once approved,
the application shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission. At the city manager's discretion, the
city manager may forward an application to the planning and zoning commission and council with or without a
recommendation.
(d) Official submission date/incomplete applications. For the purpose of this division, the “official submission
date” shall be the date upon which a complete application for approval of a PD district, that contains all elements
and information required by this division, is first submitted to the city manager. No application shall be deemed
officially submitted until the city manager determines that the application is administratively complete and a fee
receipt is issued by the city. Applications which do not include all required information and materials will be
considered incomplete, shall not be accepted for official submission by the city, and shall not be scheduled on a
planning and zoning commission agenda until the proper information is provided to city staff.
Sec. 14.03.306 Concept plan
(a) Required. No PD district may be established without approval of a concept plan. It establishes general
guidelines for the PD district by identifying the proposed land uses and intensities, building locations, building
footprints, and other items listed in section 14.03.303(f). The concept plan, as incorporated in the PD ordinance
and together with the text of the ordinance, establishes the development standards for the PD district. The
concept plan must include enough information to allow the city to plan for infrastructure and to demonstrate that
the plan will be an enhancement to the city, while allowing for flexible and creative planning.
(b) Concept plan components. In addition to any other requirements of this division, the concept plan shall
include, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Detailed description of the PD district. A written detailed description identifying the proposed
land uses and intensities, building locations, building footprints, and other items listed in section
14.03.303(f). This detailed description shall contain the following:
(A) The names of adjacent additions or subdivisions, or the name of the owners of record and
recording information for adjacent parcels of platted or unplatted land, including parcels on the
other sides of roads or rights-of-way;
(B) The existing and proposed uses of the subject property;
(C) A general arrangement of future land uses, including the approximate number of lots and
any residential uses anticipated, and a generalized circulation plan for the subject property;
(D) The existing zoning and existing and proposed uses on adjacent land;
(E) The location, width and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways
within or adjacent to the tract;
(F) Any existing easements with recording information;
(G) Existing buildings; railroad rights-of-way;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/420
(H) Topography, including contours at two-foot intervals with existing drainage channels or
creeks, including the 100-year floodplain, if applicable; any other important natural features
(such as rock outcroppings, wildlife habitats, etc.);
(I) All substantial natural vegetation; and adjacent political subdivisions, corporate limits,
and/or school district boundaries;
(J) The layout and width, including right-of-way lines and curblines, of existing and proposed
thoroughfares, collector streets and/or intersections, and a general configuration of proposed
streets, lots and blocks;
(2) Base zoning designation. A designation of the base zoning district for the proposed PD district;
(3) Development standards. A description of any development standards or requirements that are
different from those in the base zoning district;
(4) Variances. A description of any variances from the requirements of this division being
requested and basis for such variance;
(5) Map. Fully dimensioned map(s) of the proposed PD district;
(6) Informational statement. A general statement setting forth how the proposed PD district will
relate to the city's comprehensive plan;
(7) Total acreage. The total acreage within the proposed PD district;
(8) Development timetable. A timetable for the development of the PD district. If the development
is to occur in phases, a conceptual phasing plan that identifies the currently anticipated general
sequence of development, including the currently anticipated general sequence for installation of
major capital improvements to serve the development; and
(9) Aerial photograph. An aerial photograph with the boundaries of the PD district clearly
delineated.
(10) Other information. Any other information as may be required by the city to allow the city to
make an informed decision on the proposed PD district.
(c) Consistency required. Each PD district shall be developed, used, and maintained in compliance with the
approved concept plan for the PD district. All permit applications and site plan filings within the PD district
shall be consistent with the incorporated concept plan. Failure of a subsequent development application to
conform to the approved concept plan for the PD district shall result in denial of the application.
(d) Conflicts with ordinance. If the concept plan and the ordinance establishing the PD district conflict in any
way, the PD ordinance shall be considered the controlling document.
Sec. 14.03.307 Ordinance establishing PD district
(a) Procedures. The procedures for establishing a PD district shall be as for any other type of zoning change or
amendment as outlined in section 14.03.151 of this chapter.
(b) Concept plan part of ordinance. The ordinance establishing a PD district shall incorporate the approved
concept plan as part of the district regulations.
(c) Governing regulations. Except to the extent provided by the concept plan and the ordinance establishing
the PD district, development within the PD district shall be governed by all of the ordinances, rules, and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/420
regulations of the city in effect at the time of such development, including the standards of the zoning district
identified in the application.
(d) Conflict. In the event of any conflict between the ordinance establishing the PD district and the
ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city in effect at the time of the establishment of the PD district, the
terms, provisions, and intent of the ordinance establishing the PD district shall control.
(e) Concept plan amendments. Concept plans, excluding informational statements, are considered part of the
ordinance establishing the PD district. Any substantive amendment to a concept plan, as determined by the city
manager, shall be considered a zoning change. Nonsubstantive modifications may be approved by the city
manager.
(f) Site plans. Site plans are not considered part of ordinance establishing the PD district.
(h) Lapse of concept plan. A concept plan shall be effective for a period of one year (365 calendar days).
(i) Extension and reinstatement. Extension of a concept plan shall be in accordance with the following:
(1) Prior to the lapse of approval for a concept plan, the applicant may request that the city, in
writing, extend the plan approval. Such request shall be considered at a public meeting before the
planning and zoning commission and the city council, and an extension may be granted by city
council at such meeting. Two (2) extensions of six (6) months each in length may be granted, unless
otherwise specified by ordinance. If no petition for extension of concept plan approval is submitted,
then the plan shall be deemed to have automatically expired by operation of law and shall become
null and void.
(2) Determination of extension. In determining whether to grant a request for extension, the city
council shall take into account the reasons for the lapse, the ability of the applicant to comply with
any conditions attached to the original approval, and the extent to which development regulations
would apply to the concept plan or site plan at that point in time. The planning and zoning
commission and city council shall either extend the concept plan or deny the request, in which
instance the originally approved plan shall be deemed null and void. However, the two (2)
aforementioned extensions shall not be unreasonably withheld without due cause.
(Ordinance O-1-18, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/17)