7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/598
City of Midlothian
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 17
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed advisable to be included as enacted through Ordinance 2019-09
adopted 3/12/19.
HOME-RULE CHARTER*
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION–FORM OF GOVERNMENT–POWERS
Section 1.01. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the City of Midlothian, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the
manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the “City
of Midlothian.”
Section 1.02. Form of Government.
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the “Council-Manager” form of government. Pursuant
to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution and by this Charter all powers of the
City shall be vested in an elective City Council which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and
appoint the City Manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City.
State law reference–Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.021.
Section 1.03. Powers of the City.
The City shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the Constitution and laws of this State, as fully and completely
as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. All such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be
exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by this Charter, and, when not prescribed herein, in such manner as may
be provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council of the City of Midlothian.
The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the
powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City may have and shall exercise all
other powers which, under the Constitution of the State of Texas, it would be competent for the Charter specifically to
enumerate. The City of Midlothian shall have and exercise all the powers conferred upon cities by what is known as the
Home Rule Amendment to the Constitution of the State of Texas and the enabling act and all others laws passed or which
may hereafter be passed by the Legislature in relation to such matters.
The City of Midlothian may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions, and may participate in the financing
thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise with the Government of Texas or any agency thereof, or with the
Federal Government or any agency thereof, or with the government of any county, city, or political subdivision to accomplish
any lawful municipal purpose.
State law references–Powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.S. art. 1175; general powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 51.071 et seq.
Section 1.04. City Limits–Extension of Boundaries.
The City Council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Midlothian and to provide for the
alteration and the extension of said boundary limits, and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the City, with
or without the consent of the owners or inhabitants of the annexed territory subject to the procedures set forth in state law.
State law references–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A, Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.; municipal annexation,
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 43; authority of home-rule municipality to annex area, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
43.021.
Section 1.05. Public Improvements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/598
(a) Streets. The City of Midlothian shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, and over and under
public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the City and may provide for the improvement thereof by paving, repaving,
raising, draining, or otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the general laws of the State of Texas. Such exclusive
dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the City of
Midlothian shall also include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate, locate, remove, or prohibit the location of, all utility
pipes, lines, wires or other property.
(b) Other Improvements. The City of Midlothian shall have the power to provide for the improvement of drainage facilities
and to extend its water and sewer systems and assess a part of the cost of such improvements against abutting property
owners as in the case for street improvements according to the procedures set forth in the general laws of the State of Texas,
and fix a lien to secure the cost of such assessments as therein provided and issue assignable certificates.
State law references–Street improvements and assessments in cities having more than 1,000 inhabitants, V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, ch. 313; authority of municipality over and under public highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.001;
assessment for street improvements, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.091.
ARTICLE II. THE CITY COUNCIL
Section 2.01. Composition of Council.
Except as otherwise provided by the Charter of the City, all powers conferred on the City shall be exercised by a City Council
to be composed of a Mayor and six (6) members, nominated and elected in the manner provided in Article III of this Charter,
unless otherwise prescribed by law. They shall each be elected for a term of three (3) years. The Council members so
elected shall serve until their respective successors shall have been elected and shall have qualified.
State law references–Eligibility for public office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.001 et seq.; age and residence requirements for
home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.003.
Section 2.02. Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem.
The Mayor shall be the official head of City government. He shall be the chairman and preside at all meetings of the Council.
The Mayor may vote on every proposition before the Council but shall have no power of veto. He shall perform duties
consistent with this Charter as may be imposed upon him by the Council.
The Mayor Pro Tem may be elected by the City Council from its membership. The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as Mayor in the
case of the absence or inability of the Mayor to perform the duties of office and in this capacity shall be vested with all of the
powers conferred upon the Mayor.
Section 2.03. Council Qualifications.
The Mayor and each Council member shall have the following qualifications:
(a) Must be a citizen of the United States.
(b) Must be a qualified voter of the State of Texas.
(c) Must have resided at least six (6) months next preceding the election within the corporate limits of the City of
Midlothian.
(d) Must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
(e) Must not be in arrears in payment of taxes or other liabilities due the City of Midlothian.
(f) Must not have been convicted of a felony.
(g) Must not be disqualified by reason of any provision of any other section of this Charter.
State law references–Eligibility for public office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.001 et seq.; age and residence requirements for
home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.003.
Section 2.04. Forfeiture of Office.
The Mayor or any Council member shall forfeit his office if he:
(a) Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by
law;
(b) Violates any express prohibition of this Charter;
(c) Is convicted of a felony; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/598
(d) Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular Council meetings or six (6) Council meetings in any calendar
year without being excused by the Council.
Section 2.05. Council Quorum.
A quorum shall consist of four (4) members, which may include the Mayor, where the number of Council members, including
the Mayor, due to vacancies, is reduced to less than five (5), in which event a quorum shall consist of all the remaining
Council members; but a less number than a quorum may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent
members in such manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
Section 2.06. Council Rules.
The Council shall determine its own rules of procedures, and may punish its members for misconduct, and may compel the
attendance of absent members.
Section 2.07. Vacancies in the City Council; How Filled.
(a) If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or on the City Council on or before one hundred twenty (120) days before a
regular election for City Council, the vacancy shall be filled at a special election for that purpose. At its next regular meeting
after the occurrence of the vacancy, the City Council shall call a special election to be held not less than thirty (30) days nor
more than sixty (60) days after the date of the call. The additional member of the Council provided in this Charter until the
first regular election, shall be provided as per the provisions of Section 15.17 hereof.
(b) If a vacancy occurs subsequent to one hundred twenty (120) days before a regular election for City Council, the
vacancy may be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council until the next regular election, at which
time such vacancy shall be filled by election.
(c) A person elected either at a special election or a regular election to fill a vacancy in the office of Mayor or on the City
Council shall serve only the unexpired term of the Mayor or Council member whose place has been declared vacant, as the
case may be.
(d) If a candidate duly elected either to the office of Mayor or to the City Council at the regular election fails to take the oath
of office on or before ten (10) days after the official canvass of the election, then his place shall be considered a vacancy and
filled as herein provided for other vacancies. In the event such a candidate, elected either to the office of Mayor or to the City
Council at a special election, fails to take the oath of office on or before ten (10) days after the official canvass of the election,
then his place shall be considered a vacancy and filled as herein provided for other vacancies.
Section 2.08. Prohibiting Holding or Running for Other Office.
(a) No person elected to the office of Mayor or to the City Council shall, during the term for which he was elected, be
appointed to any office or position of emolument in the service of the City. If the City Manager, the City Secretary, the City Tax
Assessor-Collector, the City Attorney, or the Judge of the Municipal Court shall become a candidate for nomination or
election to any public office, he shall immediately forfeit his place or position with the City.
(b) The Mayor or any member of the City Council shall forfeit his place on the Council if he becomes a candidate for
nomination or election to any public office other than a place on the City Council or if he becomes a candidate for election to
any different place on the City Council which requires him to take office prior to the end of his elective term.
Section 2.09. City Council May Summon Witnesses, etc.
The City Council shall have power to summon and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and
papers before it whenever it may be necessary for the more effective discharge of its duties, and shall have the power to
punish for contempt before it with the same fines and penalties as the County Judge may punish for contempt before the
County Court. All process shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Secretary and shall be served by the Chief of
Police or any police officer of the City.
The Mayor, City Secretary or any member of the City Council shall have authority to administer oaths in any matter pertaining
to municipal affairs.
Section 2.10. No Interference by Council.
Subject to the Council's authority to approve all appointments of administrative officers or directors of departments of the City
under Section 5.03(a) of this Charter, neither the Council nor any of its members shall dictate the appointment by the City
Manager of any person to City offices or employment. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the Council and its members shall
deal with that part of the administrative service for which the City Manager is responsible solely through such Manager, and
neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the City Manager in said
departments, either publicly or privately.
Section 2.11. Investigations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/598
The Council, the City Manager or any person or committee authorized by either or both of them shall have power to inquire
into the conduct of any department or office of the City; to make investigations as to City affairs, and for that purpose may
subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence material to said
inquiry. The Council may provide by ordinance penalties for contempt in refusing to obey any such subpoenas or failure to
produce books, papers and other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided
by ordinance.
Section 2.12. Regular Meetings.
On the day the members of the City Council take office, they shall meet at the building designated as the official City Hall and
thereafter all regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the City Council Chamber in such building at such times as
may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution; but not less than two (2) regular meetings shall be held each month unless
postponed or cancelled for valid reasons, to be recorded in the minutes.
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
Section 2.13. Special Meetings.
Special meetings shall be called by the City Secretary upon written request of the Mayor, City Manager or three members of
the Council, if posted on the agenda in compliance with Texas Open Meeting Law (6252-17 VTCS). All Council members,
City Manager, City Secretary and City Attorney shall be given written or equivalent notice of such meetings and therein shall
be stated the subject to be considered at the special meeting and such may provide for the taking up of any other business
provided at such meeting.
Section 2.14. Open Meetings.
All official meetings of the Council and all boards, commissions and committees thereof shall be open to the public except as
may be provided by State law. The City Council shall provide for reasonable opportunity for citizens to be heard at all open
meetings concerning any subject considered thereat under such rules as the Council may provide.
Section 2.15. Financial Loss by Elected City Officials.
Duly elected City Officials acting in their official capacity shall be protected by the City from personal financial loss resulting
from Council decisions made while in official sessions as a result of law suits filed pertaining to such decisions.
ARTICLE III. MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS*
Section 3.01. Holding of Municipal Elections.
All municipal elections shall be held under the provisions of this Charter unless the laws of the State of Texas applicable to
city elections require otherwise.
Section 3.02. Qualifications of Voters.
All residents of the City of Midlothian who shall have qualified to vote in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Election
Code shall have the right to vote in all City elections.
Section 3.03. Regular Election.
No primary election shall be held in the selection of nominees to the City Council unless specifically required by State Law.
Regular elections for the purpose of electing members of the City Council shall be held on the first Saturday in April of each
year, or as otherwise may be prescribed by State Law.
Editor's note–The regular election day adopted by Ordinance 89-04 is the first Saturday in May and the runoff election day is the third
Saturday in May pursuant to V.T.C.A., Election Code sec. 41.001.
State law references–Date for election of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.042; election dates, V.T.C.A., Election
Code, ch. 41.
Section 3.04. Election of Council Members.
All qualified voters of the City shall be entitled to vote for the candidate for Mayor and for one (1) candidate for Place Number
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6, as may be listed on the official ballot of the City.
Section 3.05. Nomination.
A person desiring to become a candidate for Mayor or for any place on the City Council shall be entitled to have his name
placed on the official ballot if he files with the City Secretary, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days prior
to the election, a sworn application verifying his qualifications as provided in Section 2.03 of this Charter and stating that he is
a candidate for Mayor or the Place Number for which he is running, as the case may be.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/598
Section 3.06. Designation of Official Ballot.
The Mayor shall be designated on the official ballot as “Mayor.” The Places on the official ballot shall be designated as
“Member of Council, Place No. ,” designating the Place Numbers, such to be in numerical order, and the candidate's
name shall appear in the Place for which he filed his application. The City Secretary shall make up the official ballot from the
names so presented to him in the manner hereinabove set out. The order in which the names of the candidates for each
Place shall appear on the ballot shall be determined by lot in a drawing held under the supervision of the City Secretary.
Section 3.07. Canvass of Election.
Within thirty (30) days following either a regular or special election, the City Council shall convene in a meeting in the Council
chambers and canvass and certify the results of such election.
State law reference–Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67.
Section 3.08. Candidates Elected.
A candidate in said election receiving a majority of the votes cast for the position of Mayor and for the position of Councilman
for the Place for which he is a candidate, as the case may be, shall be declared elected. If none of the candidates for such
position receives a majority vote, then none of the candidates for that office shall be elected and a run-off election shall be
held among the two (2) candidates who receive the greatest number of votes for such position. In the event of a run-off, the
City Council shall immediately order a run-off election, which shall be held not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty (30)
days after the canvass of the election in which a run-off is required. Notice of such run-off election shall be given and the
election shall be held in the same manner as the general or special election in which the run-off occurred. At such election,
only the names of the two candidates who received the greatest number of votes for such position shall be printed on the
ballot and any write-in votes cast for any other person shall be void and shall not be counted for any purpose.
Section 3.09. First Election of Mayor and Councilmen.
On the first Saturday in April, 1981, an election shall be held to elect the Mayor and all Councilmen. The person elected as
Mayor and the persons elected to represent Places 1 and 2 shall serve for a term of three (3) years, their terms expiring in
April, 1984. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.01, the persons elected to represent Places 3 and 4 shall serve for a
term of two (2) years, their terms expiring in April, 1983, and the persons elected to represent Places 5 and 6 shall serve for
a term of one (1) year, their terms expiring in April, 1982. Beginning in April, 1982, all Council Members shall be elected for a
term of three (3) years.
ARTICLE IV. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS*
Section 4.01. Council Action.
The City Council shall evidence its official actions by written ordinances, resolutions or oral motion. The use of one method or
the other shall not affect the validity of the action, except in those instances where one or the other is required by State law or
this Charter.
Section 4.02. Style of Ordinances and Resolutions.
The style of all ordinances shall be: “Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Midlothian,” and the style of all
resolutions shall be: “Be It Resolved by the City Council of the City of Midlothian.” In each case words of like import may be
used, but such caption may be omitted when said ordinances are published in book form, or are revised and digested under
the order of the Council.
Section 4.03. Passage.
All ordinances and resolutions of the City Council, unless otherwise provided by State law, this Charter, or the ordinance
itself, shall be final on the passage or adoption by the required majority pursuant to one motion duly made, seconded and
passed. Where the State law or this Charter provides for a different procedure before the action of the Council may become
final, then in that event, the Council shall follow the procedure required.
Section 4.04. Voting.
The vote upon the passage of any ordinance, resolution or motion shall be taken by voice vote unless otherwise requested
by a member of the City Council, in which case a roll call vote shall be taken. The results of all voting shall be entered upon
the minutes of the proceedings of the Council. Every ordinance, resolution, or motion shall require on final passage the
affirmative vote of a majority of the members present unless more is required by State law or this Charter.
Section 4.05. Effective Date.
All ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council shall become effective immediately from and after final publication,
except in the following instances:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/598
(a) Where the State law or other provisions of this Charter provide otherwise, in which case the effective date
shall be the earliest time therein prescribed.
(b) Where the ordinance or resolution prescribes a different effective date.
(c) Where an ordinance or resolution is adopted under the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter,
in which case the effective date thereof shall be immediately after the canvass of the election.
Section 4.06. Enrollment.
Each ordinance, resolution and motion passed by the City Council shall be enrolled by the City Secretary within five (5) days
after its passage, or as soon as thereafter as practicable. It shall then be carefully compared with the original and all
amendments, if any, by the City Attorney. If errors exist therein, they shall be corrected.
Section 4.07. Publication of Ordinances.
The descriptive caption or title of each ordinance stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for
violation thereof shall be published at least once in the official newspaper of the City, unless otherwise provided by State law
or this Charter, in which event the specific provisions shall be followed.
State law reference–Publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 52.013.
Section 4.08. Codification of Ordinances.
The City Council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the City to be printed, in code form, and shall have the same
arranged and digested as often as the Council may deem advisable; however, failure to print the ordinances as herein
provided shall not affect the validity of the same.
State law reference–Code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 53.
Section 4.09. How Plead.
In all judicial proceedings, it shall be sufficient to plead any ordinance by caption, or by the number of sections thereof
wanted, and it shall not be necessary to plead the entire ordinance or section. All ordinances of the City, when printed and
published and bearing on the title page thereof “Ordained and Published by the City Council of the City of Midlothian,” or
words of like import, shall be prima facie evidence of their authenticity and shall be admitted and received in all the courts
and places without further proof.
Section 4.10. Approval of Mayor Not Necessary.
The approval or signature of the Mayor shall not be necessary to make an ordinance or resolution valid.
ARTICLE V. THE CITY MANAGER
Section 5.01. Appointment; Qualifications; Compensation.
The Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term and fix his compensation. The Manager shall be appointed
solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications.
Section 5.02. Removal.
The Council may remove the Manager from office in accordance with the following procedures:
(a) The Council shall adopt by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members a preliminary resolution which
must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the Manager from duty for a period not to exceed forty-five
(45) days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the Manager.
(b) Within five (5) days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the Manager, he may file with the Council a
written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held at a Council meeting not earlier than fifteen (15)
days nor later than thirty (30) days after the request is filed. The Manager may file with the Council a written reply
not later than five (5) days before the hearing.
(c) The Council may adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately, by
affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after five (5) days from the date when a copy of the
preliminary resolution was delivered to the Manager, if he has not requested a public hearing, or at any time after
the public hearing if he has requested one. The Manager shall continue to receive his salary until the effective
date of a final resolution of removal. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the Manager shall be
final and not subject to review by any court or agency.
Section 5.03. Powers and Duties of the City Manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/598
The City Manager shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the City. He shall be responsible to the Council for
the administration of all City affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. He shall have the following powers and
duties:
(a) He shall, with approval of the Council, appoint the administrative officers or directors of the City's
departments which are provided for by or under this Charter and shall make all appointments of lesser positions in
the City's service on recommendations of the administrative officer or director of the department affected. When
he deems it necessary for the good of the City, he may suspend or remove any City employee provided, however,
that no administrative officer as head of a department may be suspended or removed without the consent of the
Council.
(b) He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except
as otherwise provided by this Charter or by statute.
(c) He shall attend all Council meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote.
(d) He shall see that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the Council subject to enforcement by him or
by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed.
(e) He shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the Council.
(f) He shall be responsible for the submission to the Council and make available to the public a complete report
on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year.
(g) He shall make such other reports as the Council may require concerning the operations of City departments,
offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision.
(h) He shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City and make
such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City as he deems desirable.
(i) He shall perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the Council.
(j) He shall be responsible for the proper handling, disbursement and reporting on all matters of finance,
purchasing, property management and other acts required under Article IX of this Charter.
ARTICLE VI. CITY SECRETARY
Section 6.01. Appointment; Removal; Compensation.
The City Council shall appoint a City Secretary who shall serve at the discretion of the Council. He shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the Council.
Section 6.02. Duties of the City Secretary.
The City Secretary shall:
1. Attend all meetings of the City Council and keep accurate records of all actions taken by the Council;
2. Maintain the official records and files of the City;
3. Administer oaths;
4. Attest contracts, assessment certificates and other legal instruments when executed by the authorized
officers of the City;
5. Serve as the election official for all City elections; and
6. Perform such other duties as may be required of him by this Charter, the City Council, or State law.
ARTICLE VII. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
Section 7.01. General Provisions.
(a) Creation of Departments. The Council may by ordinance establish City departments, offices or agencies in addition to
those created by this Charter and may prescribe the functions of all departments, offices and agencies, except that no
function assigned by this Charter to a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless this Charter
specifically so provides, assigned to any other.
(b) Direction by Manager. All departments, offices and agencies under the direction and supervision of the City Manager
shall be administered by an officer appointed by and subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager. The
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/598
appointments of the directors of all departments established by the Council or by this Charter shall be subject to the approval
of the Council, but approval by the Council shall not be required for the heads of subdivisions of any department, office or
agency, or of any other subordinate employee of the City. The City Manager may serve as head of one or more such
departments, offices or agencies or may appoint one person as the head of two or more of them.
Section 7.02. Personnel Rules.
The City Manager shall prepare personnel rules and the Council may by ordinance adopt them with or without amendment.
These rules shall provide for:
(a) The classification of all City positions, based on the duties, authority and responsibility of each position, with
adequate provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted by changed circumstances;
(b) A pay plan for all City positions;
(c) Methods for determining the merit and fitness of candidates for appointment or promotion;
(d) The policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and removal of employees;
(e) The hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for sick and vacation leave;
(f) The policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional appointments;
(g) Policies regarding in-service training programs;
(h) Grievance procedures; and
(i) Other practices and procedures necessary to the administration of the City personnel system.
Section 7.03. City Attorney.
The City Council shall appoint a City Attorney from recommendations of the City Manager, or by any member of the City
Council, who shall be duly licensed to practice law in the State of Texas. He shall receive for his services such compensation
as may be fixed by Council. He may be removed at any time by majority vote of the City Council.
The City Attorney shall represent the City of Midlothian in all its litigation. He shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and
counsel for the City of Midlothian, the Council and all boards, commissions and agencies, and all officers and departments
thereof.
The City Attorney shall have authority to appoint one or more assistants, subject to approval of the City Manager, such
assistant or assistants to hold office at the will of the City Attorney so long as he remains as such.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, the Council may engage special legal counsel to represent the City of Midlothian in
any specific matter or for the performance of any specifically delineated duties otherwise to be performed by the City
Attorney.
Section 7.04. Independent Audit.
The Council shall cause an independent audit to be made of the books of account, records and transactions of all the
administrative departments of the City at least once yearly. Such audits, during such fiscal year, shall be made by one or
more certified public accountants who, for the three (3) years next preceding, have held a certificate issued by the State
Board of Accountancy of the State of Texas, or by a state maintaining an equal standard of professional requirements, which
entitled the holder of such certificate to a Texas certificate. The auditor or auditors to make the audit shall be selected by the
Council, and shall be responsible to the Council. The duties of the auditor or auditors so appointed shall include the
certification of all statements required of the City Manager in his annual budget estimate. Such statements shall include a
balance sheet, exhibiting the assets and liabilities of the City, supported by departmental schedules, and schedules for each
utility publicly owned or operated, summaries of income and expenditures, supported by detailed schedules; and also
comparisons, in proper classification, with the last previous year. The report of such auditor or auditors for the fiscal year
shall be printed and a copy thereof shall be furnished to each member of the Council and the City Manager and a copy shall
be kept available in the office of the City Secretary for inspection by any citizen upon request. A summary of such report of
the auditor or auditors may also be published once in the official newspaper. The original report of the auditor or auditors
shall be kept among the permanent records of the City.
State law reference–Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 103.
ARTICLE VIII. MUNICIPAL COURT*
Section 8.01. Municipal Court.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/598
There shall be a court known as The Municipal Court of the City of Midlothian, with such jurisdiction, powers and duties as
are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.
Section 8.02. Judge of the Municipal Court.
The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a magistrate who shall be known as the Judge of the Municipal Court. The
Judge shall be appointed by the Council to serve at the discretion of the Council.
In the event the Judge of the Municipal Court is unable to act for any reason, the Council shall appoint a replacement. The
Judge, or anyone acting in his place, shall receive such compensation as may be set by the Council.
The Council shall have the power to create and establish additional municipal courts and to appoint more than one judge of
each municipal court, whether one or more, each of whom shall be a magistrate and shall have the qualifications and serve
at the discretion of the Council.
State law reference–Municipal court judges generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004.
Section 8.03. Clerk of the Municipal Court.
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Clerk shall have the power to
administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the Court thereto, and otherwise perform any and all acts
necessary in issuing process of such Court and conducting the business thereof.
State law reference–Municipal court clerk, generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
ARTICLE IX. FINANCIAL PROCEDURES*
Section 9.01. Fiscal Year.
The Fiscal Year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September of the next
succeeding year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.
State law references–General fiscal power to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.022; city fiscal year,
V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
Section 9.02. Submission of Budget and Budget Message.
On or before the 1st day of August each year, the Manager shall submit to the Council a budget for the ensuing fiscal year
and an accompanying message.
State law reference–Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 102.
Section 9.03. Budget Message.
The Manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. It shall outline the
proposed financial policies of the City for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any
major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such
changes, summarize the City's debt position and include such other material as the Manager deems desirable.
Section 9.04. Budget a Public Record.
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the City Secretary when submitted to the Council and shall be
opened to public inspection by anyone interested.
Section 9.05. Public Hearing on Budget.
At the Council meeting at which time the budget is submitted, the Council shall name the date and place of a public hearing
and shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the City the time and place, which will be not less than ten (10)
days nor more than thirty (30) days after date of notice. At this hearing interested citizens may express their opinions
concerning items of expenditures, giving their reasons for wishing to increase or decrease any items of expense.
Section 9.06. Proceeding on Adoption of Budget.
After public hearing, the Council shall analyze the budget, making any additions or deletions which they feel appropriate, and
shall, at least ten (10) days prior to the beginning of the next fiscal year, adopt the budget by a favorable majority vote of the
full membership of the Council. Should the City Council take no final action on or prior to such day, the current budget shall
be in force on a month to month basis until a new budget is adopted.
Section 9.07. Budget, Appropriation and Amount to be Raised by Taxation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/598
On final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. Final adoption of the budget by the Council shall
constitute the official appropriations as proposed expenditures for the current year and shall constitute the basis of official
levy of the property tax as the amount of tax to be assessed and collected for the corresponding tax year. Estimated
expenditures will in no case exceed proposed revenue plus cash on hand. Unused appropriations may be transferred to any
item required for the same general purpose.
Section 9.08. Contingent Appropriation.
Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount
not more than seven (7) percent of the total general fund expenditures, to be used in case of unforeseen items of
expenditures. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the City Manager and distributed by him only after
prior approval by the City Council. The proceeds of the contingent appropriation shall be disbursed only by transfer to other
departmental appropriation, the spending of which shall be charged to the departments or activities for which the
appropriations are made.
Section 9.09. Amending the Budget.
Under extreme emergency conditions which may arise and which could not reasonably have been foreseen in the normal
process of planning the budget, the Council may, by a majority vote of the full membership, amend or change the budget to
provide for any additional expense in which the general welfare of the citizenry is involved. These amendments shall be by
ordinance, and shall become an attachment to the original budget.
Section 9.10. Certification; Copies Made Available.
A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the City Secretary, and such other places required by State law or
as the City Council shall designate. The final budget shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced and sufficient
copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, agencies and for the use of interested persons and civic
organizations.
Section 9.11. Defect shall not Invalidate the Tax Levy.
Errors or defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirements shall not
nullify the tax levy or the tax rate.
Section 9.12. Finance.
A central accounting system shall be established, and insofar as local conditions will permit, all functions of accounting,
financing, inventory, and budget controls will be centralized therein. The City Manager shall perform, or delegate to one or
more officers designated by him, the following duties and responsibilities:
(a) Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all moneys and have control over all expenditures to
ensure that budget appropriations are not exceeded;
(b) Maintain a general accounting system for the City government and each of its offices, departments and
agencies, keep books for, exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department and agency, keep
separate accounts for the items of appropriation contained in the City budget, each of which accounts shall show
the amount of the appropriation, the amounts paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it, and the
unencumbered balance; require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency
of the City government to be made daily or at such intervals as he may deem expedient;
(c) Submit to the Council a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the
exact financial conditions of the City of Midlothian;
(d) Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the City of Midlothian, or any office,
department or agency of the City government, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depository or
depositories as may be designated by the City Council, subject to the requirements of law in force from time to
time as to the furnishing of bond or the deposit of securities and the payment of interest on deposits;
(e) Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City government, or in possession of such
government in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the City of Midlothian and
the receipt and delivery of City of Midlothian bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange;
(f) Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment
and other articles used by any office, department or agency of the City government and prepare the periodical
inventories of supplies, materials and City-owned property; and
(g) Approve all proposed expenditures and unless there is an unencumbered balance of appropriations and
available funds, no expenditure shall be made.
Section 9.13. Accounting Supervision and Control.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/598
The City Manager or such officer or officers designated by him shall have power and shall be required to:
(a) Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills or claims to be used by all the offices, departments and
agencies of the City government;
(b) Examine and approve all contracts, orders and other documents by which the City government incurs
financial obligations, having previously ascertained that moneys have been appropriated and allotted and will be
available when the obligations shall become due and payable;
(c) Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and other evidences of claims, demands or
charges against the City government and with the advice of the City Attorney determine the regularity, legality and
correctness of such claims, demands or charges; and
(d) Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office,
department or agency of the City government apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office.
Section 9.14. Lapse of Appropriations.
All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully
encumbered.
Section 9.15. Fees shall be Paid to City of Midlothian.
All fees received by any officer or employee shall belong to the City and shall be accounted for and paid to the Finance
Officer at such times as required by the City Manager except as otherwise provided.
Section 9.16. Sale of City Property.
Before the City of Midlothian makes any sale or contract for the sale of any property belonging to the City of Midlothian,
except utilities, in the form of personal property, having an estimated value of $3,000 or less, opportunity shall be given for
open competition under such rules and regulations as the City Council may prescribe.
In the sale of property valued at more than $3,000, the property shall be advertised for sale and bids in the local newspaper.
The contract for sale shall be awarded to the highest responsible bidder, either at auction or upon sealed bids, after such
public notice and competition as may be prescribed, and upon such other terms and conditions not inconsistent with express
provisions of law and of this Charter, as the City Council may order; provided the City Council shall have the power to reject
any and all bids and advertise again. These same procedures shall be used whenever the City of Midlothian acts as transfer
agent. Sale of land shall be in accordance with provisions of Article 5421c-12, as amended, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas.
State law reference–Sale of real property by public auction or sealed bid, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 253.008.
Section 9.17. Purchase Procedure.
Expenditures shall be made according to procedures established by ordinance of the City Council for all budgeted items not
exceeding $3,000. All contracts or purchases involving more than $3,000 shall be let to the lowest and best bid by a
responsible bidder after there has been an opportunity for competitive bidding in accordance with the requirements of Article
2368a, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas and any present or future amendments relating thereto. Provided, however, the
Council shall have the right to reject any and all bids. Provided, further, nothing herein shall apply to contracts for personal or
for professional services nor to work done by the City and paid for by the day as such work progresses nor to the purchase of
real estate. Emergency purchases are authorized under circumstances and in accordance with procedures set forth under
Article 2368a and any present or future amendments relating thereto.
Editor's Note–Ordinance 95-02, adopted January 10, 1995, provided as follows: “That, the City of Midlothian hereby elects to have
Section 252.002 and related sections of the Local Government Code supersede the City of Midlothian Charter so that the threshold
amount at which competitive bids are required will be in compliance with Section 252.021 of the Local Government Code, presently being
$15,000.00 for contracts other than insurance and $5,000.00 for insurance, with the express provisions that any future amendments to
the Local Government Code relating to bid amounts will be placed into effect at the time of their effective date.”
Ordinance 2001-58, adopted October 23, 2001, amends Ordinance 95-02 as follows: “That, the City of Midlothian hereby elects to have
Section 252.002 and related sections of the Local Government Code supersede the City of Midlothian Charter so that the threshold
amount at which competitive bids are required will be in compliance with Section 252.021 of the Local Government Code, presently being
$25,000.00 for contracts other than insurance and $5,000.00 for insurance, with the express provision that any future amendments to the
Local Government Code relating to bid amounts will be placed into effect at the time of their effective date.” (Ordinance 2001-58 adopted
10/23/01)
State law reference–Purchasing and contracting authority of municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, chs. 252, 271.
Section 9.18. Disbursement of Funds.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/598
All checks, vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the City depository shall be signed by the City Manager
and countersigned by the Finance Officer, if there is one officially designated, or, if not, then by the City Secretary and/or by
such other persons as designated by the City Council.
Section 9.19. Borrowing in Anticipation of Property Taxes.
For the purpose of temporary borrowing, the City Council shall have the power by ordinance to raise money on the credit of
the City by the issuance of warrants, certificates of obligation and/or notes in anticipation of the collection of taxes, of special
assessments, or of other anticipated revenues.
Section 9.20. Sale of Notes; Report of Sale.
All notes issued pursuant to this article may be sold at not less than par and accrued interest at private sale without previous
advertisement, and such sale shall be authorized by the Council.
Section 9.21. Surety Bonds.
The directors of all administrative departments whose duties include the handling of moneys, and all employees whose
duties include the handling of moneys, belonging to the City of Midlothian, shall, before entering upon the duties of their office
or employment, make bond in some responsible surety company authorized to do business in the State, acceptable to the
City Council. Any such surety bond shall be conditioned that the principal thereon will faithfully perform and/or discharge the
duties of his office, account for and pay over to the City all moneys and property coming into his hands belonging to the City,
and if there are provisions of State law bearing upon the functions of his office under which the execution of a surety bond is
required, it shall be further conditioned to comply therewith. Premiums for such surety bonds will be paid by the City.
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
ARTICLE X. INCURRING INDEBTEDNESS*
Section 10.01. Powers to Issue.
In keeping with the Constitution of the State of Texas and not contrary thereto, the City of Midlothian shall have the power to
borrow money on the credit of the City for any public purpose not now or hereafter prohibited by the Constitution and laws of
the State of Texas, and shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time
warrants, certificates of obligation and other evidence of indebtedness as now authorized or as may hereafter be authorized
to be issued by any City under and in accordance with the restrictions, conditions and laws of the State of Texas.
Section 10.02. Sale of Bonds.
No bonds issued by the City of Midlothian shall be valid unless they are sold for par value and accumulative interest
exclusive of commission. The Council shall have the right to reject any or all bids.
Section 10.03. Interest and Sinking Funds.
It shall be the duty of the Council to levy an annual tax sufficient to pay the interest on and provide the necessary sinking
fund required by law on all outstanding general obligation bonds, time warrants, and certificates of obligation of the City. The
interest and sinking fund shall be deposited in a separate account and shall not be diverted to or used for any other purpose
than to pay the interest and principal on all such bonds, time warrants, and certificates of obligation issued by the City of
Midlothian. The sinking fund maintained for the redemption of any debt may be invested in any interest-bearing security
authorized by the laws of this State. Investments of all sinking funds for interest shall mature at least fifteen (15) days prior to
the date of payment due on bonds issued by the City of Midlothian. The Council may also invest any other City funds in any
state or national chartered bank in interest-bearing certificates of deposit secured by pledged securities as required by state
law.
Section 10.04. Revenue Bonds.
The City shall have power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of
public utilities, recreational facilities or facilities for any other self-liquidating municipal function not now or hereafter prohibited
by any general laws of the State, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall
be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties or interest therein acquired and the income therefrom, and shall
never be a debt of the City in accordance with State law.
Section 10.05. Execution and Registration of Bonds.
All bonds, warrants and certificates of indebtedness shall be signed by the Mayor, countersigned by the City Secretary, and
sealed with the seal of the City in the manner provided by general law, and shall be payable at such times and place or
places as may be fixed therein. It shall be the duty of the Mayor, when such bonds are issued, to forward the same to the
Attorney General of the State of Texas for approval and for registration by the Comptroller of Public Accounts.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/598
Section 10.06. Bond Register.
The Finance Officer or other officer of the City designated by the City Manager shall keep, or cause to be kept, for and on
behalf of the City a complete bond registry and books showing all bonds, warrants and certificates of indebtedness issued,
the date and amount thereof, the rate of interest, maturity and other information pertinent thereto, of all bonds or other
indebtedness surrendered and all other transactions of the Council having reference to the refunding of the indebtedness of
said City. When bonds or their coupons are paid, their payment or cancellation shall be noted in said registry. The books shall
be safely kept among the records of the City.
ARTICLE XI. TAX ADMINISTRATION*
Section 11.01. Tax Assessor-Collector; Appointment.
There shall be a Tax Assessor-Collector who shall be appointed by the City Council from recommendations by the City
Manager or any member of the City Council. The Tax Assessor-Collector shall serve at the discretion of the City Council and
his compensation shall be established by the City Council. The Tax Assessor-Collector shall collect all taxes and special
assessments payable to the City. He shall supervise and be responsible for the assessment of all property subject to taxation
within the corporate limits of the City for taxation, prepare and maintain property maps and ownership records on all property
in the City, shall give all notices and do all other acts required by law for the assessment and collection of all taxes and
special assessments levied by and for the City of Midlothian.
Section 11.02. Power to Tax; Franchise Taxes; Occupation Taxes.
(a) The City Council shall have the power under the provisions of State law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon
all taxable property within the City not to exceed the maximum provided by the Constitution and general laws of the State of
Texas.
(b) The City Council shall have the power annually to levy and collect a street rental charge against any public service
corporation, person, or entity whether holding a franchise or not for the privilege of the use and occupancy of public streets,
alleys or grounds of the City, separately from the tangible property of such corporations, companies and corporate
institutions, as authorized by the State laws, and shall have the full power to enforce the collection of such rental charges.
(c) The City Council shall have the right to assess and collect such occupation taxes, licenses and franchise taxes upon
trades, professions, occupations and any business transaction carried on in said City as may be authorized by the general
laws of the State of Texas.
(d) All existing taxes, assessments and charges of whatever kind or nature heretofore levied by the City of Midlothian shall
remain in full force and effect until and unless repealed or changed by ordinance.
State law references–Franchise to use streets in municipality, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 311.071 et seq.; authority to grant
franchise to use or occupy public grounds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 282.003; imposition of occupation taxes by
municipalities, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 302.101.
Section 11.03. Property Subject to Tax; Method of Assessment.
All property, real, personal or mixed, lying and being within the corporate limits of the City of Midlothian on the first day of
January, not expressly exempted by law, shall be subject to annual ad valorem taxation at its true market value. The mode
and manner of making renditions, tax lists, assessments, tax rolls, delinquent tax rolls, collections and procedures for
enforcing collection of such taxes shall be in accordance with the State laws governing the levy and collection of ad valorem
taxes by cities, school districts and counties. The City Tax Assessor-Collector shall assess all property which has been
omitted from assessment in prior years upon a current supplemental assessment roll. The taxes upon such supplemental
assessments shall be due at once, and if not paid within sixty (60) days thereafter, shall be deemed delinquent, and shall be
subject to the same penalty and interest as other delinquent taxes for such year. If the ownership of any property should be
unknown to the City Tax Assessor-Collector, he shall enter that fact in the record.
In addition to the powers granted by this Section, the City shall have the same power as county tax assessors and collectors
in Texas to make back assessments, all at the same value and tax rates as such property should have been assessed and
taxed for past years, and indicating the year or years for which it is assessed.
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 302.001.
Section 11.04. Board of Equalization; Appointment; Qualifications.
The City Council shall each year appoint three (3) residents, who shall be qualified voters and real property owners, as the
Board of Equalization. Such Board shall choose from its membership a chairman. The City Tax Assessor-Collector shall be
ex-officio secretary of the Board, provided the City Tax Assessor-Collector, with the consent of the City Council, may
designate some other officer or employee of the City to act in his stead. A majority of said Board shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. Members of the Board while serving shall receive such compensation as may be provided for
them by the City Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/598
Section 11.05. Board of Equalization; Public Hearings; Notice to Owner.
At the same meeting that the Council appoints the Board of Equalization, it shall by ordinance fix the time of the first meeting
of the Board. After such first meeting, the Board may reconvene and adjourn from time to time, and as long thereafter as may
be necessary it shall hear and determine the complaint of any person in relation to the assessment roll. Whenever said Board
shall find it their duty to raise the value of any property appearing on the tax lists or tax records of the City, it shall after having
examined such lists and records and corrected all errors appearing therein, adjourn to a day not less than ten (10) nor more
than fifteen (15) days from the date of adjournment, and shall cause the secretary of said Board to give written notice to the
owner of such property or to the person rendering same of the time to which said Board has adjourned, and that such owner
or person rendering said property may at that time appear and show cause why the value of said property should not be
raised. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed, and postage paid, in the City Post Office.
Section 11.06. Board of Equalization; Power and Duties.
It shall be the duty of such Board to examine and, if necessary, revise the assessments as returned by the City Assessor-
Collector, to the end that all property within the City shall be assessed as fairly and as uniformly as possible. The Board of
Equalization shall also have the power to:
(a) Review on complaint of property owners assessments for the purpose of taxation of both real and personal
property within the City made by the City Assessor-Collector;
(b) Administer oaths;
(c) Take testimony;
(d) Hold hearings;
(e) Adopt regulations regarding the procedure of assessment review; and
(f) Compel the production of all books, documents and other papers pertinent to the investigation of the taxable
values of any person, firm or corporation having or owning property within the corporate limits of the City subject
to taxation.
Section 11.07. Board of Equalization; Records; Approval of Rolls.
The Board shall be required to keep an accurate record of all its proceedings, which shall be available for public inspection.
Immediately upon completion of its work the Board shall certify its approval of the assessment rolls. The decision of the
Board of Equalization on property values shall be final; provided, however, appeals may be taken to a district court having
jurisdiction in accordance with State law pertaining thereto.
Section 11.08. Taxes; When Due and Payable.
All taxes due the City of Midlothian shall be payable at the office of the City Assessor-Collector and may be paid at any time
after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall be not later than October 1.
Section 11.09. Tax Liens.
The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge or encumbrance upon the property upon which the tax is
due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the
same, and the lien, charge or encumbrance on the property in favor of the City, for the amount of the taxes, penalties,
interest and other costs due on such property is such as to give the State courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien
on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this State or person whose residence is unknown,
but also as against nonresidents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property, real,
personal or mixed, upon which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. The City's tax
lien shall exist from January 1 in each year until the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims, and no gift
sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind can defeat such lien.
All persons or corporations owning or holding personal property or real estate in the City of Midlothian on the first day of
January of each year shall be liable for all municipal taxes levied thereon for such year.
State law reference–Tax liens and personal liability, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 32.
Section 11.10. Arrears of Taxes Offset to Debt Against City.
The City shall be entitled to counterclaim and offset against any debt, claim, demand or account owed by the City to any
person, firm or corporation who is in arrears to the City for taxes, in the amount of taxes so in arrears, including all penalties
and interest, and no assignment or transfer of such debt, claim, demand or account after the said taxes are due shall affect
the right of the City to so offset against the same.
Section 11.11. Additional Power of Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/598
Except as otherwise provided by law, or this charter, the Council shall have the power to provide by ordinance for the
assessment and collection of all taxes, and to make such rules, regulations and mode of procedure to enforce the collection
by and pay to the Tax Assessor-Collector as it may deem expedient, and shall provide such penalties for the failure to pay
such taxes as it may deem expedient. The Council shall also have the power to contract with any entity to perform any or all
duties described by this charter necessary for the administration and collection of taxes.
ARTICLE XII. FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES*
Section 12.01. Powers of the City.
In addition to the City's power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities and to manufacture,
distribute and sell the output of such utility operations, the City shall have such further powers as may now or hereafter be
granted under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas.
Section 12.02. Franchises; Power of Council.
The Council shall have power to grant, amend, renew or extend by ordinance all franchises of all public utilities of every
character, including cable television, operating within the City of Midlothian, and for such purposes is granted full power. All
ordinances granting, amending, renewing or extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at two separate regular
meetings of the Council and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first reading; and no such ordinance
shall take effect until sixty (60) days after its final passage; and pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be
published once each week for four (4) consecutive weeks in the official newspaper of the City of Midlothian, and the expense
of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be transferable except to
persons, firms or corporations taking all or substantially all of the holder's business in the City of Midlothian and except with
the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance. No franchise shall be granted for an indeterminate term nor for a term of
more than twenty-five (25) years. No exclusive franchise shall ever be granted.
Section 12.03. Franchise Value Not to be Allowed.
In fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the City and in determining the just compensation to be paid
by the City for public utility property which the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise, nothing shall be included as
the value of any franchise granted by the City under this Charter.
Section 12.04. Right of Regulation.
All grants, renewal, extensions or amendments to public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not,
shall be subject to the right of the City:
(a) To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time
prescribed or for failure otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after
due notice and hearing.
(b) To require an adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant
and fixtures at the standard necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of utility service to the public.
(c) To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in
service and rates.
(d) To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility. If the franchise or ordinance does not prescribe
the form of accounts kept by each utility, then it shall keep its accounts in accordance with the utility system of
accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the
State Railroad Commission of Texas, or their successors or other State or Federal utility regulating agencies.
(e) To examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility at any time and to require annual
and other reports, including reports on local operations by each such public utility.
(f) To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the
safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.
Section 312.05. Consent of Property Owners.
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance, or
operation of any public utility, but nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to
deprive any such property owners of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by
law.
Section 12.06. Extensions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/598
All extensions of public utilities within the City limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be
operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original
grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension of public utility operated under a franchise hereafter
granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time under the same conditions as the original grant.
Section 12.07. Temporary Permits.
Permits for minor or temporary privileges in the streets, public ways and public places of the City may be granted and
revoked from time to time, provided they are unconditionally revocable at the will of the governing body. Such permits shall
not be deemed franchises as the term is used in this Charter.
Section 12.08. Other Conditions.
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Midlothian and the grantee, and the
contractual rights as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the
power of the City of Midlothian to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things
reserved, and except the general power of the City heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and
services of a utility, which shall include the right to require adequate and reasonable extension of plant and service and the
maintenance of the plant fixtures at the standard necessary to render the highest reasonable quality of service to the public.
Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various
sections of this Article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall
operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the Council or the voters of the City in imposing terms and
conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant, including the right to require such compensation or
rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.
Section 12.09. Franchise Records.
Within six (6) months after this Charter takes effect, every public utility and every owner of public utility franchises shall file
with the City certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed, or under which such utility is operated in the City of
Midlothian. The City shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises.
Section 12.10. Regulation of Rates.
The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix and regulate, after public hearing and reasonable notice, the price
of water, gas, electric lights, electric power, steam heat and cable television, and charges of all public transportation of every
kind, whether transporting passengers, freight, or baggage, and generally to fix and regulate the rates and charges of all
public utilities of every kind operating within the corporate limits of the City of Midlothian.
ARTICLE XIII. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 13.01. Boards and Commissions.
The City Council shall have authority to establish by ordinance such boards, commissions, and committees as it may deem
necessary for the conduct of City business and management of municipal affairs. The authority, functions and responsibilities
of such boards, commissions and committees shall be such as is spelled out in the ordinance establishing them. All existing
boards and commissions heretofore established shall be continued in accordance with the ordinances or other acts under
which they have been created, or until the City Council shall by ordinance abolish, modify or alter the ordinances or acts
under which they exist. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter the elected City Council shall have paramount
authority over all matters affecting the budgets, appropriation of funds, expenditures, purchases and sale of properties and
procedures for accounting thereof, consistent with the express provision of this Charter and applicable provisions of the State
Constitution and laws of this State.
ARTICLE XIV. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Section 14.01. Power of Initiative.
The voters shall have power to propose any ordinance except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of
taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as initiative. Any initiative ordinance may be
submitted to the Council by a petition signed by currently qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten (10)
percent of the total number of the qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular municipal election.
Section 14.02. Power of Referendum.
The voters shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the Council or submitted by the
Council to a vote of the voters, such power being known as the referendum, except in cases of bond ordinances and
ordinances making the annual tax levy. Ordinances submitted to the Council by initiative petition and passed by the Council
without change shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within twenty (20) days after the
enactment by the Council of any ordinance which is subject to referendum, a petition signed by currently qualified voters of
the City equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the total number of the qualified voters registered to vote at the last
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/598
preceding regular municipal election may be filed with the City Secretary requesting that any such ordinance be submitted to
a vote of the voters.
Section 14.03. Frequency of Election.
Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more frequently than once each six (6) months, and no
ordinance on the same subject as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on the same subject as a referred
ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters within one (1) year from the date of such
election.
Section 14.04. Form of Petition.
Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum
petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the
circulator thereof as provided by this section. Each signer of any petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil,
and shall indicate after his name his place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the
place. There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of five (5) voters, who, as a committee of the
petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Attached to each separate petition
paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that he only personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a
stated number of signatures appended thereto which were made in his presence, and that he believes them to be the
genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be.
Section 14.05. Filing Examination and Certifications.
All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Secretary as one
instrument. Within ten (10) days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall determine whether each paper of the
petition has a proper statement of the circulator, and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified voters.
The City Secretary shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have attached thereto an affidavit signed
by the circulator thereof. After completing the examination of the petition, if the City Secretary certifies that the petition is
insufficient, he shall set forth in the certificate the particulars in which it is defective, and shall at once notify the petitioners of
these findings. The City Secretary shall then notify the Council of the results of the examination at its next regular meeting.
An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within ten (10) days after the notification of the insufficiency
has been sent by the City Secretary, by filing of a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided
in case of an original petition. The City Secretary shall, within five (5) days after such an amendment is filed, make
examination of the amended petition, and, if the petition be still insufficient, a certificate shall be filed to that effect in the City
Secretary's office, and the committee of petitioners notified of these findings, and no further action shall be had on such
insufficient petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same
purpose.
When a referendum petition, or amended petition as defined above, has been certified as sufficient by the City Secretary, the
ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone
into effect, until and unless approved by the voters, as hereinafter provided.
Section 14.06. Council Consideration and Submission to Voters.
Whenever the Council received a certified initiative or referendum petition from the City Secretary, it shall proceed at once to
consider such a petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read, and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon
the proposed ordinance. The Council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than sixty (60) days after the date on
which such ordinance was submitted to the Council by the City Secretary. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the
Council, and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question, “Shall the ordinance specified in the
referendum petition be repealed?”
If the Council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by the initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set
forth in the petition therefor, or if the Council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be
submitted to the voters not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days from the date the Council takes its final
vote thereon. The Council may, in its discretion, and if no regular election is to be held within such period, provide for a
special election.
Ordinances submitted to vote of the voters in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be
submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the City Attorney, but it shall be finally approved by the City
Council. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear,
concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance and if a paper ballot is
used, it shall have below the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other in the order indicated: “FOR THE
ORDINANCE” and “AGAINST THE ORDINANCE.” Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election, and
may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting on an initiated or referred ordinance or ordinances
shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall have below it the same two
propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the voter shall be given an
opportunity to vote for either of the two propositions and thereby to vote for or against the ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/598
Section 14.07. Referendum Petitions; Suspension of Effect of Ordinances.
When a referendum petition is filed with the City Secretary, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from
taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when:
(a) There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or
(b) The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition, or
(c) The Council repeals the ordinance, or
(d) Thirty (30) days have elapsed after a vote for repeal of the ordinance has failed.
Section 14.08. Results of Referendum Elections.
If a majority of the voters voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an
ordinance of the City. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the voters voting thereon shall thereupon
be deemed repealed. If the conflicting ordinances are approved by the voters at the same election, the one receiving the
greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict.
Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the voters shall be published, and may be amended or
repealed by the Council, as in the case of other ordinances.
Section 14.09. Power of Recall.
The people of the City reserve the power to recall any elected officer of the City. In the case of either the Mayor or any
Council Member, such power may be exercised by filing with the City Secretary a petition signed by currently qualified voters
of the City equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of currently qualified voters registered to
vote at the last regular municipal election demanding the removal of such elected officer. If the petition is certified by the City
Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall order and hold an election forthwith to determine whether such officer shall be
recalled, and if the majority of the legal votes are cast for a recall of the officer named on the ballot, the Council shall
immediately declare his office vacant, and such vacancy shall be filled forthwith in accordance with the provisions of this
Charter. No recall petition shall be filed against an officer within six (6) months after such elected officer takes office.
Any member of the City Council may be removed from office by recall.
Section 14.10. Public Hearing to be Held.
The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the City
Council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present pertinent facts. In this event the City Council shall
order such public hearing to be held not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request
for a public hearing.
Section 14.11. Recall Election.
The City Secretary shall at once examine the recall petition and if he finds it sufficient and in compliance with the provisions
of this article of the Charter, he shall within five (5) days submit it to the City Council with the City Secretary's certificate to
that effect, and notify the officer sought to be recalled of such action. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign
within five (5) days after such notice, the City Council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall election. Any
such election shall be held not less than thirty (30) nor more than ninety (90) days after the petition has been presented to
the City Council or after the public hearing provided in Section 14.10 is held; if such hearing is requested, at the same time
as any municipal election held within such period; but if no such municipal election be held within such period, the City
Council shall call a special election to be held within the time aforesaid.
All qualified voters of the City shall be entitled to cast ballots in a recall election of the Councilman elected at large.
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted “Shall (name of
person) be removed from the office of Council Member by recall?”
(b) Immediately below each question there shall be printed the two following propositions, one above the other,
in the order indicated:
“For the recall of (name of person)”
“Against the recall of (name of person)”
ARTICLE XV. GENERAL PROVISIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/598
Section 15.01. Personal Financial Interests.
The Mayor, Council members and other officers and employees of the City shall not be interested either directly or indirectly
in the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for the City of Midlothian; nor shall any of them be interested
either directly or indirectly in the sale to the City of any supplies, equipment, material or articles purchased nor shall any of
them be the owner of stock in any public utility or public service corporation operating under franchise or license of the City of
Midlothian. Any contract in which any officer or employee of the City has an interest or shall acquire an interest may be
declared void by the City Council. Any violations of this Section shall result in the forfeiture of office, position or job.
State law references–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171; public disclosure, V.T.C.A., Government
Code, ch. 553.
Section 15.02. Official Oath.
All elected officers of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, take and subscribe the official
oath prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Texas. The oath of office shall be administered by the Mayor, Mayor Pro
Tem, City Secretary or any other person authorized by law to administer oaths.
State constitution reference–Oath of office, Texas Constitution, art. 16, sec. 1.
Section 15.03. Notice of Claim.
The City shall not be held liable on account of any claim for the death of any person or injuries to any person or damage to
any property unless the person making such complaint or claiming such damages shall, with sixty (60) days after the time at
which it is claimed such damages were inflicted upon such person or property, file with the City a written statement under
oath, stating the nature and character of such damages or injuries, the extent of the same, the place where same happened,
the circumstances under which same happened and the conditions causing same, with a detailed statement of each item of
damages and the amount thereof, and if it be for personal injuries, giving a list of any witnesses known by affiant to have
seen the accident.
State law references–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101; notice procedures, V.T.C.A., Civil
Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 101.101; immunity of certain governmental functions, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code,
sec. 101.055; limitation on amount of liability, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 101.023.
Section 15.04. Assignment, Execution and Garnishment.
The property, real and personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable for sale or appropriation under any writ of execution.
The funds belonging to the City in the hands of any person, firm or corporation shall not be liable to garnishment on account
of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor any of its
officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The City shall not be
obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors.
State law reference–Authority to provide that municipal funds not subject to garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
101.023.
Section 15.05. Security or Bond Not Required.
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceedings in which the City shall be a party for any bond, undertaking or
security to be executed in behalf of the City, but all actions, suits, and proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as
if such bond, undertaking, or security had been given. The City shall have all remedies of appeal provided by law to all courts
without bond or security of any kind. For the purposes of all such actions, suits, proceedings and appeals, the City shall be
liable in the same manner and to the same extent as if the bond, undertaking or security had been executed and given.
State law reference–Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 6.002.
Section 15.06. Nepotism.
No person related within the second degree by affinity, or the third degree by consanguinity to the Mayor or any member of
the City Council shall be appointed to any paid office or position of the City. This prohibition shall not apply to any person who
shall have been employed by the City for two (2) years or more prior to and at the time of the election of the Mayor, or
members of the City Council or the appointment of the City Manager so related to him or her.
State law reference–Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 573.
Section 15.07. Fire Zones.
The City Council may establish fire zones and prescribe the kind and character of materials to be used in buildings
constructed within such zones.
State law reference–Designation of fire limits in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 342.012.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/598
Section 15.08. When Provisions Take Effect.
For the purpose of nominating and electing members of the Council, the provisions of this Charter shall be in effect for the
regular municipal election to be held in April, 1981. For all other purposes this Charter shall be in effect as provided in
Section 15.19.
Section 15.09. Ordinances, Rules and Regulations Validated.
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Midlothian heretofore ordained, passed or enacted, that are in
force at the time this Charter becomes effective, and which are not in conflict with such Charter, shall remain in full force until
altered, amended or repealed by the City Council after such Charter takes effect.
Section 15.10. Separability Clause.
If any section or part of a section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall
not effect [affect] the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of a section so held invalid may
appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with
the section or part to which such holding shall directly apply.
Section 15.11. Charter Amendment.
This Charter may be amended in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 1170, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as
amended or as may be hereafter amended.
State constitution reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, Texas Constitution, art. 11, sec. 5.
State law reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 9.001 et seq.
Section 15.12. Officers and Employees.
(a) Rights and Privileges Preserved. Nothing in this Charter, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall affect or
impair the rights or privileges of persons who are City officers or employees at the time of its adoption.
(b) Continuance of Office or Employment. Except as specifically provided by this Charter, if at the time this Charter takes
full effect a City administrative officer or employee holds any office or position [sic] until the taking effect of some specific
provision under this Charter directing that he vacate the office or position. Any elected officer whose office becomes
appointive or is or may be abolished by this Charter shall continue in office to which he or she was elected until his or her
term expires, at which time such elective office is abolished as such.
Section 15.13. Departments, Offices and Agencies.
(a) Transfer of Powers. If a City department, office or agency is abolished by this Charter, the powers and duties given it by
law shall be transferred to the City department, office or agency designated in this Charter or, if the Charter makes no
provision, designated by the City Council.
(b) Property and Records. All property, records and equipment of any department, office or agency existing when this
Charter is adopted shall be transferred to the department, office or agency assuming its powers and duties, but, in the event
that the powers or duties are to be discontinued or divided between units or in the event that any conflict arises regarding a
transfer, such property, records or equipment shall be transferred to one or more departments, offices or agencies designated
by the Council in accordance with this Charter.
Section 15.14. Pending Matters.
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue except as modified
pursuant to the provisions of this Charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with by the City
department, office or agency appropriate under this Charter.
Section 15.15. Judicial Notice.
This Charter shall be deemed a public act, may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be
taken thereof in all courts and places.
Section 15.16. Gender.
Whenever the context shall so require, the words “he,” “him,” “his,” “Council Member,” and all other words herein in the male
or neuter gender shall be deemed to include the female gender, all singular words shall include the plural, and all plural
words shall include the singular.
Section 15.17. Interim Government.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/598
From and after the date of adoption of this Charter and until the first regular City election thereunder and the qualifications of
the Mayor and Council Members therein elected, the Mayor and Council then in office shall continue in office and shall
exercise all of the powers conferred upon the City by this Charter.
The additional member of the City Council provided by this Charter shall be appointed by the Mayor, to be confirmed by a
majority vote of the City Council. This appointment shall be in full force and effect until the first general city election in April,
1981.
Section 15.18. Submission of Charter to Electors.
The Charter Commission in preparing this Charter finds and declares that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so
that the voter may vote “Yes” or “No” on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it
to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons the Charter Commission
directs that said Charter be voted upon as a whole, and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of
Midlothian at an election to be held for that purpose on the 9th day of August, 1980. If said Charter is approved by a majority
of the qualified voters voting at said election, it shall become the Charter of the City of Midlothian upon the entering upon the
records of said City by the governing body of such City an official order declaring the adoption of said Charter.
Section 15.19. Charter to Become Effective on October 1, 1980.
The Charter Commission further directs that in order to permit an orderly transition from government of the City's affairs
under the provisions of the general laws to those prescribed by this Charter, this Charter shall become effective and its
provisions shall not be in force until October 1, 1980.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Midlothian, Texas, as compiled, edited and published by
Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc.
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the
“Code of Ordinances, City of Midlothian, Texas,” and may be so cited.
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the
contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles, divisions and
sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed
when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be
observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Midlothian, Texas.
City manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or
other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other
municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Midlothian, Texas.
Council. Whenever the words “council” or “this council” or “the council” are used, they shall mean the city council of the City
of Midlothian, Texas.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Ellis, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/598
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships,
associations and corporations as well as to males.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall
include the singular.
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and
“affirmed.”
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as
may be in current use in the city.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic
and corporate as well as to individuals.
Property. The word “property” means and includes real and personal property.
Real property. The word “real property” means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for
the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues,
recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of
this code are severable and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been
enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any
ordinance which has been previously repealed.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or presented to
the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, the Code of
Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of the code which is to be
amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article and section; provided, however, the failure
so to do shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/598
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or
directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of
ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement
and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the
code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall
be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest
ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the
code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to
prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the
supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the code
printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and,
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this
section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance articles or
sections inserted into the code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of
ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations; injunctive relief
(a) Civil and criminal penalties. The city may enforce a provision of this code or any ordinance of the city through civil or
criminal penalties. Whenever an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is prohibited or declared to be unlawful by such provision, the
person or persons responsible for such violation of or noncompliance with the code or ordinance provision shall be subject to
civil or criminal penalties in the following amounts:
(1) For violation of or noncompliance with any code provision or ordinance governing point source effluent
limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a nonpoint source, into a sewer system, including a
sanitary or stormwater sewer system, owned or controlled by the city, a civil penalty may not exceed five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00).
(2) For violation of or noncompliance with any code provision or ordinance governing fire safety, zoning or
public health and sanitation (including the dumping of refuse), the penalty may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(3) For violation of or noncompliance with any code provision or ordinance that relates to or governs the
following activities, the penalty many not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00):
(A) Preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used to construct a building or other
structure or improvements, including the foundation, structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus,
plumbing and fixtures, entrances or exits;
(B) Preservation of public health or the fire safety of a building or other structure or improvement,
including provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, interior configuration, illumination,
warning devices, sprinklers or other fire suppression devices, availability of water supply for extinguished
fries, or location, design, or width of entrances or exits;
(C) Zoning for the use of land or zoning district classification of the land;
(D) Criteria for land subdivision or construction of buildings, including provisions relating to street width
and design, lot size, building widths or elevation, setback requirements, or utility service specifications or
requirements;
(E) Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/598
(F) Conditions caused by accumulation of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding living
places for insect and rodents;
(G) Interior configuration, design, illumination, or visibility of business premises exhibiting for viewing by
customers while on the premises live or mechanically or electronically displayed entertainment intended to
provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratifications; or
(H) Development within special flood hazard areas.
(4) For violation of or noncompliance with any other code provision or ordinance, the penalty may not exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(5) Each day a violation of or noncompliance with any code provision or ordinance of the city continues shall
constitute a separate offense, and penalties in the amounts stated in this section shall be cumulative.
(6) Any penalty provided for in subsection (a) shall not exceed the amount of a penalty prescribed for the same
or similar violation of or noncompliance with any code provision or ordinance under state law. Any change in the
maximum amount of a penalty pursuant to state law shall be incorporated in this subsection by reference upon the
effective date of such change. The city may utilize any procedures available under the laws of the state for
imposition of civil or criminal penalties in order to enforce its police regulations, provided, however, that the use of
such remedial procedures shall be consistent with state law requirements.
(7) This section is intended to supersede any code or ordinance provision that prescribes a different penalty or
otherwise conflicts with the provisions of subsection (a). Nothing herein is intended to prevent the city from
seeking civil penalties for violation of or noncompliance with a code provision or ordinance described in
subsection (a) in circumstances where a criminal penalty is prescribed for the same conduct.
(8) Any penalty provided for under subsection (a) shall accrue from the date of the violation of or
noncompliance with the code provision or ordinance at issue.
(b) Injunction and equitable relief. In addition to the penalties prescribed in subsection (a), the city may pursue any other
remedies which are available under the laws of the state, including but not limited to prohibitory and mandatory injunctive
relief and revocation of licenses or permits, to enforce or redress a violation of or noncompliance with a police regulation;
provided, however, that the use of such remedial procedures shall be consistent with state law requirements. This subsection
shall supersede to the extent of a conflict any enforcement provision contained in a specific ordinance providing for equitable
remedies.
(c) Charter dowers. This section shall not be construed to limit the city's authority under its charter to enforce its police
regulations.
(Ordinance 2010-02 adopted 1/12/10)
ARTICLE 1.02 FINANCES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.02.001–1.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Lien Expense Reimbursement
Sec. 1.02.031 Authority
The city is empowered by various state laws and municipal ordinances to file liens relating to grass mowing, demolition of
dangerous structures, etc. Incident to the filing of said liens, the city incurs expenses such as costs, filing fees and attorney's
fees. (Ordinance 98-49, sec. 1, adopted 7/28/98)
Sec. 1.02.032 Required
No liens will be released by the city until the obligor reimburses the city for all expenses, costs and attorneys' fees relating to
said liens in addition to the principal amount of the lien, plus accrued interest, at the highest legal rate. (Ordinance 98-49,
sec. 2, adopted 7/28/98)
Secs. 1.02.033–1.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Fees
Sec. 1.02.061 Zoning, subdivisions and signs
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/598
The fee schedule relating to actions pursuant to the city zoning ordinance and city subdivision ordinance and signs is not
printed in this code but is on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance 2000-35 adopted 10/10/00; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 1.02.062 Copying of accident reports
The fees relating to copying of accident reports are not printed in this code but are on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance 97-37 adopted 9/23/97; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.03 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Special Standing Committees
Sec. 1.03.031 Creation; purpose
There are hereby created and designated the following committees, for the purpose of advising staff, providing consultation
concerning the development of physical and financial plans and related agreements and ordinances in their respective areas
of interest, and making recommendations for appointments to boards and commissions:
(1) Utility subcommittee.
(2) Planning/economic development subcommittee.
(3) Transportation/public safety subcommittee.
(4) Nominating subcommittee.
(Ordinance 2008-35, sec. 1, adopted 8/12/08)
Sec. 1.03.032 Members
Each subcommittee shall consist of a minimum of five persons who shall include the mayor, two councilmembers appointed
by the mayor, the city manager, and his staff designee. (Ordinance 2008-35, sec. 2, adopted 8/12/08)
Sec. 1.03.033 Length of term
Members shall serve at the pleasure of the council. (Ordinance 2008-35, sec. 3, adopted 8/12/08)
Sec. 1.03.034 Removal
Members of these committees, which have been appointed by council, shall be subject to removal from the committee by the
city council, upon a majority vote, for any cause deemed sufficient for their removal, in the best interest of public service.
(Ordinance 2008-35, sec. 4, adopted 8/12/08)
Sec. 1.03.035 Meetings and quorums
Meeting notice will be posted in compliance with the open meetings act. (Ordinance 2008-35, sec. 5, adopted 8/12/08)
Sec. 1.03.036 Annual report
It shall be the duty of the city manager to make periodic reports to the city council. (Ordinance 2008-35, sec. 6, adopted
8/12/08)
Secs. 1.03.037–1.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Dallas/Ft. Worth Superconducting Super Collider Research Authority*
Sec. 1.03.061 Finding of necessity
The city council hereby finds, determines, recites and declares that it is wise, expedient, necessary and advisable that the
Dallas/Ft. Worth Superconducting Super Collider Research Authority, hereinafter referred to in this division as “the authority,”
be formed. (1990 Code, sec. 2-41)
Sec. 1.03.062 Creation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/598
The city council, pursuant to the provisions of House Bill 2085 of the Acts of the 70th Legislature, Regular Session 1987,
hereinafter referred to in this division as “the act,” and in conjunction with the governing bodies of the other sponsoring
entities, by concurrent ordinance, does hereby establish and create the authority as a separate body politic and corporate
and a political subdivision of the state. (1990 Code, sec. 2-42)
Sec. 1.03.063 Purpose
The authority is created to engage in the planning, financing, acquiring, constructing, owning, operating and maintaining of
eligible projects necessary or incidental to the location of the super collider facility and neighboring community, to effect the
development and diversification of the economy, the elimination of unemployment or underemployment or the development
or expansion of commerce in the state. (1990 Code, sec. 2-43)
Sec. 1.03.064 Board of directors
The board of directors and their respective offices shall be as set forth on file in the city secretary's office. The board of
directors shall be appointed by concurrent resolutions of the governing bodies of the public entities that have created the
authority and shall serve for two-year terms expiring on June 1 of the odd-numbered years. Vacancies in office shall be filled
for the unexpired term by the same method as successors are appointed. (1990 Code, sec. 2-44)
Sec. 1.03.065 Powers
(a) The authority shall be a separate body politic and corporate and a political subdivision of the state and may:
(1) Sue and be sued.
(2) Enter into contracts, leases and agreements with and accept donations, grants and loans from the United
States, its departments and agencies, this state, its departments and agencies, counties, municipalities, political
subdivisions, and public or private corporations and persons, including those public entities creating the authority.
(3) Acquire, convey, grant, loan, pledge, mortgage, grant a security interest in, or otherwise dispose of, any
land, easements, roads, bridges, infrastructure improvements, other property or improvements, services or cash,
or interest therein that will permit or aid in the accomplishment of the purposes of the act, without the necessity of
taking competitive bids.
(4) Undertake eligible projects.
(5) Make loans to public or private entities to fund eligible projects.
(6) Issue bonds to fund eligible projects.
(7) Encumber its property, pledge its revenues, and enter into credit agreements, as defined by Vernon's Ann.
Civ. St. art. 717q, to secure its bonds.
(8) Adopt bylaws and exercise any other power consistent with the act and this concurrent ordinance creating
the authority.
(9) Exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire land, easements and property, or interests in land,
easements or property, as determined to be necessary by the board of directors for eligible projects, including the
power to take the fee title in land condemned.
(10) Adopt and enforce reasonable rules to carry out its purposes, to secure and maintain safe, efficient and
normal operation and maintenance of the super collider facility and its appurtenant eligible projects, and to
regulate privileges on any land, easement, or property interest adjoining the super collider facility site to prevent
activities on the adjoining land, easement or property interest which could adversely affect the safe, efficient and
normal operation and maintenance of the super collider facility or its appurtenant eligible projects.
(11) Exercise any power necessary or useful in connection with an eligible project.
(12) Generally perform any and all acts necessary for the full exercise of the powers vested in the authority and
shall have the functions, powers, authority, rights, and duties which will permit accomplishment of the purposes for
which it was created.
(b) In addition, the authority shall have all the rights and powers necessary to accomplish the purposes for which it was
created and authorized by the act and other laws of the state.
(1990 Code, sec. 2-45)
Secs. 1.03.066–1.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. Historic Advisory Board
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/598
Part I. In General
Sec. 1.03.091 Established, composition
There is hereby established a board to be called the historic advisory board, which shall consist of seven (7) regular voting
members. (Ordinance 2015-22 adopted 10/13/15)
Sec. 1.03.092 Residency requirements
Voting members shall reside within the city limits and nonvoting members may reside in either the city limits or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Qualified candidates shall have resided within the city limits or ETJ for a minimum period of
five (5) years. Should a prospective member have an extensive background in historic preservation but lacks the residency
requirement, the city council may waive this requirement. (Ordinance 2009-34, sec. 3, adopted 8/11/09)
Sec. 1.03.093 Appointment
Members of the board, voting and nonvoting, shall be appointed by the city council and serve at the desire of the council.
(Ordinance 2009-34, sec. 4, adopted 8/11/09)
Sec. 1.03.094 Terms
Each member, voting or subcommittee, will be appointed to staggered two-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an
unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member
from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the city council, render any such member liable to immediate
removal from office. (Ordinance 2009-34, sec. 5, adopted 8/11/09)
Sec. 1.03.095 Voting
Five (5) voting members of the board shall be present to constitute a quorum. In the event that a quorum is needed, an
alternate from the subcommittee (nonvoting) may be designated and moved up to a voting member for that meeting only or
until a regular voting member shows up to the meeting. In making a recommendation to the city council, affirmative votes of
the majority present shall be required. A board member shall not act in a case in which there is a conflict of interest.
(Ordinance 2009-34, sec. 6, adopted 8/11/09)
Sec. 1.03.096 Executive secretary
The planning director or a designated representative shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of
all its proceedings. (Ordinance 2009-34, sec. 7, adopted 8/11/09)
Sec. 1.03.097 Rules and regulations
The board shall be governed internally through adopted bylaws entitled Rules of Procedure and can be amended from time
to time. (Ordinance 2009-34, sec. 8, adopted 8/11/09)
Secs. 1.03.098–1.03.120 Reserved
Part II. Subcommittee
Sec. 1.03.121 Composition
There will also be a five-member, nonvoting subcommittee created for the purpose of providing assistance to the historic
advisory board in matters of project development and implementation. The subcommittee members will attend all board
meetings and will carry out duties as assigned by the board. (Ordinance 2009-34, sec. 2, adopted 8/11/09)
Sec. 1.03.122 Residency requirements
The members of the subcommittee shall have resided in the area for a minimum of fifteen (15) years. (Ordinance 98-39, sec.
2, adopted 6/23/98)
Sec. 1.03.123 Appointment
The members will be recommended by the historic advisory board and appointed by the city council and will serve at the
desire of the council. (Ordinance 98-39, sec. 3, adopted 6/23/98)
Sec. 1.03.124 Tenure
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/598
Members shall be appointed for staggered terms of two (2) years. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the
manner in which original appointments are required to be made. (Ordinance 98-39, sec. 4, adopted 6/23/98; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Secs. 1.03.125–1.03.150 Reserved
Division 5. Planning and Zoning Commission*
Sec. 1.03.151 Appointments and terms
There is hereby created and established for the city, a planning and zoning commission, which shall be composed of seven
members. The members shall be resident citizens, taxpayers and qualified voters of the city, appointed by a majority vote of
the city council. Each member's term shall be for period of two (2) years and any person filling a vacancy on the commission
shall serve to complete the unexpired term. Members of the commission may be removed by a majority vote of the city
council. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. (Ordinance 2015-23 adopted 10/13/15)
Sec. 1.03.152 Procedures
The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman, and vice-chairman, from its membership, and shall have power
to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and undertakings of the commission, and to
pay for their services and such other necessary expenses, provided that the cost of such services and expenses shall not
exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for the use of the commission. It shall also have the power to make
rules, regulations and bylaws for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city
council, and same shall be subject to approval by such council. Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for:
(1) Regular and special meetings, open to the public;
(2) Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public;
(3) Reporting to the governing body and the public, from time to time and annually;
(4) For the holding of public hearings on its recommendations.
(Ordinance 2007-39, sec. 2, adopted 8/28/07)
Sec. 1.03.153 Scope
The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make and recommend for adoption a
master plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development and redevelopment of the municipality and its environs,
including, but not limited to, investigation and recommendations concerning improvement, extension, additions and
alterations to the streets, water and sewer facilities of the municipality and the feasibility of cooperation with the federal
government or any agency thereof for the purpose of providing or improving the source and distribution of water for the
municipality; and such commission shall have power, and it shall be its duty, to prepare a comprehensive plan and ordinance
for zoning the city in accordance with section 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended and an ordinance for
the subdivision of land in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) in accordance with section 211 of the Texas Local
Government Code. The commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or state law.
(Ordinance 2007-39, sec. 3, adopted 8/28/07)
Sec. 1.03.154 Rules and procedures
(a) Organization and officers.
(1) Officers.
(A) The commission will be composed of seven members who shall be resident citizens, taxpayers and
qualified voters of the city, appointed by a majority vote of the city council. Each member's term shall be for a
period of two (2) years and any person filling a vacancy on the commission shall serve to complete the
unexpired term. Each member serves at the pleasure of and under the guidance of the city council.
Members of the commission may be removed by a majority vote of the city council. The members of the
commission shall serve without compensation.
(B) A chairman and a vice-chairman shall be elected annually from among the commission's membership
at the first meeting in January or as scheduled thereafter, and at such other times as these offices may
become vacant. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall preside over the called meeting. In
the absence of the chairman and the vice-chairman, the longest-serving commissioner present at the
meeting shall be acting chairman for that called meeting.
(C) At least four (4) commissioners shall be present to constitute a quorum and conduct business.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/598
(D) The planning director, or his designated representative, shall serve the commission as executive
secretary.
(2) Duties.
(A) The chairman, or in his absence, the vice-chairman, or acting chairman, as set forth in subsection (1),
above, shall preside over the meetings and shall decide all points of order or procedure.
(B) All letters of transmittal from the commission to the city council shall be over the signature of the
chairman.
(C) The executive secretary shall have the full care, custody and control of the minutes and other official
records, shall attend to the correspondence of the commission, and shall cause to be given such notices as
are required and in the manner prescribed by statute, ordinance, these rules or the commission.
(D) A recording secretary, designated by the planning director, shall perform such duties as are necessary
to prepare accurate and complete minutes of the commission's actions under the supervision of the
executive secretary.
(3) Orientation.
(A) The executive secretary shall prepare and present an orientation session to all newly appointed
members of the planning and zoning commission within 30 days of their appointment. Said orientation
session should include an explanation of the following subjects but not limited to:
(i) Comprehensive zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations.
(ii) Planning and zoning commission rules of procedure.
(iii) Special area plans.
(iv) Capital improvement programs.
(v) The development process.
(vi) Legal criteria for evaluating platting and zoning requests.
(vii) Potential liability of commission members.
(viii) Attendance requirements for commission members.
(B) The chairman shall report to the city council any member who does not attend such orientation
session within 30 days of appointment. Failure to attend said orientation session as required herein shall not
be a condition precedent to any member sitting on the commission and shall not disqualify said member
from deliberating or voting on any matter before the commission.
(4) Rules of order. Roberts Rules of Order, latest revision, shall be the commission's final authority on all
questions of procedure and parliamentary law not covered by these rules of procedure.
(5) Suspension of rules. Any provision of these rules not governed by the city charter or code may be
temporarily suspended by a two-thirds vote of all members of the commission, which vote shall be entered upon
the minutes.
(6) Attendance policy. Members of the board must be present in order to vote at any meeting. Regular
attendance at the board meetings is required of all members. The following number of absences shall constitute
the basis for replacement of a member. Three (3) consecutive absences from meeting of the board shall cause
the position to be considered vacant. In addition, the position of any member who has four (4) absences in a
twelve (12) month period shall also be considered vacant.
(b) Meetings.
(1) Agenda.
(A) An agenda shall be prepared by the executive secretary for each meeting of the commission and
posted in front of the city hall window no later than 72 hours prior to the scheduled hearing.
(B) There shall be attached to each agenda a report of matters pending further action by the commission
and of disposition by the executive secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/598
(2) Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be held on the third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m., unless
otherwise determined by the commission.
(3) Special meetings.
(A) Special meetings for any purpose may be held on the call of the chairman or on request of two or
more members and by giving written notice to all members, deposited in the mail at least 72 hours before
the meeting, or as may be scheduled by a majority of the commission at any previous meeting with a posted
agenda placed in front of the city hall window no later than 72 hours prior to the scheduled hearing.
(B) The time and place of the special meeting shall be determined by the convening authority.
(4) Public meetings.
(A) All meetings shall be held in full compliance with the provisions of state law, the charter and this code
and these rules of procedure.
(B) Any party in interest may appear on his/her own behalf or be represented by counsel or agent.
(5) Work/study session.
(A) The commission may be convened as a committee of the whole in the same manner as prescribed for
the calling of a special meeting for the purpose of holding a work or study session, provided that no
deliberation shall take place regarding scheduled cases.
(B) A written agenda shall be posted for all called work/study sessions as required for regular meetings.
(C) A quorum is required to carry on business at a work/study session.
(c) Official records.
(1) Definition. The official records shall be these rules and regulations and the minutes of the commission
together with all findings, decisions and other official record of the commission.
(2) Recording of vote. The minutes of the commission's proceedings shall show the vote of each member or, if
absent or failing to vote, shall indicate that fact.
(3) Files; retention.
(A) All matters coming before the commission shall be filed in the planning department in accordance with
that department's general file system.
(B) Original papers of all requests and proposals shall be retained for not less than five (5) years after
date of submittal; other studies shall be retained for not less than two (2) years.
(C) Thereafter, they may be microfilmed or in a format acceptable by city policies for retention as
permanent record along with other special matters as the executive secretary deems essential or as the
commission may direct.
(4) Public record. The official records, filed for commission action in regular or special meetings, shall be on file
in the planning department and shall be open to public inspection during customary working hours.
(d) Application procedures.
(1) Written request required. Every proposal submitted for commission action shall be made in writing on
application forms provided by the city accompanied by all prescribed fees and submittal requirements, and shall
be complete in all respects before being accepted for filing.
(2) Filing deadline. Every proposal shall be filed with the planning department according to the latest submittal
calendar approved by the planning and zoning commission every November.
(3) Notice. The public notice and public advertisement of cases requiring public hearings shall adhere to section
1 of the zoning ordinance.
(4) Submission of supporting information. Information supporting a recommendation to approve or disapprove
any proposal before the commission shall be submitted only through the executive secretary or to the commission
in public meeting.
(5) Withdrawal or continuance of application. When any applicant desires to withdraw or continue a hearing on
an application, it may do so by filing a written request to that effect with the executive secretary, subject to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/598
following rules:
(A) A request for withdrawal submitted within fourteen (14) days following the filing of the application shall
be accepted by city staff without the need for commission approval.
(B) All other requests for withdrawal are subject to commission approval at its next regularly scheduled
public hearing, at which time the commission may, at its discretion, recommend acceptance of the
withdrawal (which shall be considered a recommendation of denial without prejudice of the proposal) or
recommend rejection of the withdrawal (which shall be considered a recommendation of denial with
prejudice).
(C) The applicant is entitled to one continuance for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days
from the filing of the application, provided that the request is submitted no later than fourteen (14) days
following the filing of the application. Such continuance shall be granted administratively by city staff and
shall not require commission approval.
(D) All other requests for continuance will be at the discretion of the commission, which may not continue
public hearings on a case beyond one hundred eighty (180) days from the filing of the application. At that
time, the commission shall hear the case or, if the applicant is not prepared to present the merits of the case,
shall recommend denial of the case with or without prejudice.
(e) Hearings and decisions.
(1) Order of business.
(A) The chairman shall call the commission to order, and the members present and absent shall be
recorded.
(B) The minutes of any preceding meeting shall be submitted for approval.
(C) The public shall be advised of the procedures to be followed in the meeting. The executive secretary
shall publicly advise the commission of any communications received pertaining to any matter before the
commission.
(D) The commission shall then hear and act upon those proposals scheduled for public hearing, together
with any other matters of business, and report as the commission or executive secretary finds to require
commission consideration.
(2) Procedure for hearing of proposals.
(A) The chairman shall call each proposal for amendment in such order as to be in accord with the
hearing time and agenda sequence specified in the posted notice of public hearing.
(i) The chairman, at the request of other commissioners and/or staff, may change the order of the
agenda.
(B) Staff will present each case to the commissioners and also provide a recommendation. The applicant
or representative may also present their case to the commission.
(C) The chairman shall next call on persons who have filled out a form to speak relative to the applicable
public hearing proposal being heard.
(D) The chairman shall afford the staff an opportunity to call to the attention of the commission any
additional pertinent information.
(E) The chairman shall then call for rebuttal testimony from the applicant only.
(3) Voting.
(A) The commission shall vote on each case after it is presented and before the public hearing on the next
case.
(B) During the public hearing on the case, any member of the commission may call upon the applicant,
city staff or any other person present at the hearing for further questioning relevant to the case.
(C) During the voting session, no further testimony shall be permitted. However, the commission may
direct questions to the city staff in order to review or clarify any testimony or evidence presented at the public
hearing.
(4) Motions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/598
(A) A motion may be made by any member of the commission.
(B) A motion to recommend approval of any item on the posted agenda shall require an affirmative vote of
four (4) members.
(5) Disqualification.
(A) A member shall disqualify himself from voting whenever he finds that he has a personal or monetary
interest in the property under appeal, or will be directly affected by the decision of the commission.
(B) A member may disqualify himself from voting whenever any applicant, or his agent, has sought to
influence the vote of the member on his application, other than in the public hearing.
(C) A member who disqualifies himself or abstains from voting on any case shall announce such
disqualification or abstention for the public record, prior to the presentation of the case, and shall not take
part in the deliberation or voting on the case. In the event a member does not discover any circumstances
require his disqualification or abstention until the public hearing, such member shall announce such
disqualification or abstention as soon as it is discovered.
(D) A member who disqualifies himself from voting shall also sign a conflict of interest disclosure form and
be notarized by the city secretary.
(6) Staff attendance.
(A) The director of planning, or their designees, shall attend all meetings of the commission.
(B) The director of planning and the city attorney shall advise the commission on all matters under
consideration and may direct questions to the applicant or any other person at the public hearing.
(C) The director of planning and the city attorney or their designees shall, at the request of the chairman
or any other member of the commission, be available to respond to questions from any member of the
commission.
(f) Rules and amendments.
(1) Amendments. Amendments to these rules of procedure may be adopted by the commission at any meeting
upon the affirmative vote of four (4) members, provided that such amendment is proposed at a preceding meeting
and spread on the minutes of such meeting. By unanimous consent of the commission, amendments may be
adopted at the meeting at which introduced but shall not become effective until the next regular meeting following
city council approval. The city council may request recommendations from the commission; however, the rules of
procedure may be amended at any time without the commission's prior approval.
(2) Certified copy. A certified copy of these rules of procedure and of any amendments thereto shall be filed in
the office of the city secretary within ten days following their date of adoption.
(3) Repealing clause. All previously adopted rules of procedure of the commission shall be and the same are
hereby expressly repealed.
(Ordinance 2015-23 adopted 10/13/15)
Secs. 1.03.155–1.03.180 Reserved
Division 6. Citizen's Community Planning Group
Sec. 1.03.181 Creation
There is hereby created the citizen's community planning group. (Ordinance 99-74, sec. 1, adopted 12/28/99; Ordinance
2003-10, sec. 1, adopted 1/28/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.03.182 Purpose
The citizen's community planning group will develop and annually review a community project list consisting of projects such
as parks, libraries, city halls, etc., for the purpose of making recommendations to the city council on an annual program.
(Ordinance 2003-10, sec. 2, adopted 1/28/03)
Sec. 1.03.183 Members
The committee shall consist of twenty-two members. Twenty-one committee members shall be appointed by the city council.
One member shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ordinance 99-74, sec. 2, adopted 12/28/99; Ordinance 2003-10, sec.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/598
3, adopted 1/28/03)
Sec. 1.03.184 Terms
Terms of office of committee members shall be for two years, and the terms shall be staggered. Appointments shall be made
before the 15th of January each year, or as soon as possible thereafter. (Ordinance 99-74, sec. 3, adopted 12/28/99;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.03.185 Meetings and quorum
The committee shall hold as many meetings as necessary to conduct its business. A majority of the members of the board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and posted in
accordance with state law. (Ordinance 99-74, sec. 4, adopted 12/28/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.03.186 Report
It shall be the duty of the committee to make a report to the city council of its recommendations for proposed capital
improvements for the upcoming year. (Ordinance 99-74, sec. 5, adopted 12/28/99)
Secs. 1.03.187–1.03.200 Reserved
Division 7. Construction Board of Appeals
Sec. 1.03.201 Creation
(a) The city council hereby establishes a construction board of appeals (the board) for the purpose of determining the
acceptability and adequacy of materials, equipment and methods of construction, hearing appeals of interpretations by
designated officials as listed herein or elsewhere in this code. The city council shall adopt construction codes and standards
which will be applicable throughout the city. Construction codes and standards shall include but not be limited to the building
codes (building, fire, residential, existing building, energy conservation, fuel gas, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes),
property maintenance code, swimming pool code, and sign code as may be adopted by the city council and amended from
time to time.
(b) Whenever any reference to the electrical board, mechanical board, plumbing board or other similar boards is made in
any ordinance adopted prior to this article, such reference shall be deemed to refer to the construction board of appeals as
created herein.
Sec. 1.03.202 Composition
The board shall consist of five (5) members, with three (3) alternate members, to be appointed in the following manner:
(1) Members.
(A) Place 1: *Architect or accredited professional building designer.
(B) Place 2: *Engineer with mechanical, electrical, plumbing or structural background.
(C) Place 3: *Master electrician.
(D) Place 4: *Master plumber.
(E) Place 5: *Air-conditioning/refrigeration contractor.
(2) At-large alternates.
(A) Place 6: Fire protection engineer or accredited fire protection professional.
(B) Place 7: Homebuilder, member of the Texas Association of Builders (TAB) or member of the Ellis
County Chapter Homebuilders Association.
(C) Place 8: General contractor, member of the associated general contractors (AGC).
*Currently licensed by the State of Texas.
Sec. 1.03.203 Appointment of members
Subject to confirmation by the city council, the city manager shall appoint members or alternate members to the board from
time to time.
Sec. 1.03.204 Residency
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/598
All members and alternate members must reside within the Midlothian Independent School District (MISD) boundaries or
within the county in the event qualified members and alternates are not first and foremost available from within the MISD.
Sec. 1.03.205 Terms of members
Members and alternate members shall serve two (2) year terms. Members and alternate members appointed to oddnumbered
places shall serve terms which expire July 1st of odd-numbered years. Members and alternate members
appointed to the even-numbered places shall serve terms which expire July 1st of even-numbered years. No member or
alternate member shall serve more than a total of three (3) consecutive two (2) year terms. A member or alternate member
may be eligible to serve again after a break in service of at least two (2) years. Members and alternate members shall serve
until their successors are appointed.
Sec. 1.03.206 Successors
Should any member or alternate member of the board die, become unable to act for any reason, resign or be removed for
cause, as hereinafter provided, the city manager shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the city council, a successor to fill
the unexpired term, or to serve until a new member or alternate member can be duly appointed.
Sec. 1.03.207 Disqualification of member
A member or alternate member shall not hear an appeal in which that member or alternate member has a personal,
professional or financial interest.
Sec. 1.03.208 Removal from office
The city council may remove any member or alternate member of the board for cause based on a written charge during the
term of which he/she may be appointed. Prior to making a decision regarding removal, the city council must hold a public
hearing on the matter “if requested” by the member subject to the removal action.
Sec. 1.03.209 Compensation of members
All members and alternate members shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses
attendant to the performance of their duties as allowed by law.
Sec. 1.03.210 Ex officio members
The building official shall serve as an ex officio member of the board. The building official shall serve as secretary of the
board. By the end of each fiscal year, the building official will provide an annual report containing an overview of the past
year's operation of the board to the city manager.
Sec. 1.03.211 Rules and procedures
(a) The board must adopt rules to govern its proceedings that are consistent with this division and the statutes of the state.
The rules should establish hearing procedures that give ample opportunity for presentation of evidence and testimony by all
interested parties. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but shall mandate that only
relevant information be received. The board may amend the rules and procedures from time to time when deemed
necessary.
(b) The board shall hold an organizational meeting in January of each year, or as soon as possible thereafter; at which
time it shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson before proceeding to other matters of business. Alternate members
may not serve as chairperson or vice-chairperson.
Sec. 1.03.212 Meetings
All meetings of the board shall be open to the public as provided by law. The board shall hold meetings at such time and
place as notified by the chairperson. The building official will present all matters to the board.
Sec. 1.03.213 Quorum
(a) Four (4) members of said board shall constitute a quorum to transact business. Members present, including the chair,
shall vote unless required to abstain due to a conflict of interest.
(b) As at-large alternates, alternate members may fill in for any absent member or vacant position. When only one (1)
alternate is needed, the chair may determine which alternate may substitute at any particular meeting, giving fair rotation
between alternate members. The chosen alternate shall serve for the entire meeting.
(c) Alternate members may participate in discussions, but may not vote or be counted as part of the quorum; except that
when filling in for a vacant position, in the absence of any other member or when any other member is required to abstain,
the designated alternate member may be counted and allowed to vote in that members place.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/598
(d) Ex officio members cannot vote and do not count toward a quorum.
Sec. 1.03.214 Board decision
The board shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the designated code official by a concurring vote of four (4) of its
members. Certified copies of the board's decision shall be furnished to the appellant and to the building official.
Sec. 1.03.215 Notice of hearing
The board shall meet within ten (10) days of the filing of an appeal or at stated periodic meetings. All parties of interest shall
be notified in writing of the time and place for appeal hearings. Parties may appear before the board in person, by agent or by
attorney. The board may require additional data and tests, at the appellant's expense, that may be necessary for an adequate
decision of the appeal.
Sec. 1.03.216 Agenda and records
The agenda for the board shall be prepared by the secretary and shall be posted as required by law. All records and
evidence pertinent to any appeal shall be transmitted to the board prior to the hearing by delivery to the secretary. Minutes
must be kept of the board's proceedings that reflect each member's vote, decision to abstain, or absence from the hearing for
each and every matter. Records of all appeals and meetings shall be kept in the office of the building official.
Sec. 1.03.217 Right of appeal
Any person, firm, company or corporation aggrieved by a decision or order of the designated code official may appeal such
decision or order to the board if it falls within the board's authority. Every appeal must be filed in writing on the form provided
by staff with the secretary within twenty (20) days from the date of the decision or order appealed from occurred. The board
shall not consider any appeal that is filed after the twenty (20) day period. Such appeal shall contain appropriate reference to
the decision or order appealed from, as well as the grounds for the appeal. At the time of filing an appeal, the appellant shall
pay a nonrefundable appeal fee as established by the city council. The building official will first present all appeals at the
board hearing prior to testimony by any other interested parties.
Sec. 1.03.218 Postponed hearing
When five (5) members are not present to hear an appeal, either the appellant or the appellant's representative shall have
the right to request a postponement of the hearing.
Sec. 1.03.219 Authority and power
(a) The board shall have no authority relative to the administrative provisions of any of the codes and standards under its
purview.
(b) The board shall have the authority and power to:
(1) Hear appeals on “interpretations” by the building official or other designated official on the adopted building
codes (e.g., building, fire, residential, energy, fuel gas, electrical, mechanical and plumbing codes), property
maintenance code, swimming pool code and the sign code. No interpretation shall be heard by the board until the
designated official has rendered a written interpretation.
(2) Approve alternate methods of construction where it is “impractical” to meet the adopted construction codes
and standards; provided that the board finds the same degree of suitability, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance,
durability, sanitation and safety exists in the alternate method as intended by the adopted codes and standards.
(3) Approve new methods of construction “not covered” by the construction codes and standards; provided that
the board finds the same degree of suitability strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, sanitation and
safety exists in the new methods as intended by the adopted codes. The board in approving new materials and
processes shall rely upon tested and proven methods, standards or practices.
(4) Determine the “acceptability and adequacy” of materials, equipment and methods of construction of signs.
Hear appeals on interpretations by the building official or other designated official on the sign code of the city. No
interpretation shall be heard by the board until the building official has rendered a written interpretation.
(c) The board shall not have the authority or power to:
(1) Waive or grant variances to the administrative and nonadministrative sections and provisions of the adopted
construction codes and standards.
(2) Waive or grant variances for the use of alternate materials or construction methods.
Sec. 1.03.220 Limitations on authority
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/598
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of the adopted construction codes and standards have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of the codes and standards do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of
construction is proposed. The board may only make a determination as to whether the alternative material or method of
construction equally meets the applicable code's provisions and standards, especially considering the alternative's adequacy,
stability, strength, sanitation, fire resistance, and safety for the public's health and welfare.
Sec. 1.03.221 Other functions
The board may review and study from time to time proposed amendments to the respective construction codes and
standards and recommend any necessary changes and/or improvements to the city council. This review shall include
consideration of suggestions from industry or the public at large which shall be obtained by means of open hearing as well as
through the regular channels. The board may make recommendations to the city council for amendments to codes and
standards as needed throughout the year.
Sec. 1.03.222 Enforcement
The building official or other designated official shall enforce and execute all legal decisions and orders of the board for which
they are respectively responsible.
Sec. 1.03.223 Stay of proceedings
An appeal to the board shall stay all proceedings in connection with the decision or order appealed from, unless and until the
building official or other designated official shall have certified to the board after notice of appeal has been filed that stay
would cause hazard to life or property. Any work done contrary to the order of the building official or other designated official
after filing an appeal, shall be subject to nullification should the order be affirmed and may not be considered by the board as
mitigating or extenuating circumstance.
Sec. 1.03.224 Court review
A person, firm, company or corporation aggrieved by a decision or order of the board may present to a district court a
petition, duly verified, setting forth that such a decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality. Such
petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10) calendar days after the date of the decision of the board.
(Ordinance 2011-06 adopted 2/22/11)
ARTICLE 1.04 TORT LIABILITY*
Sec. 1.04.001 Governmental immunity
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety.
Neither the city nor agents and representatives of the city (or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trustee or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any
order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article) shall be liable for any damage sustained to
persons or property as the result of such activity. (1990 Code, sec. 2-181)
Sec. 1.04.002 Property owner immunity
Any person owning or controlling real estate, fixtures or other premises, who is compelled by reason of authority exercised
pursuant to law to grant the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate, fixtures or
premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice disaster shall not be civilly liable for
the death of, or injury to, any persons on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (1990 Code, sec. 2-182)
Sec. 1.04.003 Standard of care for emergency action
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, and every officer, agent, or employee of an authorized provider of emergency
services, including, but not limited to, every unit of government or subdivision thereof, while responding to emergency calls or
reacting to emergency situations, regardless of whether any declaration of emergency has been declared or proclaimed by a
unit of government or subdivision thereof, is hereby authorized to act or not to act in such a manner to effectively deal with
the emergency. An action or inaction is “effective” if it in any way contributes or can reasonably be thought by the provider of
such emergency service to contribute to preserving any lives or property. This section shall prevail over every other provision
of this code or ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law
establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee, agent, or officer thereof, or
other unit of government or subdivision thereof or its employees, agents, or officers shall be liable for failure to use ordinary
care in such emergency. It is the intent of the city council, by passing this article, to assure effective action in emergency
situations by those entrusted with the responsibility of saving lives and property by protecting such governmental units from
liability and their employees, agents, and officers from unintentional tort liability to the fullest extent permitted by statutory and
constitutional law. This section shall be liberally construed to carry out the intent of the city council. (1990 Code, sec. 2-183)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/598
ARTICLE 1.05 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.05.001 Definitions
The definitions contained in section 201.003 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, are herein adopted save
and except for the definition of “records management officer.”
Records management officer. The records management officer means the city secretary or the city secretary's designee.
Sec. 1.05.002 Records management program, records management officer
(a) The city secretary is authorized to establish and administer the records management program for the city pursuant to
legal, fiscal, administrative, and archival requirements.
(b) The city secretary or city secretary's designee is hereby named records management officer.
(c) The city secretary shall implement a program to encompass such areas of records management as are required to
preserve and keep in order all books, papers, documents, records and files of the city council and of the executive
departments to achieve the following results:
(1) Release space and reduce the need for storage and filing equipment;
(2) Establish an efficient retrieval operation for both active and inactive municipal records;
(3) Provide for routine disposition of paperwork;
(4) Maintain security over municipal records;
(5) Communicate the need of an effective records management program; and
(6) Secure a central records storage facility which can be operated and maintained by records management
staff.
(d) The requirements of this article shall be known and may be cited as the “Records Management Program of the City of
Midlothian, Texas,” providing for the proper and efficient management of the municipal records of the city.
(e) The citizens of the city have a right to expect efficient and cost-effective government. Recognizing the importance of
city records in the lives of all citizens, the efficient management of city records is necessary to the effective and economic
operation of the city, the preservation of records of permanent value is necessary to provide the people of the state with
resources concerning their history and to document their rights of citizenship and property, and the establishment of uniform
standards and procedures for the maintenance, preservation, electronic storage, or other disposition of city records is
necessary to fulfill the higher public purpose.
(f) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the
creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of
integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition.
Sec. 1.05.003 Records as public property; destruction and use of records
(a) All city records, as defined herein are hereby declared to be property of the city. No city official or employee has, by
virtue of position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled
them.
(b) The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of city records is prohibited.
Sec. 1.05.004 Records management officer duties
The records management officer shall have the following duties and others as assigned by the city council, and as provided
by state law:
(1) Assist in establishing and developing policies and procedures for a records management program for the
city, which program shall include basic files management and records disposition policies, systems, standards and
procedures;
(2) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to custodians for the purposes of
reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping;
(3) In cooperation with the custodians of the records:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/598
(A) Prepare and file with the director and librarian, the records control schedules and the list of obsolete
records required by the act;
(B) Prepare and file with the director and librarian amended schedules as needed to reflect new records
created or received by the city; and
(C) Prepare or direct the preparation of requests for authorization to destroy records not on an approved
control schedule as provided by the act, of requests to destroy the originals of permanent records that have
been saved electronically, and of electronic storage authorization requests;
(4) In cooperation with custodians, identify and take adequate steps to preserve city records that are of
permanent value;
(5) In cooperation with custodians, identify and take adequate steps to protect essential city records;
(6) In cooperation with custodians, ensure the maintenance, preservation, electronic storage, and destruction of
records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city's record management program
and requirements of state law;
(7) Disseminate to the city council and custodian's information concerning state laws, administrative rules, and
the policies of the city relating to local government records through a records manual which may be amended
from time to time and other means of communication;
(8) In cooperation with custodians, establish procedures to ensure that the handling of records in any context of
the records management officer or those under the officer's authority is carried out with due regard for:
(A) The duties and responsibilities of custodians that may be imposed by law; and
(B) The confidentiality of information in records to which access is restricted by law.
(9) Report annually to the city council on program effectiveness;
(10) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city offices and departments, by preparation of
manuals of procedure and policies and by on-site consultation;
(11) Carry out destruction and transfers that are required by records schedules, and carry out electronic storage
tasks when staff and central facility becomes available;
(12) Design and manage the operations of a records center for the low cost storage of inactive records and as a
future site for a centralized electronic storage program;
(13) Develop a citywide forms design and control system; and
(14) Establish in cooperation with other responsible city officials a disaster plan for each city office and
department to insure maximum availability of records for re-establishing operations quickly and with minimum
disruption and expense.
Sec. 1.05.005 City council duties
The city council shall:
(1) Establish, promote, and support an active and continuing program for the efficient and economical
management of all city records;
(2) Cause policies and procedures to be developed for the administration of the program under the direction of
the records management officer;
(3) Facilitate the creation and maintenance of city records containing adequate and proper documentation of
the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of the city and designed to
furnish the information necessary to protect the legal and financial rights of the city, the state, and persons
affected by the activities of the city government;
(4) Facilitate the identification and preservation of city records that are of permanent value;
(5) Facilitate the identification and protection of essential city records;
(6) Cooperate with the commission in its conduct of statewide records management surveys; and
(7) Review records control schedules, or amended schedules, as it considers necessary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/598
Sec. 1.05.006 Custodians of records
Custodians of records in the city shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established by
the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out requirements under the act;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of city business and the services, programs, and duties for which the
custodian and the custodian's staff are responsible;
(3) Maintain the records in the custodian's care and carry out their preservation, electronic storage, destruction,
or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city's records management
program and the requirements of the act and rules adopted thereunder;
(4) Designate records officers within their offices and provide the records management officer the names of the
designees and all persons working under their supervision, such records officers to report directly to the custodian
in their department on matters relating to the records management program and have full access to all files in their
respective departments; and
(5) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a custodian of
records does not exempt the custodian or the records in the custodian's care from the application of this article or
rules adopted by the state under the Local Government Records act (the “act”), and may not be used by the
custodian as a basis for refusal to participate in the city's records management program.
Sec. 1.05.007 Electronic storage of records
(a) Electronic storage. The maintenance of city record data in the form of digital electronic signals on a computer hard disk,
magnetic tape, optical disk, or similar machine-readable medium.
(b) Source document. The city record from which city record data is obtained for electronic storage. The term does not
include backup copies of the data in any media generated from electronic storage.
(c) Any city record data may be stored electronically in addition to or instead of source documents in paper or other media,
subject to the requirements of the act and rules adopted under it.
(d) The city will be subject to the rules established by the commission for standards and procedures for electronic storage
and will be subject to the provisions of chapter 205 of the act.
Sec. 1.05.008 Public access to record copies
The public shall have access to information stored electronically to which they are entitled under law. Such copied records
shall be placed in conveniently accessible files and the public shall be allowed to use, examine, exhibit or project or enlarge
the same upon request and during regular office hours.
Sec. 1.05.009 Fees for copies of certain records
The cost for provisions of city records shall not exceed that permitted by the Texas Public Information Act.
(Ordinance 2016-24 adopted 9/27/16)
ARTICLE 1.06 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.06.001 Conflict of provisions
When the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede
and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. (1990
Code, sec. 5-1)
Sec. 1.06.002 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety,
and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with
any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to
persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and
without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the
whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/598
practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (1990 Code, sec. 5-2)
Sec. 1.06.003 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity
authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by
contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster.
During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and
necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (1990 Code, sec. 5-3)
Sec. 1.06.004 Obstruction of personnel
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management
organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule
or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. (1990 Code, sec. 5-4)
Sec. 1.06.005 False personation
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a
member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person
by the proper officials. (1990 Code, sec. 5-5)
Sec. 1.06.006 Unauthorized warnings
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the
termination of a warning. (1990 Code, sec. 5-6)
Secs. 1.06.007–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 1.06.031 Office of director; coordinator
(a) The office of emergency management director of the city shall be held by the mayor. (1990 Code, sec. 5-31(a);
Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. (1990 Code,
sec. 5-31(b))
Sec. 1.06.032 Responsibilities of director
The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying
out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the
coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. (1990 Code, sec. 5-32)
Sec. 1.06.033 Composition of organization
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so
designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and
duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the
emergency management plan. (1990 Code, sec. 5-33)
Sec. 1.06.034 Powers, duties of director
The powers and duties of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and
an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would
tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city and
recommendation for adoption by the city council of all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the
implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/598
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the
purposes of this article.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization as well as the training of
emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency
management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency
management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the
carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives
of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed
desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the
county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment,
including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency
management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter
and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used
during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 418.001 et
seq.).
(1990 Code, sec. 5-34)
Sec. 1.06.035 Dissemination of information
All proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the
attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the
city secretary. (1990 Code, sec. 5-35)
Sec. 1.06.036 Continuance of declaration of emergency
The declaration of emergency may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with
the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall
be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. (1990 Code, sec. 5-36)
Secs. 1.06.037–1.06.055 Reserved
Division 3. Plan
Sec. 1.06.056 Scope
A comprehensive emergency management plan which is on file in the city secretary's office shall be maintained in a current
state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As
provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency
management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of
the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to
perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times.
The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the
time of a disaster. (1990 Code, sec. 5-56)
Sec. 1.06.057 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation
of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint
emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/598
necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as such program may affect the city.
(1990 Code, sec. 5-57)
ARTICLE 1.07 LIBRARY
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.07.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Librarian. The head librarian of the A. H. Meadows Library or his designated agent.
Library. The A. H. Meadows Library maintained by the city and the Midlothian Independent School District.
Patron. Any person who uses, or seeks to use, any facility, service, program, or item offered by the library.
(1990 Code, sec. 11-51)
Sec. 1.07.002 Responsibility of school district
The Midlothian Independent School District shall be responsible for furnishing a certified librarian to the library and will pay all
costs of utilities, maintenance of the building, and custodial services. (1990 Code, sec. 11-52)
Sec. 1.07.003 Responsibility of city
The city shall be responsible for furnishing one (1) library aide, who shall be paid at the scale of the Midlothian Independent
School District for school aides. (1990 Code, sec. 11-53)
Sec. 1.07.004 Rules, regulations, fees
The rules and regulations and fees of the library shall be on file at the library. (1990 Code, sec. 11-54)
Secs. 1.07.005–1.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Library Board
Sec. 1.07.031 Members
The A. H. Meadows Library Board shall be composed of nine (9) members, including the superintendent of schools, the city
manager, three (3) members appointed by the city council, three (3) members appointed by the Midlothian Independent
School District board of trustees; the ninth member shall be appointed by the other eight (8) members and shall reside
outside the city limits. (1990 Code, sec. 11-66)
Sec. 1.07.032 Terms of office
The A. H. Meadows Board, excepting the city manager and the school superintendent, shall serve three-year terms with two
(2) members, one (1) city and one (1) school, appointed each year in August to begin serving in September. The member
appointed by the other eight (8) members shall serve a three-year term. Any unexpired term shall be filled by appointment of
the A. H. Meadows Library board, but must be ratified by both the city council and the Midlothian Independent School District
board of trustees. (1990 Code, sec. 11-67)
Sec. 1.07.033 Self-governing board
The A H. Meadows Library Board shall be a self-governing body. (1990 Code, sec. 11-68)
Sec. 1.07.034 Powers
The A. H. Meadows Library Board shall have, but not be limited to, the power to make budgets, hire and fire personnel, and
establish library policies and library hours. (1990 Code, sec. 11-69)
ARTICLE 1.08 PARKS AND RECREATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.08.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context indicates otherwise.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/598
Closed field or area. A field or area that has been closed for any use due to weather or maintenance by the recreation
manager.
Director. The director of the City of Midlothian Parks Department or designee.
Game field. A field that has been designated by the director to be used only for the purpose of conducting league play or
tournament play only.
League play. An athletic event which is authorized, organized or scheduled with the assistance of the city parks and
recreation department by a nonprofit organization which is a member of the city's sports association.
Park. A park, reservation, playground, recreation center, or any other area in the city owned, leased, controlled or used by
the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation, including all planted expressways, parkways, triangles and traffic circles
maintained by the city.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company or organization of any kind.
Sec. 1.08.002 Unlawful acts
(a) General park rules. Within the limits of said parks, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to do any of the acts
hereinafter specified, except as may be otherwise provided:
(1) To hitch, fasten, lead, drive, or let loose any animal, reptile or fowl of any kind, provided that this shall not
apply to dogs when led by a cord or chain, not more than six (6) feet long except in designated areas.
(2) To ride or drive any horse or other animal, except in designated areas. To ride, drive, or go at a rate of
speed faster than speed limits as posted on standard traffic signs, upon any bicycle, motorcycle automobile or any
other vehicle whatsoever, upon any drive or street in any park of the city, or to ride or drive any such motorcycle,
automobile, or other motorized vehicle upon any walk in such park, or to ride or drive any such motorcycle,
automobile or other motorized vehicle upon the turf, grass or soil, except in designated areas.
(3) To carry or discharge any firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or any other fireworks, air-guns, BB
guns, bows and arrows, slingshots; or hit golf balls, except in designated areas.
(4) To damage, cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, plant, shrub, rock, building, cage, pen, monument,
fence, bench or other structure, apparatus, or property; or to pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush,
plant or flower; or to mark or write upon, paint or deface in any manner, any building, monument, fence, bench, or
other structure.
(5) To cut or remove any turf, wood, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel, or fertilizer.
(6) To swim, to bathe, wade in, or pollute the water of any fountain, pond, lake, or stream.
(7) To make or kindle a fire except in picnic stoves, braziers, fire pits, or designated areas provided for that
purpose.
(8) To wash dishes or to empty salt water or other waste liquids elsewhere than in sinks provided for such
purposes.
(9) To leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers, or other refuse elsewhere than in receptacles provided therefor.
(10) To participate or engage in any activity on any public park area when such activity will create a danger to
the public or may be considered a public nuisance. Overnight camping is prohibited on any park property except
by special permit issued by the city manager or his designate.
(11) To play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, or
other device, for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representation of value, or to maintain or exhibit any
gambling table or other instrument of gambling or gaming.
(12) To use or speak any threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language in any of the public parks, and no
person shall commit, in any parks, any obscene, lewd, or indecent act or create any nuisance.
(13) To disturb in any manner, any picnic, meeting, service, concert, exercise or exhibition.
(14) To distribute, post, place or erect any advertising, handbill, circular, bill, notice, paper or other advertising
device without prior permission of the city manager or his designate.
(15) To sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise, or services unless such person has a
written agreement or a permit issued by the city manager or his designate.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/598
(16) To practice, carry on, conduct or solicit any trade, occupation, business or profession or to circulate a
petition of any kind or character without approval of the city manager or his designate.
(17) For any person over the age of six (6) years to use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.
(18) To remain, stay or loiter in any public park between dusk to dawn of the following day or remain, stay or
loiter in any park in other than open hours when posted as open between dusk to dawn of the same day except by
a special permit issued by the city manager or his designate. All parks will have a sign posted of the operational
hours.
(19) To possess or consume any alcoholic beverage including liquor, wine, beer, or any other type, within any
city park.
(20) To participate or to attempt to participate as a coach, assistant coach, manager, trainer, umpire, referee or
other official during any game, practice, or tournament sponsored by an organized sports association, if such
person is not recognized as such or if the person's recognition has been suspended, terminated or revoked by
such sports association.
(21) To use any tobacco product, or to smoke or possess any burning tobacco weed, plant or other tobacco
product except in designated smoking areas or in paved parking areas.
(22) To interfere or disrupt any game, league play, tournament or practice of any organized sports association,
or any city-sponsored or approved organized athletic activity.
(23) To use any abusive or profane language or gestures toward any coach, assistant coach, trainer, manager,
umpire, referee, player, or other official during a practice, game or league play of any organized sports association
or any city-sponsored or approved organized athletic activity.
(24) For any person ejected from a game, field or facility by the umpire, referee, or other game official, to fail to
leave the game, field or facility, or to otherwise fail to comply with the ejection order.
(25) For a person 18 years of age or older to participate or to attempt to participate in any game, practice, or
tournament of a youth sports association as a coach, assistant coach, trainer, manager, umpire, referee or in any
other official capacity without first having on file with the youth sports association a current certificate of
satisfactory compliance with the city policy for criminal background check from the sponsoring youth sports
association.
(Ordinance 2014-31 adopted 8/12/14)
(b) Dog park rules. Within the limit of said dog park located at 1111 Walter Stephenson Road, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to do any of the acts hereinafter specified, except as may be otherwise provided:
(1) General rules and information.
(A) Use of the dog park shall be at the handler's own risk. Handlers shall be responsible for the actions of
their dogs at all times.
(B) No person under 12 years of age or under may enter the dog park unless supervised by an adult.
(C) No person shall allow a child under their supervision to run with or chase dogs inside the dog park
(D) The dog park shall be accessed only through its designated entrance gate. No person shall fail to
close or otherwise prevent the closing of the dog park gate, which shall be closed at all times except when
entering or exiting the dog park.
(E) No person shall be in the possession of food or treats for people or dogs while in the dog park.
(F) Handlers shall clean up and properly dispose of any waste left by their dog.
(G) No person shall possess a glass container while in the dog park.
(H) No person shall possess or use tobacco products in the dog park.
(I) No person shall possess or consume alcoholic beverages within the dog park.
(J) No person shall conduct professional dog training classes within the dog park.
(K) No person shall use motorized vehicles or toys, bicycles, scooters, riding toys, skateboards or other
items that might interfere with the utilization of the dog park by other handlers and their dogs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/598
(2) Dog-related rules.
(A) Dogs must be leashed when entering or exiting the dog park.
(B) Handlers must carry and keep a leash visible for each dog in their possession at all times.
(C) Any dog that exhibits or appears to exhibit aggressive behavior, including aggressive barking, biting or
fighting, shall be immediately leashed and removed from the dog park.
(D) Dogs must be properly licensed and vaccinated with corresponding tags displayed on each dog's
collar. All dogs must be healthy and have no open wounds.
(E) Dogs “in season” shall be prohibited.
(F) Dogs under the age of four (4) months shall be prohibited.
(G) Dogs wearing spike, pinch or prong collars shall be prohibited.
(H) No person shall possess more than two (2) dogs at any one time in the dog park.
(I) The city is not responsible for any damage or injury caused by handlers' dogs. Owners and handlers
are financially responsible and liable for damage or injury caused by their dogs.
(J) Handlers must be in verbal and sight control of their dogs at all times while in the dog park.
(K) A person who has knowledge of an incident in the dog park involving a dog biting a human must report
such incident to the city's animal control services or police department.
(L) No person shall be within the dog park except during the operational hours established by the city,
which may be altered from time-to-time to accommodate the city's operational needs
(3) Violation. Any person violating any dog park rule as set forth under this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, if convicted, and shall be fined as provided in the general penalty provision found in section
1.01.009 of this code.
(Ordinance 2018-52 adopted 8/28/18)
Sec. 1.08.003 Closed areas
The director is authorized to close any section or part of a park at any time and for any period or interval of time due to
weather, maintenance or other public health or safety reason. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any section or
area of a park which has been closed by the director.
Sec. 1.08.004 Enforcement
(a) Officials. The city manager or his designate, park attendants designated by the city manager or his designate, and
police department, shall in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article.
(b) Ejectment. The city manager or his designate, park attendants designated by the city manager or his designate, shall
have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation of this article.
(c) Seizure of property. The city manager or his designate, or any member of the police department shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used in violation of this article.
Sec. 1.08.005 Game fields; designation
(a) The director of the city parks department or designee is authorized to designate fields as game fields by posting a sign
thereon stating:
“Game Field–Restricted to League Play Only”
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon a field which has been designated a game field except for the purpose of
participating in approved league play.
Sec. 1.08.006 Closed fields; designation
(a) The director is authorized to designate any field as a closed field for purposes of maintenance or to protect the surface
of the field from damage by posting a sign thereon stating:
“Closed Field–Do Not Trespass”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/598
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon a field which has been designated as a closed field except for the
purpose of authorized maintenance or repairs.
Sec. 1.08.007 Practice
Except with prior approval of the director of the city parks department or designee, no practice is allowed on any game field
or areas where games and practices have been canceled due to weather conditions. Each sports organization shall require
in its bylaws that any team guilty of violating this provision shall forfeit one league game.
Sec. 1.08.008 Facility utilization agreement required
Sports associations which desire to use any city park shall be required to execute a facility use agreement with the city which
contains the duties and responsibilities of the parties. The use of city park by youth sports associations shall be restricted to
organizations that have at least 75% of the youth listed on the cumulative playing rosters of the organization as residents. For
purposes of this section, a resident is defined as an individual currently residing in the city, or currently attending public
school in the Midlothian Independent School District.
Sec. 1.08.009 Concessions
The director of the city parks department or designee shall control all concession rights for all parks and athletic facilities. No
concession may be sold in any park or facility by any person except with the approval of the director of the city parks
department or designee.
Sec. 1.08.010 Insurance
Organizations or associations conducting organized leagues must provide and keep in force for the duration of the season
with an insurance company duly licensed in the state and rated A- or better by A.M. Best, general liability insurance in an
amount specified by the city's risk manager. Insurance limits will be reviewed on an annual basis. In addition, the policy shall
include the city as an additional named insured. No games may be played until an acceptable proof of insurance has been
received by the director of the city parks department or designee and reviewed for adequacy by the city's risk manager.
Sec. 1.08.011 Requirements for organizations using facilities
All groups or organizations desirous of establishing leagues and utilizing recreational facilities owned, leased, or controlled by
the city for competitive or recreational league play must comply with the following requirements:
(1) Be a nonprofit organization serving and operating exclusively for amateur sports competition.
(2) If requested, file a yearly financial report with the director.
(3) Have an active board of directors with a president or chairperson, vice-president or co-chairperson,
secretary, and treasurer.
(4) Have on file with the director of the city parks department a current copy of the organization's articles of
incorporation, constitution, bylaws (which must be in harmony with parks and recreation department policies), a
certificate of liability insurance, and names of the organization's board of directors.
(5) Have a policy that permits individuals to file for exemption from registration fees.
(6) Have a nondiscrimination policy in which programs operated by the organization are open to all residents of
the city regardless of race, age, socio-economic level, color, sex, national origin, religion, and handicap status.
Sec. 1.08.012 Youth sports association background checks
All youth sports associations which desire to use any city parks shall comply with the city policy adopted by the city council by
resolution from time to time for criminal background checks for youth sports association coaches, assistant coaches,
managers, umpire, referee, or other volunteers.
(Ordinance 2014-31 adopted 8/12/14)
Sec. 1.08.013 User and rental fees
The athletic user fees and public park rental fees are not printed in this code but are on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 1.08.014–1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Park Board
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/598
Sec. 1.08.031 Creation
There is hereby created and designated a municipal park board for the purpose of making recommendations to the city
council concerning improvements and management in its respective areas of interests. (1990 Code, sec. 11-101)
Sec. 1.08.032 Members
The park board will consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the city council.
Sec. 1.08.033 Terms of office
Term of board members shall be staggered with 4 (four) member's terms beginning in one 2-year cycle and the remaining
three (3) members beginning in another 2-year cycle the following year. Appointment and reappointment to this board is
approved by the city council. These new terms shall begin upon reappointment of an existing member or when a new
member is appointed.
(Ordinance 2013-47 adopted 10/22/13)
Sec. 1.08.034 Removal
The members of the park board shall be subject to removal from office by the city council, upon a majority vote, for any cause
deemed sufficient for their removal, in the interest of public service. Regular attendance at the board meetings is required of
all board members. The following number of absences shall constitute the basis for replacement of a member. Three (3)
consecutive absences from meetings of the board shall cause the position to be considered vacant. In addition, the position
of any board member who has four (4) absences in a twelve (12) month period shall also be considered vacant.
Sec. 1.08.035 Meetings and quorum
The board shall hold at least twelve (12) regular meetings per year in the city on dates fixed by rule of the board. The board
shall make rules providing for the holding of special meetings. Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business. The act of four or more board members at a meeting at which a quorum is in attendance shall
constitute the act of the board. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public and posted in accordance with state law.
(Ordinance 2015-21 adopted 10/13/15)
Sec. 1.08.036 Annual report
It shall be the duty of the park board, at the end of each fiscal year, to file with the city council a full and detailed report of its
activities for the year. (1990 Code, sec. 11-106)
Secs. 1.08.037–1.08.060 Reserved
Division 3. Public Tennis Courts
Sec. 1.08.061 Definitions
Public tennis court. A paved flat surface area that is either independently or jointly owned by either the city, or the Midlothian
Independent School District, which is specifically designed marked and designated for playing a game of tennis.
Public tennis court facility. A land area upon which is constructed one or more public tennis courts along with associated
amenities such as, but not limited to, designated parking areas, fencing, pedestrian sidewalk areas, spectator areas,
concession facilities, restroom facilities, and landscaped areas which serves to facilitate the playing and observation of the
game of tennis.
Tennis. A game played with rackets and a light, elastic ball by two players or pairs of players on a rectangular tennis court
divided by a low net. Tennis is played indoors and outdoors, on hard-surface, clay, and grass courts.
Sec. 1.08.062 Rules and regulations
(a) Public tennis courts shall be used only for the practicing and playing of tennis. The use of tennis courts for nonrelated
tennis activities, which shall include, but not be limited to, skateboarding, roller-blading, roller-skating, kickball, football,
soccer, volleyball or handball shall be prohibited on a public tennis court.
(b) Proper tennis attire is required for any person using a public tennis court, including proper tennis shoes. Cleats, blacksoled
shoes, and shoes with any type of wheels are not permitted on the public tennis court.
(c) No pets of any type shall be permitted in or on a public tennis court.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/598
(d) Public tennis courts shall be used on a “first come, first served” basis unless a reservation has been made and the
reserving party must be able to show the appropriate executed rental form to prove that the court was rented. During the
school year MISD practice and events shall take precedence over all other league play and associated events. A schedule
will be submitted to the city annually immediately upon development for review and implementation. Beyond MISD practice
and events, league play and association events shall have a first right-of-use of a public tennis court.
(e) No alcoholic beverage of any type shall be permitted at a public tennis court facility.
(f) Littering shall be prohibited at a public tennis court facility.
(g) The playing of loud music shall be prohibited at a public tennis court facility.
(h) No use of profanity or vulgar language shall be permitted at a public tennis court facility.
Sec. 1.08.063 Penalty
(a) Any violation of the terms of this division is declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to be guilty thereof
shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009. Violation of or noncompliance with any other code provision or
ordinance, the penalty may not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(b) Any complaints or violations of the terms of this division shall be reported as an informal complaint to an on duty
supervisor with the police department.
(Ordinance 2014-61 adopted 12/9/14)
ARTICLE 1.09 COMMERCIAL FILMING
Sec. 1.09.001 Purpose
(a) The following guidelines are intended to protect the personal and property rights of our city residents and businesses.
The city manager reserves the right to impose additional regulations in the interest of public safety if deemed necessary.
(b) These guidelines cover requests for commercial use of city-owned property (streets, rights-of-way, parks, public
buildings), commercial use of private property which may affect adjacent public or private property, and the use of city
equipment and personnel in the filming of movies, TV shows, commercials, and related activities.
Sec. 1.09.002 City control/city manager authority
(a) The city manager may authorize the use of any street, right-of-way, or public building, equipment or personnel for
commercial uses in the filming or taping of movies, television programs, commercials, or training films and related activities.
In conjunction with these uses, the city manager may require that any or all of the conditions and/or remuneration as
specified on the application as shown in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 2010-13, be met as a prerequisite to that use.
(b) The applicant agrees that the city shall have full control over the use of public streets and buildings of the city while
being used, as well as control over the hours of production and the general location of the production. The city reserves the
full and absolute right to prohibit all filming or to order cessation of filming if determined to be detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare.
(c) The applicant shall agree to allow the respective city departments (i.e., police, fire, building) to inspect all structures
and/or devices and equipment to be used in connection with the filming and taping if required by the city manager.
Sec. 1.09.003 Permit requirements
(a) Before filing an application for filming in the city, the office of the city manager must be contacted to discuss the
production's specific filming requirements and the feasibility of filming in the city.
(b) Any commercial producer who desires to undertake a commercial production in the city is required to complete and
return the application for filming to the office of the city manager, within the time frames below:
(1) Commercials or episodic television. A minimum of two (2) business days prior to the commencement of
filming or any substantial activity related to the project.
(2) Feature films. A minimum of five (5) business days prior to the commencement of filming or any substantial
activity related to the project.
Sec. 1.09.004 Fees
(a) An application processing fee of $25.00 should accompany each application for filming in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/598
(b) The city manager may waive this fee upon proof of an organization's nonprofit status, or for any other reason deemed
necessary.
Sec. 1.09.005 Use of city equipment and personnel
(a) The applicant will agree to pay for the costs of any police, fire, public works, or other city personnel assigned to the
project (whether specifically requested by the production or not). Remuneration rates for the use of any city equipment,
including police cars and fire equipment, will be established on a case-by-case basis as determined by the city manager. The
applicant will agree to pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, the charges incurred. The city manager may, at his/her
discretion, require an advance deposit for the use of the equipment.
(b) The city manager in consultation with the chief of police and/or fire chief shall have the authority to stipulate additional
fire or police requirements and level of staffing for same, at any time during a film project if it is determined to be in the best
interest of public safety, health and welfare, which cost shall be borne by the applicant. Off-duty police officers and firefighters
shall be paid by the production company at a rate no less than one and one-half their hourly rate based on their rank.
Sec. 1.09.006 Use of city property
(a) The city manager may authorize the use of any street, right-of-way, or public building, use of the city name, trademark
or logo and/or use of city equipment and/or personnel for commercial uses in the production of movies, television programs,
commercials, or training films and related activities. In conjunction with these uses, the city manager may require that any or
all of the conditions and/or remuneration as specified on the application be met as a prerequisite to that use. A security or
damage deposit may be required based on production activity.
(b) Depending upon the extent of the use of city property, the applicant agrees to reimburse the city for inconveniences
when using public property. Following is the rate schedule:
Activity Cost (per Calendar Day)
Total or disruptive use (regular operating hours) of a public
building, park, right-of-way, or public area
$500.00
Partial nondisruptive use of a public building, park, right-ofway,
or public area
$250.00
Total closure or obstruction of public street or right-of-way,
including parking lots and on-street parking (for filming
purposes)
$50.00 per block
Partial closure or obstruction of public street or right-of-way,
including parking lots and on-street parking (for filming
purposes)
$25.00 per block
Use of city parking lots, parking areas, and city streets (for
the purpose of parking film trailers, buses, catering trucks,
and other large vehicles)
$50.00 per block or lot
(c) The applicant agrees that the city shall have full control over the use of its name, trademark, logo, public streets and
buildings of the city while any are being used, as well as control over the hours of production and the general location of the
production. The city reserves the full and absolute right to prohibit all filming or to order cessation of filming activity if it is
determined to be hazardous to the public health, safety and welfare.
Sec. 1.09.007 Special equipment, vehicles and food service
The applicant shall provide a report listing the number of vehicles and types of equipment to be used during the filming,
including proposed hours of use and proposed parking locations. Such locations will need to be specifically approved by the
city so as to maintain traffic safety. On-street parking or use of public parking lots is subject to city approval. The use of
exterior lighting, power generators, or any other noise- or light-producing equipment requires on-site approval of the city
manager. Any catering service or food preparation is subject to city inspection and approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/598
Sec. 1.09.008 Hours of filming
Unless permission has been obtained from the city manager in advance and affected property owners, tenants and residents
have been notified, filming will be limited to the following hours: Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., and Saturday,
Sunday and holidays, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Sec. 1.09.009 Notification of neighbors
The applicant shall provide a short written description, approved by the city manager, of the schedule for the proposed
production to the owners, tenants and residents of each property in the affected neighborhood (as defined by boundaries set
by the city manager). The applicant, or his or her designee, shall make a good faith effort to notify each owner, tenant and
resident of all such property, and shall submit, as part of the application, a report noting each owner, tenant or resident's
comments, along with their signatures, addresses and phone numbers. Based upon this community feedback, the city
manager may grant or deny the filming application.
Sec. 1.09.010 Certificate of insurance
The producer shall attach a certificate of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 general liability, including bodily injury and property damage with a $5,000,000 umbrella; and automobile liability
(if applicable) in an amount not less than $1,000,000 including bodily injury and property damage.
Sec. 1.09.011 Liability
The applicant agrees to pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, the costs of repair for any and all damage to public or
private property, resulting from or in connection with, the production, and restore the property to its original condition prior to
the production, or to better than original condition.
Sec. 1.09.012 Hold harmless agreement
The producer shall sign the following hold harmless agreement holding the city harmless from any claim that may arise from
their use of designated public property, right-of-way, or equipment in conjunction with the permitted use:
I certify that I represent the firm which will be performing the filming/taping at the locations specified on the
attached permit application. I further certify that I and my firm will perform in accordance with the directions and
specifications of the City of Midlothian, TX, and that I and my firm will indemnify and hold harmless the City of
Midlothian, TX for and from any loss, damage, expense, claims and costs of every nature and kind arising out of
or in connection with the filming/taping pursuant to this permit.
I further certify that the information provided on this application is true and correct to the best of my knowledge,
and that I hold the authority to sign this and other contracts and agreements with the City of Midlothian on behalf
of the firm.
Signed: ________________________________
Title: __________________________________
Date:__________________________________
(Ordinance 2010-13 adopted 6/22/10)
ARTICLE 1.10 ELECTIONEERING AT POLLING LOCATIONS ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY
Sec. 1.10.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide reasonable time, place, and manner regulations for electioneering on city-owned or
controlled public property when such property is used as an election polling place. The regulations contained herein are to
mitigate against any safety concerns, prevent damage to public property, and ensure that the property is sufficiently available
for its patrons who use the facilities other than for election purposes.
Sec. 1.10.002 Definitions
The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:
Designated polling place. An area located on city-owned property as may be designated by this article as a polling place
pursuant to chapter 43 of the Texas Election Code.
Electioneering. The posting, use, or distribution of political signs or literature.
Political sign. A sign promoting the election of a candidate or political party, or approval or rejection of a measure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/598
Voting period. A voting period is:
(1) With respect to early voting by personal appearance, the hour the polls are open for voting on the first day of
the early voting period and ending when the polls are closed or the last voter has voted, whichever is later, on the
last day of the early voting period; and
(2) With respect to election day, the hour the polls are open for voting and ending when the polls close or the
last voter has voted, whichever is later.
Sec. 1.10.003 Regulations and exceptions of electioneering
(a) Political signs may be placed at a designated polling place subject to the following:
(1) Shall only be placed within the designated area shown in Illustration No. 1.10.001-1.
(2) No more than two (2) political signs for each candidate, political party, or for or against a measure shall be
placed within the designated area for political signs as shown in Illustration No. 1.10.001-1.
(3) Shall comply with the provisions of section 4.6008 of the city's zoning ordinance, except:
(A) The sign face area of a political sign shall not exceed two feet (2.0') by two feet (2.0').
(B) Political signs may be placed no earlier than 7:00 a.m. on the seventh (7th) day prior to the first day of
the early voting period and removed no later than 5:00 p.m. on the fifth (5th) day after the election day.
(4) A political sign affixed to or located on a motor vehicle is not subject to the size restrictions of this article but
is subject to the following:
(A) The vehicle must be parked in a designated parking space except when entering and leaving the
property; and
(B) The parking of the vehicle on the property is subject to the same regulations as the parking of other
vehicles on the property, including, but not limited to, any restrictions or prohibitions on overnight parking.
(5) It shall be an offense for any person to violate any provision of this section. Signs placed in violation of this
section are subject to removal by the code enforcement division or designated representative of the city without
notice.
(b) This section does not authorize the location of political signs on any area of any public property located within the rightof-
way of a public street, alley, or highway.
(c) Electioneering shall only be allowed within the designated area shown in Illustration No. 1.10.001-1, subject to the
following:
(1) Persons participating in electioneering shall not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or impede the normal
day-to-day operations of the area designated as a polling place;
(2) It shall be unlawful for a person to participate in electioneering at the designated polling place outside the
area shown in Illustration No. 1.10.001-1; and
(3) Signs may be placed within the permitted electioneering location as shown in Illustration No. 1.10.001-1
provided the signs do not physically touch any part of the premises.
Sec. 1.10.004 Midlothian Conference Center as designated polling place
For purposes of this article, the Midlothian Conference Center is a designated polling place. Illustration No. 1.10.001-1 shows
the locations of areas in which signs are permitted to be placed on the premises and locations of areas in which
electioneering is permitted provided that such does not conflict with state law.
Illustration No. 1.10.001-1
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/598
(Ordinance 2018-21 adopted 4/10/18)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
Animal. Any living creature, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, fowl and
livestock.
Editor's note–The caption of Ordinance 2005-45 states, in part, “REMOVING ‘INSECTS' FROM SECTION 1... .” However, the word
“insects” was retained in the adoption of Ordinance 2005-48. Because of the apparent intent of the city to remove the word “insects,” the
definition of “animal” has been editorially changed to remove that word.
Animal control officer. Any person designated by the supervisor of animal control to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 1, adopted 10/25/05)
Backyard chicken. A female chicken (hen) which is possessed or harbored for the purpose of providing organic egg
production in compliance with this article.
Fowl. A domesticated bird kept for its eggs or flesh, including but not limited to roosters, ducks, turkeys, geese, pigeons or
guineas; excluding backyard chickens as defined in this article.
(Ordinance 2017-06, sec. 1, adopted 1/24/17)
Harboring. The act of keeping and caring for an animal or providing a premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter
or care for a period of three days or more.
Kennel. Any building, lot or premises on or in which any combination of cats and dogs total five (5) or more (at least eight (8)
weeks of age) are kept, or any building, lot, or premises where dogs or cats are housed or accepted for boarding, for which
remuneration is received. This term does not include a veterinary clinic, animal hospital, or pet store in the normal course of
business.
Livestock. All types of sheep, goats, swine, fowl, horses or any member of the domesticated equine family, including but not
limited to mules, donkeys, ponies; and all members of the bovine family, including but not limited to cows, bulls, buffalo and
bison.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/598
Owner. Any person, firm or corporation having title to any animal, or a person who has, harbors or keeps, or who causes or
permits to be harbored or kept, an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises.
Police department. The reporting agent for the purposes of this chapter, whose duties consist of the following:
(1) Receiving all reports of animal bites and scratches to humans;
(2) Receiving all reports of suspect rabid animals;
(3) Other duties as entailed by the text of this chapter.
Rabies vaccination. The vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an antirabies vaccine approved by the United
States Department of Agriculture and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state.
Running at large. An animal not completely confined by a building, wall or fence of sufficient strength or construction to
restrain the animal, except when such animal is either on a leash, or held in the hands of the owner or keeper with sufficient
strength to control the animal, or under direct supervision of the owner within the limits of the owner's private property.
Stray animal. Any animal for which there is not an identifiable owner or harborer.
Unprovoked attack. Relating to an attack by an animal, shall mean that the animal was not hit, kicked or struck by a person
with any object or part of a person's body, nor was any part of the animal's body pulled, pinched or squeezed by a person.
Vicious animal shall mean:
(1) Any animal that, when unprovoked, inflicts severe injury or death to a person, or bites or attacks a person on
public or private property; or
(2) Any animal that has killed or severely injured a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property; or
(3) Any animal which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any
public or private property in an apparent attitude of attack such that the person reasonably believes that the
animal will cause physical injury to the person; or
(4) Any individual animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury,
or to otherwise threaten the safety of persons or domestic animals.
Wild animal. Any poisonous or dangerous reptile, or any other animal which can normally be found in the wild state, not
normally capable of being domesticated including, but not limited to skunks, foxes, leopards, panthers, tigers, lions, and lynx,
unless certified for medical, biological, herpetological or other scientific research or study.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 1, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.01.002 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to be guilty thereof shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 21, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.01.003 Enforcement; authority to issue citations; interference with animal control officer
(a) Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the animal control officer.
(b) Any animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter. If the person being
cited is not present, the environmental control officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by certified mail.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or prevent the police, animal control officer or their
authorized representatives in the discharge of their duties as herein prescribed, or to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(d) No person shall remove, alter, damage, or otherwise tamper with a trap set out by the animal control supervisor or his
deputies or any of their equipment.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 2, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.01.004 Running at large; authority to impound
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person or owner who possesses, has, harbors, or keeps an animal, to permit or to allow the
animal to run at large, as defined in section 2.01.001 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/598
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks or pigeons or other fowls owned by him
or under his control to be or run at large upon the highways, streets or alleys or the city or upon premises owned or occupied
by other persons, without the consent of such other persons, within the city limits.
(c) The animal control officer is authorized to impound such animals running at large, other than a cat, and may impound a
cat under conditions specified in article 2.02 of this chapter and/or when he has received a complaint that the cat causes a
nuisance or hazard to the health or welfare of human or animal population.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 4, adopted 10/25/05)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.01.005 Animal nuisance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any animal on his premises in such a manner as to endanger the
public health, to annoy neighbors by the accumulation of animal wastes which cause foul and offensive odors or are
considered to be a hazard to any other animal or human being, or by continued presence on the premises of another.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain for possession any combination of dogs and cats that total more
than four (4) on any residential lot of two (2) acres or less.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 5(B), 5(C), adopted 10/25/05)
Cross reference–Offenses and nuisances, ch. 8.
Sec. 2.01.006 Livestock, fowl, and backyard chickens
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own, keep or harbor any livestock, backyard chickens, or fowl on any
premises, except for conditions listed below:
(1) Any livestock or fowl may be owned, kept, or harbored under the following conditions:
Number of animals Minimum area required
1 1/2 acre
2 1 acre
Each additional animal 1/2 acre
(A) Any stable, corral, animal enclosure and containment structures, feed and bedding shall be located a
minimum 100 feet from private residence, in order to minimize odor and nuisance problems.
(B) Premises must be maintained in such a manner as not to create a health nuisance. Corral and stables
shall be maintained in clean, sanitary conditions at all times.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person or owner who possesses, has, harbors, or keeps livestock, to permit
or allow the animal to run at-large, as defined in section 2.01.001 of this article.
(2) Backyard chickens may be owned, kept, or harbored under the following conditions:
Number of chickens Minimum area required
Up to 4 maximum 0 to 1/2 acre
Up to 8 maximum 1/2 acre to 1 acre
Each additional chicken 1/2 acre
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/598
(A) The backyard chicken(s) shall be kept within a secure chicken coop and run except when being
removed to be transported off of the property or returned from a location off of the property;
(B) The chicken coop and run must be located within the rear yard and no closer than five (5) feet from
any property line;
(C) The chicken coop in which the backyard chicken is kept must be:
(i) No more than 200 square feet in size excluding the run and with a maximum height of the coop
seven (7) feet at the highest point of the roof;
(ii) Constructed in a workmanship like manner of naturally decay resistant wood, or wood that has
been pressure treated to resist decay, or galvanized steel or aluminum;
(iii) Constructed in such a manner as to be easily movable;
(iv) Exterior must be stained, sealed or painted to provide additional weather protection to the
materials of the chicken coop or structure; and
(v) Chicken coop and chicken run shall be maintained and shall be regularly cleaned to control dust,
odor, and waste and not constitute a safety hazard, or health problem to surrounding properties;
(vi) A minimum of four (4) square feet of space per chicken shall be provided in both the coop and
run.
(D) Premises must be maintained in such a manner as not to create a health nuisance.
(Ordinance 2017-06, sec. 2, adopted 1/24/17)
Sec. 2.01.007 Beekeeping
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or raise bees within the limits of the city in any district where there are at
least four occupied dwelling houses within 600 feet of the place where such bees are owned, kept or raised. (Ordinance
2005-48, sec. 7, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.01.008 Inhumane treatment
(a) Cruelty to animals. It is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally commit or cause
to be committed any act of cruelty, harassment, or torture of any animal or cause such animal to be mutilated or inhumanely
killed. Ownership, or the commission of such acts of cruelty on private property, shall not be justifiable defense for violation of
this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to unreasonably withhold food, water or shelter from any animal such that the
animal's health is endangered or it is caused to unduly suffer.
(b) Poisoning. It is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to poison any domestic animal or to distribute poison
or toxicant on public or private property in any manner whatsoever with the intent of poisoning any domestic animal.
(c) Abandoning animals, alive or dead. It is prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally release,
abandon or discard a dog, cat or any other animal in their custody, alive or dead, in the city limits.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 8, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.01.009 Selling or giving away, changing natural color of certain animals
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter or give away as toys, premium or novelties, baby
chickens, ducklings or other fowl under three (3) weeks old or rabbits under two (2) months old, unless the manner or method
of display is first approved by animal control.
(b) It shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain, or otherwise change the natural color of any chickens, ducklings, other fowl, or
rabbits, or to possess, for the purpose of sale or to be given away, any of the above mentioned animals which have been so
colored.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 9, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.01.010 Wild animals
It shall be unlawful to keep any wild animal inside the city. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 20, adopted 10/25/05)
ARTICLE 2.02 IMPOUNDMENT*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/598
Sec. 2.02.001 Animals subject to impoundment
The following animals may be impounded:
(1) Cats and dogs not exhibiting evidence of being vaccinated, as described in article 2.03, division 1, of this
chapter;
(2) Any animal infected or kept under conditions which could endanger the public or animal health;
(3) Any animal that creates a nuisance, as defined by section 2.01.005;
(4) Any animal running at large, as provided in section 2.01.004;
(5) Any animal treated in a manner determined by the supervisor of animal control to be cruel or inhuman, as
defined in section 2.01.008;
(6) Any animal that has bitten a human shall be placed under observation for rabies, as determined by the
animal control officer;
(7) Any animal that needs to be placed under observation for rabies, as determined by the animal control
officer;
(8) Any animal violating any provision of this chapter.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 3, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.02.002 Animals under rabies quarantine
(a) Any dog or cat, which has bitten a person, shall be observed for a period of ten days from the date of the bite. The
police department or animal control officer shall designate the procedure and place of observation. Any confinement shall be
at the expense of the owner. Stray dogs or cats whose owners cannot be located shall be confined in a local veterinary
hospital or animal shelter at the discretion of the animal control officer. The owner of the dog or cat that has been reported to
have inflicted a bite on any person shall on demand produce said dog or cat for impoundment as prescribed in this article.
Refusal to produce the dog or cat constitutes a violation of this article, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a
separate and individual violation.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from any place of confinement any dog or cat, which has been confined
as authorized in this article without consent of the police or animal control officer, until the designated term of confinement is
met.
(c) If any animal is being held under quarantine or observation for rabies, the owner shall not be entitled to possession until
the animal control officer has released it from quarantine.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 3, adopted 10/25/05)
State law references–Rabies reports and quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041 et seq.; quarantine and
impoundment facilities, generally, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.051 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.003 Disposition of other impoundments
(a) If any of the animals named in this article are found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the
premises shall have the right to confine or trap such animal in a humane manner as approved by the animal control officer
until he can come and impound such animal. When so notified, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer to have such
animal impounded as herein provided.
(b) Reasonable effort shall be made by an animal control officer to contact the owner of any animal impounded which is
wearing a current vaccination tag; however, final responsibility for location of an impounded animal is that of the owner.
(c) The owner can resume possession of an impounded animal upon payment of impoundment fees, handling fees and
any veterinarian bills incurred by animal control or its contracted agent for animal shelter for the welfare of the animal, and
upon compliance with vaccination provisions of this chapter.
(d) Disposition of animals impounded on the grounds of cruel or inhumane treatment shall be determined by the court of
jurisdiction.
(e) The police department or animal control officer shall select and establish a place for impounding animals under
provision of this chapter.
(f) Any animal not reclaimed by the owner, may be humanely euthanized or given up for adoption after being impounded
for seventy-two (72) hours, except dangerous, vicious or wild animals.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/598
(g) Unless there is reason to believe that it has an owner, immediate disposal may be deemed appropriate by the animal
control officer.
(h) Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious
milk, may be immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering.
(i) An owner who no longer wishes to maintain responsibility for an animal may sign a waiver, supplied by animal control,
provided that no warm-blooded animal that has bitten a human being shall be euthanized before expiration of the quarantine
period. The animal control officer may also, upon his discretion, euthanize or authorize the adoption of said animal.
(j) Any impounded animal that appears to be suffering from extreme injury or illness may be euthanized immediately or
given to a nonprofit humane organization for the purpose of veterinary medical care, as determined by the animal control
officer.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 3, adopted 10/25/05)
ARTICLE 2.03 RABIES CONTROL*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.03.001 Vaccination required; certificate
All dogs and cats over four (4) months of age must be vaccinated annually for rabies with an antirabies vaccine administered
by a duly licensed veterinarian. A metal certificate of vaccination with the year of vaccination, a certificate number and the
name, address and phone number of the vaccinating veterinarian must be securely attached to a collar or harness that must
be worn by the dog or cat while off their premises. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 10, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.03.002 Report of rabies suspect
Any person having knowledge of the existence of any animal known to have been or suspected of being exposed to rabies
must immediately report such knowledge to the police department giving such information as may be required. For any
animal known to have been or suspected of being exposed to rabies, the following rules must apply:
(1) Unvaccinated animals, which have been bitten or directly exposed by physical contact with a rabid animal or
its fresh tissues, shall be:
(A) Humanely killed; or
(B) If sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed animal shall be immediately
vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict isolation for 90 days, and given booster vaccinations during the
third and eighth weeks of isolation. Any cost incurred during confinement shall be at the owners' expense.
For young animals, additional vaccinations may be necessary to ensure that the animal receives at least two
(2) vaccinations at or after the age prescribed by the United States Department of Agriculture for the vaccine
administered.
(2) Vaccinated animals that have been bitten or otherwise significantly exposed to a rabid animal shall be:
(A) Humanely killed; or
(B) The exposed vaccinated animal should be given a booster rabies vaccination and placed in strict
isolation for 45 days. Any cost incurred during confinement shall be at the owner's expense.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 10, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.03.003 Authority to direct disposition of animals
The animal control officer shall direct the disposition of any animal suspected of being rabid or having any other zoonotic
disease considered to be a hazard to any other animal or human. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 10, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.03.004 Surrender of carcass of dead animal suspected of rabies
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies or suspected of having been rabid shall, upon demand, be surrendered to
animal control. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 10, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.03.005 Refusal to surrender animal for rabies control purposes
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender an animal for supervised quarantine or humane destruction, as required herein for
rabies control, when the animal control officer therefore makes demand. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 10, adopted 10/25/05)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/598
Secs. 2.03.006–2.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Quarantine*
Sec. 2.03.031 Authority
The animal control officer shall have the authority to order quarantine of animals responsible for bite incidents, or suspected
of having any zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to the human population or other animals. (Ordinance 2005-48,
sec. 11, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.03.032 Animals subject to quarantine; conduct of quarantine
Every animal that bites a human or attacks another animal or is suspected of having rabies or any other zoonotic disease,
shall be immediately confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify animal control of the place where such animal is
confined and the reason for the confinement. The owner shall not permit such animal to come in contact with any other
person or animal. The owner shall surrender possession of such animal to animal control on demand for supervised
quarantine. Supervised quarantine shall be at the animal shelter designated by the animal control officer, or a veterinary
hospital. The quarantine shall be for not less than ten (10) days. Any cost incurred during confinement shall be at the
expense of the owner. A release from quarantine may be issued if no signs of rabies or other diseases have been observed
during the quarantine period. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 11, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.03.033 Violation of quarantine, cause for seizure and impoundment
The violation of quarantine by any person shall be just cause for seizure and impoundment of the quarantined animal by
animal control. It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the observation period. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 11, adopted
10/25/05)
Sec. 2.03.034 Investigation of animal bite reports; killing of biting animal
All animal bite reports shall be investigated by animal control. Without permission of the animal control officer, it shall be
unlawful for any person to kill or remove from the city limits any animal that has bitten a person or other animal, or that has
been placed under quarantine, except when it is necessary to kill such animal to protect the life of any person or other
animal. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 11, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.03.035 Notification upon escape, sickness or death of quarantined animal
Any person having possession of, or responsibility for, any quarantined animal shall immediately notify animal control if such
animal escapes, or becomes or appears to become sick, or dies, and in case of death of the animal while under quarantine,
shall immediately surrender the dead animal to animal control for diagnostic purposes. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 11, adopted
10/25/05)
ARTICLE 2.04 VICIOUS, DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.04.001 Violations
(a) It shall be a violation of this chapter for a vicious or potentially dangerous animal to kill or wound, or assist in killing or
wounding any domestic animal belonging to or in the possession of any person, or for a vicious animal to attack, assault, bite
or otherwise injure any person or assist in attacking, assaulting, biting, or otherwise injuring any person while out of or within
the enclosure of the owner, whether such vicious or potentially dangerous animal was on a leash and securely muzzled or
whether the vicious or potentially dangerous animal escaped without fault of the owner. The animal control division is
empowered to confiscate and destroy such vicious or potentially dangerous animal in an expeditious and humane manner.
(b) It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of a potentially dangerous animal to:
(1) Have a potentially dangerous animal outside the enclosure unless muzzled and restrained on a leash or
chain;
(2) Fail to have a proper enclosure, as defined in section 2.04.051(a)(1) to confine the potentially dangerous
animal;
(3) Fail to post signs around the premises with clear visible warning signs that there is a potentially dangerous
animal on the premises;
(4) Fail to secure and maintain public liability insurance of at least $100,000.00;
(5) Fail to have the potentially dangerous animal neutered or spayed; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/598
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 19, adopted 10/25/05)
(6) Fail to notify the chief of police of a change in status as set out in section 2.04.052. (Ordinance 2005-48,
sec. 19, adopted 10/25/05; Ordinance adopting code)
(c) Exemptions. The provisions under this section shall not apply to any law enforcement agency where an animal is being
used for law enforcement. (Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 19, adopted 10/25/05)
Secs. 2.04.002–2.04.025 Reserved
Division 2. Vicious Animals
Sec. 2.04.026 Declaration
(a) An animal is automatically declared to be a “vicious animal” under subsections (1) and (2) of the definition of the term
“vicious animal” in section 2.01.001.
(b) The animal control division may find and declare an animal to be a vicious animal if the division has evidence before it
to believe that an animal is a vicious animal under subsections (3) or (4) of the definition of the term “vicious animal” in
section 2.01.001.
(c) Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals, made under oath before an individual
authorized by law to take sworn statements, setting for the nature and the date of the act, the location of the event, the owner
of the animal, the address of the owner, and the description of the animal doing such act, the animal control division shall
investigate the complaint and may determine that an animal is vicious under subsections (3) or (4) of the definition of the
term “vicious animal” in section 2.01.001.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 12, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.04.027 Notification of declaration
(a) Within five (5) working days of declaring an animal vicious, the animal control division will notify, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the person owning the animal of its designation as a vicious animal.
(b) If the animal is declared to be vicious under subsections (3) or (4) of the definition of the term “vicious animal” in
section 2.01.001, the notice shall inform the owner of the animal that a determination hearing may be requested to contest
the declaration. The request for a determination hearing must be in writing and must be received by the animal control
division no later than five (5) working days from receipt by the owner of the vicious animal declaration.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 13, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.04.028 Determination hearing
(a) Upon the written request for a determination hearing by the owner of an animal declared vicious under subsections (3)
or (4) of the definition of the term “vicious animal” in section 2.01.001, the animal control officer shall schedule said hearing
before the chief of police or his designee. The determination hearing shall be conducted within twenty (20) working days of
receipt of the request for such hearing.
(b) The owner shall be notified of said hearing by regular mail. Failure of the owner of the animal to appear at the
determination hearing shall result in the animal control division's declaration as final. Pending the outcome of the
determination hearing, the animal must be securely confined in a humane manner set forth by the animal control officer. The
costs of securing such animal shall be borne by the owner.
(c) Failure to appeal the declaration of vicious animal within twenty (20) days after notification of the findings of the
determination hearing to a district court of the county under the “substantial evidence rule” shall result in the animal control
division's declaration as final.
(d) The chief of police or his designee shall determine whether to declare the animal to be a vicious animal under this
chapter based upon evidence, affidavits, and testimony presented at the time of the hearing by the owner, witnesses to any
incident which may be germane to such a determination, animal control personnel, police or any other person possessing
information pertinent to such determination.
(e) The chief of police shall issue findings within five (5) working days after the determination hearing. In the event that the
animal is determined to be vicious, the chief of police shall order the animal euthanized in a safe and humane manner by a
veterinarian or by the animal control officer.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 14, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.04.029 Defense to declaration
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/598
It is a defense to the determination of an animal as vicious and to the prosecution of the owner of an animal previously
declared to be vicious:
(1) If the threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a willful trespass
or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal;
(2) If the person was teasing, tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been observed
or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal;
(3) If the person was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
(4) If a domestic animal killed was at the time, teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal;
(5) If the animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an
unjustified attack or assault; or
(6) If the animal was injured and responding to pain.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 15, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.04.030 Impoundment authority
(a) No person shall own or harbor a vicious animal within the city limits of the city; such an animal shall be impounded as a
public nuisance. If impoundment of said vicious animal is being attempted away from the premises of the owner and the
impoundment cannot be made with safety, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner or harborer. If an attempt
is made to impound a vicious animal from the premises of the owner or harborer and the impoundment cannot be made with
safety, the owner or harborer will be given notice that if the said animal is not surrendered to the animal control division for
impoundment within twenty-four (24) hours, then the animal will be destroyed wherever it is found. After this notice, the
vicious animal may be destroyed during an attempt to impound, if impoundment cannot be made with safety, wherever the
impoundment is attempted. Notice under this section may be verbal or in writing. A written notice left at the entrance to the
premises where the vicious animal is harbored will be considered valid notice under this section.
(b) If an animal is declared to be vicious under this article, and if the animal is not in the possession of the animal control
division, the owner must surrender said animal to the animal control division when ordered to do so by any animal control
officer. The order may be verbal or in writing. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the animal, the animal control officer
shall have the right to take the animal into its possession from the premises of the owner or elsewhere, wherever the animal
may be found within the city. If the animal cannot be taken into custody under the animal control division, it may be taken into
custody under a search warrant for contraband issued by the municipal judge or other magistrate having jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 16, adopted 10/25/05)
Secs. 2.04.031–2.04.050 Reserved
Division 3. Potentially Dangerous Animals
Sec. 2.04.051 Responsibility of owner
(a) The chief of police or his designee may find the animal in question is “potentially dangerous,” but not vicious. If the
animal is declared “potentially dangerous,” the owner must adhere to each of the following requirements, which are ordered
by the chief of police.
(1) The potentially dangerous animal must be kept in a proper enclosure, which is defined as:
(A) A concrete foundation;
(B) A 6-foot high chain link fence with a chain link top, or other approved top;
(C) 2-inch corner post; and
(D) A locked gate.
(2) The owner must present to the city secretary a certificate of public liability insurance in the amount of one
hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) to cover any damages caused by the potentially dangerous animal. The
insurance shall be for a twelve (12) month period, renewable each year, and shall not be cancelled unless the
animal is no longer kept in the city by the owner; and
(3) The potentially dangerous animal, when taken outside the enclosure, must be securely muzzled in a manner
that will not cause injury to the animal nor interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any
person or other animal; and the potentially dangerous animal must be restrained by a substantial chain or cable
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/598
leash having a minimum tensile strength of one thousand (1,000) pounds and not to exceed six (6) feet in length;
and
(4) The owner shall post a sign on his/her premises warning that there is a potentially dangerous animal on the
property. This sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway; and
(5) The potentially dangerous animal must be spayed or neutered and verifiable documentation provided to the
animal control officer of such action; and
(6) Further identification may be required and designated by order of the chief of police.
(b) If the owner of an animal declared to be potentially dangerous under this article is unable or unwilling to comply with
the ownership requirements listed above, the animal shall be euthanized by a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer.
(c) In the event the chief of police or his designee rule that the animal in question is neither vicious or potentially
dangerous, said animal shall be returned to or released to its owner provided that the owner has paid all costs involved in the
impoundment, holding, and medical treatment of said animal, as well as any other requirements set down in this chapter.
(d) Any appeal may be taken from the order of the chief of police, issued under this article, by filing suit in a district court of
the county within twenty (20) days of the order. Hearing before the district court shall be under the “substantial evidence rule.”
(Ordinance 2005-48, sec. 17, adopted 10/25/05)
Sec. 2.04.052 Notification of change of status
The owner/keeper shall notify the chief of police or his/her designee within twenty-four (24) hours if a potentially dangerous
animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal, or has attacked a person, or has died, or has been sold or given
away. The owner/keeper shall provide the chief of police with the name, address, and telephone number of the new
owner/keeper. The new owner/keeper, if they reside in the city, must sign a sworn statement that he/she will comply with all
of the requirements of owners of potentially dangerous animals. The new owner/keeper must comply with the requirements
of owners of potentially dangerous animals within ten (10) days of ownership of potentially dangerous animals. (Ordinance
2005-48, sec. 18, adopted 10/25/05)
Secs. 2.04.053–2.04.080 Reserved
Division 4. Dangerous Dogs*
Sec. 2.04.081 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division:
Dangerous dog. A dog that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person or another dog that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place
other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from
leaving the enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was
reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to
reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person.
Dog. A domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family.
Owner. A person who owns or has custody or control of the dog.
Secure enclosure. A fenced area that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog;
(4) Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and
(5) In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the city.
Unprovoked. With respect to an attack or attempt to attack by a dog, the dog was not hit, kicked, or struck by a person with
any object or part of the attacked person's body nor was any part of the dog's body pulled, pinched, or squeezed or in any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/598
other manner provoked by the person attacked.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.082 Requirements for owner
(a) Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that he or she is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with animal control;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure
enclosure;
(3) Muzzle the dog when it is outside the secure enclosure;
(4) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to
cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof
of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal control officer; and
(5) Have the dangerous dog spayed or neutered.
(b) If a person reports an incident described by section 2.04.081 regarding the definition of a “dangerous dog,” the animal
control officer may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control
officer determines the dog is a dangerous dog, he or she shall notify the owner of that fact.
(c) An owner, not later than the 15th day after the date the owner is notified that a dog owned by the owner is a dangerous
dog, may appeal the determination of the animal control officer to the municipal court. An owner may appeal the decision of
the municipal court in the same manner as for other civil cases.
(d) The owner of a dangerous dog who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the dog to the animal control
officer not later than the 30th day after the owner learns that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(e) If, on the application of any person, a justice court, county court, or municipal court finds, after notice and hearing as
provided herein, that the owner has failed to comply with subsection (a) or (c), the court shall order the animal control officer
to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The animal control officer shall seize the dog or order its
seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions.
(f) The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the city or county related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or
destruction of the dog.
(g) The court shall order the animal control officer to humanely destroy the dog if the owner has not complied with
subsection (a) before the 11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the animal control officer. The
court shall order the animal control officer to return the dog to the owner if the owner complies with subsection (a) before the
11th day after the date on which the dog is seized or delivered to the animal control officer.
(h) The court may order the humane destruction of a dog if the owner of the dog has not been located before the 15th day
after the seizure and impoundment of the dog.
(i) For purposes of this division, a person learns that the person is an owner of a dangerous dog when:
(1) The owner knows of an attack described in section 2.04.081 regarding the definition of a “dangerous dog”;
(2) The owner receives notice that a justice court, county court, or municipal court has found that the dog is a
dangerous dog after a hearing on the matter; or
(3) The owner is informed by the animal control officer that the dog is a dangerous dog.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.083 Registration
(a) Animal control shall annually register a dangerous dog if the owner:
(1) Presents proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility, as required by section 2.04.082(a)(4), proof of
current rabies vaccination, proof of sterilization of the dangerous dog; and has a secure enclosure in which the
dangerous dog will be kept that is inspected and approved by the animal control officer; and
(2) Pays an annual registration fee which is on file in the city secretary's office.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/598
(b) The animal control officer shall provide to the owner registering a dangerous dog a registration tag. The owner must
place the tag on the dog's collar. The collar must be of a distinctive color and design that identifies the dog as a dangerous
dog.
(c) If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells or moves the dog to a new address, the owner, not later than the 14th
day after the date of the sale or move, shall notify the animal control officer for the area in which the new address is located.
On presentation by the current owner of the dangerous dog's prior registration tag and payment of a fee, the animal control
officer shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dangerous dog's collar.
(d) An owner of a registered dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer of any attacks the dangerous dog makes
on any person or animal.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.084 Attack by dog
(a) A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous dog and the dog makes an unprovoked attack
on another person outside the dog's enclosure and causes bodily injury to the other person.
(b) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily injury or death, in
which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor.
(c) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous dog destroyed by the
animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian.
(d) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this division is liable for civil penalty not to
exceed $10,000.00. The city attorney may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. The city shall
retain penalties collected under this division.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.085 Violations
(a) A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous dog commits an offense if the person fails to comply
with section 2.04.082.
(b) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor, and any person who violates any provision of this division shall, upon
conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalty in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(c) An offense under this section is a class B misdemeanor if it is shown on the trial of the offense that the defendant has
previously been convicted under this division.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.04.086 Defense
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.04.084 or 2.04.085 that the person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a
person employed by a recognized animal shelter, or a person employed by the state or a political subdivision of the state to
deal with stray animals and has temporary ownership, custody, or control of the dog in connection with that position.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.04.084 or 2.04.085 that the person is an employee of the institutional
division of the state department of criminal justice or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement
or corrections purposes.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under section 2.04.084 or 2.04.085 that the person is a dog trainer or an employee of a
guard dog company under chapter 1702, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 2.05 FEES
Sec. 2.05.001 Schedule
Fees for animal impoundment, confinement and head shipping are not included in this chapter but are on file in the city
secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/598
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Permits required
Any person performing work covered by the building code, electrical code, plumbing code, mechanical code, and all other
activities regarding buildings and zoning requiring a permit as enacted by the city council shall secure a permit from the city
before starting work on each job. The fee for each permit shall be on file in the city secretary's office. (1990 Code, sec. 4-56)
Sec. 3.01.002 Fee schedule for building permits and certain other applications
Any person performing work covered by the International Building Code, International Plumbing Code, International
Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, as enacted by the city, shall secure a permit from the city building inspections
department before starting work on each job. The charge for each permit and application shall be on file in the city secretary's
office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.02 BUILDING STANDARDS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.02.001 Portable buildings
(a) Generally. No portable buildings (which are defined for purposes of this section as buildings which are designed so as
to be readily able to be moved from one (1) location to another, regardless of foundation built or whether the owner or person
in possession thereof has any intention of ever moving such building; an example of a portable building being a metal lawn
equipment storage building) shall be allowed in the city unless said building meets all of the following rules and regulations:
(1) Portable buildings will be permitted for utility and accessory uses only, such as storage; accessory uses
must be incidental to the main use located on the site.
(2) Portable buildings may not be used for living quarters.
(3) Portable buildings will not be permitted on a site prior to the construction of the main use structure.
(4) All yard area requirements prescribed by the zoning ordinance shall be applicable to portable buildings.
(5) All clearances prescribed by the building and fire codes shall be applicable to portable buildings.
(6) No portable building will be permitted in the front yard area as described by the zoning ordinance.
(7) No portable building may be attached to the permanent structure unless it meets the construction
requirements of the building and fire codes.
(8) Portable buildings will be allowed in any zoning category less restrictive than “M.H.” mobile home district.
(b) Penalty. Any violation of the terms of this section is declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to be guilty
thereof shall be punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-74)
Secs. 3.02.002–3.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code
Sec. 3.02.031 Adopted
Certain provisions of the 2015 edition of the International Building Code (IBC) are hereby adopted by the city, and declared to
be effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary of one copy
of said IBC.
Sec. 3.02.032 Amendments
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/598
In accordance with the IBC, local amendments are adopted as well as amendments recommended by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments. For code uniformity with other regional cities and local practices certain sections of the 2015
International Building Code are amended. The “Amendments to the 2015 International Building Code” are made a part of this
article by reference. The city adopts these amendments, all of which are on file in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 3.02.033 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 3.02.034 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to
be guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 5/23/17)
Secs. 3.02.035–3.02.050 Reserved
Division 3. Existing Building Code
Sec. 3.02.051 Adopted
Certain provisions of the 2015 edition of the International Existing Building Code (IEBC) are hereby adopted by the city, and
declared to be effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary
of one copy of said IEBC.
Sec. 3.02.052 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 3.02.053 Amendments
In accordance with the IEBC, local amendments are adopted as well as amendments recommended by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments. For code uniformity with other regional cities and local practices certain sections of the 2015
International Existing Building Code are amended. The amendments attached to Ordinance 2017-33 entitled “Amendments
to the 2015 International Existing Building Code” are made a part of this article by reference. The city adopts these
amendments, all of which are on file in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 3.02.054 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to
be guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2017-33 adopted 5/23/17)
ARTICLE 3.03 HOUSING*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.03.001–3.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Housing Code
Sec. 3.03.031 Adopted
The provisions of the 1997 edition of the Uniform Housing Code as published by the International Conference of Building
Officials is hereby adopted by reference. Unless deleted, amended, expanded or otherwise changed herein, all provisions of
such code shall be fully applicable and binding. A copy of the code is on file in the city secretary's office.
Sec. 3.03.032 Amendments
The following sections of the 1997 edition of the Uniform Housing Code, are hereby amended to read as follows:
Section 102; change to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/598
Sec. 102. Purpose.
The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public
welfare by regulating and controlling the use and occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings and
structures within the jurisdiction of the City of Midlothian, Texas.
The purpose of this code is not to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of
persons who will or should be especially protected or benefited by the terms of this code.
Section 103; change to read as follows:
Sec. 103. Scope.
The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing structures and all existing premises within the City of
Midlothian, Texas, including all accessory structures. Such occupancies in existing buildings may be continued as
provided in the building code, except such structures as are found to be substandard as defined in this code.
Where any building or portion thereof is used or intended to be used as a combination apartment house-hotel, the
provisions of this code shall apply to the separate portions as if they were separate buildings.
Roominghouses, congregate residences or lodging houses shall comply with all the requirements of this code for
dwellings.
Section 104.1; change to read as follows:
Sec. 104.1. Additions, alterations or repairs. For additions, alterations or repairs, see the building code.
Section 203; delete.
Section 301; change to read as follows:
Sec. 301. General. No building or structure regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, enlarged,
altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate permit for each
building or structure has first been obtained from the building official in the manner and according to the applicable
conditions prescribed in the building code.
Section 302; change to read as follows:
Sec. 302. Fees. When a building permit is required by section 301 of this code, the appropriate fees shall be paid
as established by the city council of the City of Midlothian. The charge for each permit shall be on file in the city
secretary's office.
Section 303; change to read as follows:
Sec. 303. Inspection. Buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work for which a
permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the manner
provided by this code and the building code.
Section 401; change to read as follows:
Sec. 401. Definitions.
For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in
either this chapter or as specified in the building code or the housing code. Where terms are not defined, they
shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used. Words used in the
singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine
and the feminine the masculine.
BUILDING CODE is the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council, as adopted
by the City of Midlothian, Texas with amendments.
BUILDING OFFICIAL is the City of Midlothian employee who is charged with the administration and enforcement
of this code, or any person duly authorized by the city manager that have the required experience, training and
knowledge to administer and enforce the provisions of this code.
CONGREGATE RESIDENCE is any building or portion thereof that contains facilities for living, sleeping and
sanitation, as required by this code, and may include facilities for eating and cooking, for occupancy by other than
a family. A congregate residence may be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, but
does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, or lodging houses.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/598
EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT is a dwelling unit containing only one habitable room and meeting the
requirements of section 503.2, exception.
HEALTH OFFICER is the City of Midlothian employee who is charged with the administration and enforcement of
any and all health-related standards found in the Code of Ordinances, or any person duly authorized by the city
manager to administer and enforce the same.
HOT WATER is water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than 110 and a maximum of 120
degrees.
LODGING HOUSE is any building or portion thereof containing not more than five guest rooms where rent is paid
in money, goods, labor or otherwise.
MECHANICAL CODE is the International Mechanical Code promulgated by the International Code Council, as
adopted by the City of Midlothian, Texas with amendments.
NUISANCE. The following shall be defined as nuisances:
1. Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence.
2. Any attractive nuisance that may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of
a building, or on an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations;
abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber,
trash, fences, debris, or vegetation that may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
3. Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the building official.
4. Overcrowding a room with occupants.
5. Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
6. Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
7. Uncleanliness, as determined by the health officer.
8. Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings or
animals, as determined by the health officer.
PLUMBING CODE is the International Plumbing Code promulgated by the International Code Council, as adopted
by the City of Midlothian, Texas with amendments.
Section 501; change to read as follows:
Sec. 501. Location on property. All buildings shall be located with respect to property lines and to other
buildings on the same property as required by the building code and zoning code.
Section 504.4; change to read as follows:
Sec. 504.4. Hallways. All public hallways, stairs, and other exitways shall be adequately illuminated at all times in
accordance with the building code.
Section 505.5; change to read as follows:
Sec. 505.5. Water closet compartments. Walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings,
shall be finished in accordance with the building code.
Section 701.1; change to read as follows:
Sec. 701.1. Heating. Dwelling units, guest rooms, and congregate residences shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit (21 degrees Celsius) at a point 3
feet (914 mm) above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe
condition and in accordance with the building code, the mechanical code, and all other applicable laws. Unvented
fuel-burning heaters are not permitted. All heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type.
Section 801; change to read as follows:
Sec. 801. General.
Dwelling units or guest rooms shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or
portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways, and appurtenances as required by the building code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/598
Sleeping rooms below the fourth story shall have at least one operable window or exterior door approved for
emergency escape or rescue. The units shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without
the use of separate tools.
Section 901; change to read as follows:
Sec. 901. General. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with the degree of fire resistive
construction as required by the building code for the appropriate occupancy, type of construction and
location on property, and shall be provided with the appropriate fire-extinguishing systems or equipment
required by the building code.
Section 1001.1; change to read as follows:
Sec. 1001.1. General. Any building or portion thereof that is determined to be an unsafe or dangerous building in
accordance with any code adopted by the city, or any building thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room or
suite of rooms, accessory structure, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the
conditions referenced in this section to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of
the public or the occupants thereof, shall be deemed and hereby are declared to be substandard buildings subject
to abatement as prescribed by the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as adopted by the
City of Midlothian, Texas with amendments.
(Ordinance 2014-28 adopted 7/8/14)
Secs. 3.03.033–3.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. International Residential Code*
Sec. 3.03.061 Adopted
Certain provisions of the 2015 edition of the International Residential Code (IRC) are hereby adopted by the city, and
declared to be effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary
of one copy of said IRC.
Sec. 3.03.062 Amendments
In accordance with the IRC, local amendments are adopted as well as amendments recommended by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments. For code uniformity with other regional cities and local practices certain sections of the 2015
International Residential Code are amended. The amendments attached to Ordinance 2017-34 entitled “Amendments to the
2015 International Residential Code” are made a part of this division by reference. The city adopts these amendments, all of
which are on file in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 3.03.063 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 3.03.064 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to
be guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2017-34 adopted 5/23/17)
ARTICLE 3.04 ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE†
Sec. 3.04.001 Adopted
Certain provisions of the 2015 edition of the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) are hereby adopted by the city,
and declared to be effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city
secretary of one copy of said (IECC).
Sec. 3.04.002 Amendments
In accordance with the IECC, local amendments are adopted as well as amendments recommended by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments. For code uniformity with other regional cities and local practices certain sections of the 2015
International Energy Conservation Code are amended. The amendments attached to Ordinance 2017-35 entitled
“Amendments to the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code” are made a part of this article by reference. The city
adopts these amendments, all of which are on file in the office of the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/598
Sec. 3.04.003 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 3.04.004 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to be
guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2017-35 adopted 5/23/17)
ARTICLE 3.05 ELECTRICITY*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.05.001 Permits for industrial plants
(a) Definition. For the purpose of this section an “industrial plant” shall be defined as a business engaged in the process of
manufacturing a product.
(b) Required. An industrial plant located in an industrial zone, as indicated by the city zoning map, shall obtain an electrical
permit for new electrical construction. An electrical permit obtained for new electrical construction, to be performed by inhouse
industrial plant personnel, shall be issued to a master electrician registered with the city and who is a full-time
employee of the industrial plant.
(c) Limitations. Electrical permits shall be limited to the plant site.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-124)
Secs. 3.05.002–3.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Electrical Code*
Sec. 3.05.031 Adopted
Certain provisions of the 2014 edition of the National Electric Code (NEC) are hereby adopted by the city, and declared to be
effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary of one copy of
said NEC.
Sec. 3.05.032 Amendments
In accordance with the NEC, local amendments are adopted as well as amendments recommended by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments. For code uniformity with other regional cities and local practices certain sections of the 2014
National Electric Code are amended. The amendments attached to Ordinance 2017-36 entitled “Amendments to the 2014
National Electrical Code” are made a part of this division by reference. The city adopts these amendments, all of which are
on file in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 3.05.033 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 3.05.034 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to
be guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2017-36 adopted 5/23/17)
ARTICLE 3.06 PLUMBING†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.06.001 Water saving performance standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/598
Plumbing fixtures used within the corporate limits of the city must comply with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety
Code, section 371.002. (1990 Code, sec. 4-169; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.06.002–3.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Code
Sec. 3.06.031 Adopted
Certain provisions of the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing Code (IPC) are hereby adopted by the city, and declared
to be effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary of one
copy of said IPC.
Sec. 3.06.032 Amendments
In accordance with the IPC, local amendments are adopted as well as amendments recommended by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments. For code uniformity with other regional cities and local practices certain sections of the 2015
International Plumbing Code are amended. The amendments attached to Ordinance 2017-37 entitled “Amendments to the
2015 International Plumbing Code” are made a part of this division by reference. The city adopts these amendments, all of
which are on file in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 3.06.033 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 3.06.034 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this division and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to
be guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2017-37 adopted 5/23/17)
ARTICLE 3.07 MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 3.07.001 Adopted
Certain provisions of the 2015 edition of the International Mechanical Code (IMC) are hereby adopted by the city, and
declared to be effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary
of one copy of said IMC.
Sec. 3.07.002 Amendments
In accordance with the IMC, local amendments are adopted as well as amendments recommended by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments. For code uniformity with other regional cities and local practices certain sections of the 2015
International Mechanical Code are amended. The amendments attached to Ordinance 2017-38 entitled “Amendments to the
2015 International Mechanical Code” are made a part of this article by reference. The city adopts these amendments, all of
which are on file in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 3.07.003 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 3.07.004 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to be
guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2017-38 adopted 5/23/17)
ARTICLE 3.08 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.08.001 Adoption of code
The 1997 edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings as published by the International
Conference of Building Officials is hereby adopted by reference. Unless, deleted, amended, expanded or otherwise changed
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/598
herein, all provisions of such code shall be fully applicable and binding. A copy of the code is on file in the city secretary's
office.
Sec. 3.08.002 Amendments to code
The following sections of the 1997 edition of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings are hereby
amended to read as follows:
Section 102.1; change to read as follows:
Sec. 102.1 Purpose. It is the purpose of this code to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be
cumulative with and in addition to, any other remedy provided by the building code, housing code, chapter 214 of
the Local Government Code, or otherwise available at law, whereby residential and nonresidential buildings or
structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general
public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished. The purpose of this code is not
to create or otherwise establish or designate any particular class or group of persons who will or should be
especially protected or benefited by the terms of this code.
Section 102.2; change to read as follows:
Sec. 102.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all residential and nonresidential buildings which are
hereinafter defined as dangerous buildings, whether now in existence or whether they may hereafter become
dangerous.
Section 103; change to read as follows:
Sec. 103 Alterations, additions, and repairs. All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under
the provisions of this code shall be repaired and in accordance with all applicable codes.
Section 204; change to read as follows:
Sec. 204 Inspection of work. All buildings or structures within the scope of this code and all construction or work
for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official in accordance with and in the
manner provided by this code and sections 110 and 1704, 1705, 1706, and 1707 of the International Building
Code.
Section 205 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
Sec. 205 Board of appeals review of decisions and determinations; municipal court jurisdiction regarding
dangerous building orders
Sec. 205.1 General. The city's board of code appeals shall have the authority to hear and decide appeals of
decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretations of this
code. The city's planning and zoning commission shall serve as the board of appeals for the purpose of this
code. Any reference elsewhere in this code to the board of appeals or the hearings board in terms of review
of decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretations of
this code shall be deemed to be the city's board of code appeals. The building official shall have no vote on
any matter before the board of code appeals, and shall only serve in an advisory capacity to the board of
code appeals. The board of code appeals shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and
shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the appellant with a duplicate copy to the building official.
Copies of all rules of procedure adopted by the board of code appeals shall be delivered to the building
official, who shall make them accessible to the public
Sec. 205.2 Municipal court jurisdiction regarding dangerous building orders
Sec. 205.2.1 Municipal court powers and duties regarding dangerous buildings
(a) The municipal court of record has the power and duty to hold a public hearing pursuant to
chapter 214.001 of the Texas Local Government Code to determine whether a structure complies with
the minimum standards set forth in this code.
(b) The municipal court of record has the following powers and duties:
(1) To require the reduction in occupancy load of an overcrowded structure or the vacation of a
structure found to be a dangerous building.
(2) To require the repair of a structure found to be a dangerous building.
(3) To require the demolition of a structure found to be a dangerous building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/598
(4) To require the removal of personalty from a structure ordered vacated or demolished.
Removal may be accomplished by use of city forces or a private transfer company if the owner of
the personalty is not known, or the whereabouts of the owner cannot be ascertained, or the
owner fails to remove the personalty. Costs of any removal and storage are the responsibility of
the owner of the personalty.
(5) To require that an open and vacant structure or open and vacant portion of a structure be
secured.
(6) To require or cause the correction of a dangerous condition on the land. Correction of a
dangerous condition may be accomplished by city forces or a private contractor. Costs of
correction are the responsibility of the owner.
(7) To assess a civil penalty, not to exceed $1,000.00 a day per violation or, if the property is
the owner's lawful homestead, $10.00 a day per violation, against a property owner for each day
or part of a day that the owner fails to repair or demolish a structure in compliance with a court
order issued under this section 205.2.
(8) Any additional authority as prescribed by chapter 214, subchapter A of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended.
Sec. 205.2.2 Initiation of proceeding; petition requirements
(a) A petition filed with the municipal court by the city attorney, code official, the building official,
initiates a civil proceeding under this section 205.2. The proceeding must be kept and organized
separately from the criminal dockets of the municipal court. A petition for appeal may also be filed by
the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of a building or structure that has been declared a dangerous
building by order of the building official by filing such petition with the building official within 30 days
from the date of service of such order.
(b) The petition filed by the city attorney, code official, or building official must be in writing and shall
include:
(1) an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the
property on which it is located; and
(2) a description of the alleged violation or violations of minimum standards that are present on
the property.
(c) The petition filed by the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of the building or structure must be in
writing and shall include:
(1) an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the
property on which it is located; and
(2) a statement indicating the owner or lienholder's desire to contest the order issued by the
building official.
(d) The proceeding will be styled “City of Midlothian, Plaintiff v. (Property Description), Defendant.”
The municipal court shall set the matter for a hearing not less than 30 days nor more than 60 days
after the filing of the petition.
Sec. 205.2.3 Notice of hearing before the municipal court
(a) The city attorney, code official or the building official shall give notice of a municipal court hearing
on the repair, demolition, vacation, or securing of a structure, or the relocation of the occupants of a
structure, to any owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of the structure. A diligent effort must be made to
discover each owner, mortgagee, or lienholder of the structure and to give such persons notice of the
hearing.
(b) Notice of the hearing must include:
(1) the date, time, and place of the hearing;
(2) an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the
property on which it is located;
(3) a description of the alleged violation or violations of minimum standards that are present on
the property; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/598
(4) a statement that the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder must submit at the hearing proof of
the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this chapter and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
(c) On or before the tenth (10th) day before the hearing date, notice of the hearing must be:
(1) mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the affected
property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the property, as shown by the records in the
office of the county clerk of the county in which the property is located if the address of the
lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or any other applicable
instruments on file in the office of the county clerk;
(2) posted, to all unknown owners, on the front door of each improvement situated on the
affected property or as close to the front door as practicable; and
(3) published on one occasion in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(d) The city attorney, code official or the building official may file in the official real property records of
Ellis County, Texas a notice of hearing that contains:
(1) the name and address of the property owner, if that information can be determined;
(2) a legal description of the property; and
(3) a description of the hearing.
(e) A notice issued under this section or section 205.2.6, or an order entered by the municipal court
under this article, that is filed in accordance with subsection (d) is binding on any subsequent grantee,
lienholder, or other transferee of an interest in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of
the notice or order and constitutes notice of the matter or order to any subsequent grantee, lienholder,
or other transferee.
Sec. 205.2.4 Request for continuance of hearing. A continuance must be requested in writing and
may only be granted for good cause shown. The municipal court may continue the hearing no more
than 60 days and must notify the parties appearing in open court of the new date and time of the
hearing. No other notice of the continued hearing date and time is required to be filed, sent, published,
or posted.
Sec. 205.2.5 Hearing procedures before the municipal court; court orders
(a) At the civil hearing in municipal court:
(1) the city attorney shall present evidence of notice of the hearing, the violation or violations of
minimum standards that are present on the property, and other relevant issues;
(2) an owner, lienholder, mortgagee, or other person shown to have an interest in the property
may present evidence of the scope of work and time required to comply with minimum standards
under this chapter, present evidence on other relevant issues, and cross-examine witnesses;
(3) the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of
any work that may be required to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the time required
to reasonably perform the work; and
(4) the city attorney may cross-examine or rebut any evidence offered by an opposing party or
other witness.
(b) At the close of evidence at the hearing, the municipal court judge may do one or more of the
following:
(1) Find by a preponderance of the evidence that the structure is substandard, specifically
describing each minimum standard found to be violated, and order one or more of the following:
a. demolition of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee not later than the
30th day after entry of the order, unless an extension is granted under subsection (c);
b. repair of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee as needed to correct
every violation of minimum standards found by the court to exist at the structure, the repair
to be accomplished not later than the 30th day after entry of the order, unless an extension
is granted under subsection (c);
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/598
c. vacation of the structure by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee, within a specified
period of time; or
d. the assessment of a civil penalty against the owner for each day or part of a day that
the owner fails to repair or demolish the structure in compliance with a court order issued
under this subsection.
(2) Find that the structure is open and vacant and order securing of the structure from
unauthorized entry by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee.
(3) Order relocation of the occupants of a structure affected by a court order, within a specified
period of time, by the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee.
(c) The municipal court may grant an extension of time for complying with an order to repair or
demolish a structure as follows:
(1) The municipal court may allow more than 30 days to comply with an order to repair or
demolish a structure under subsection (b)(1), if the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee establishes at
the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. The municipal court
shall establish a specific time schedule for the commencement and performance of the work and
require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to secure the property from unauthorized entry while
the work is being performed.
(2) The municipal court may not allow more than 90 days to comply with an order issued under
subsection (b)(1) unless the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee:
a. submits at the hearing a detailed plan and time schedule for the work; and
b. establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90
days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(3) If the municipal court allows more than 90 days to complete any part of the work required to
repair or demolish the structure under subsection (b)(1), the municipal court shall require the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the court and the building
official demonstrating compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and
performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear
before the court to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules.
(4) If the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee owns property, including structures and
improvements on property, within the city boundaries that exceeds $100,000.00 in total value, the
municipal court may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in
an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing or demolishing a structure under subsection
(c)(3). In lieu of a bond, the municipal court may require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to
provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by
the city manager. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third-party guaranty
provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the municipal court issues the order. The
municipal court shall establish rules and procedures, to be approved by the city attorney,
governing when a bond, letter of credit, or third-party guaranty will be required under this section.
(d) Demolition, vacation, and securing of a structure, and the relocation of the occupants of a
structure, may be accomplished by the city if not timely accomplished by the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee. Repair of a structure may be accomplished by the city if not timely accomplished by the
owner, lienholder, or mortgagee, but only to the extent necessary to bring the structure into compliance
with minimum standards and only if the municipal court made a determination that the structure is likely
to endanger persons or property; and the structure is a residential dwelling with ten (10) or fewer units.
If, at the close of evidence at the hearing, the municipal court orders a structure to be repaired,
vacated, secured, or demolished, or orders relocation of the occupants of a structure, the municipal
court shall in its order also authorize the city, through its agents or contractors, to enter the property
and repair, vacate, secure, or demolish the structure on the property, or relocate the occupants of the
structure, whichever applies, if the ordered action is not accomplished by the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee by the deadline given by the court pursuant to subsection (b) or (c). Performance of work
by the city under this subsection does not limit the ability of the city to collect on a bond or other
financial guaranty that may be required from the property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee under
subsection (c)(4) of this section.
(e) An order entered by the municipal court must also include a statement that any order entered by
the municipal court, when filed in the official public real property records of Ellis County, Texas binds
any subsequent grantee, lienholder, or other transferee of an interest in the property who acquires the
interest after the filing of the order.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/598
(f) After the hearing, the city attorney, code official or the building official shall promptly mail by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or personally deliver with proof of delivery, a copy of the order
to each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee of the structure and shall file a copy of the order in the official
real property records of Ellis County, Texas. Best efforts must be made to determine the identity and
address of any owner, mortgagee, or lienholder and to give such persons notice of the order. If an
order to repair, demolish, vacate, reduce in occupancy load, or secure a structure, or to relocate the
occupants of a structure, is timely effected, the building official shall, upon written request and payment
of the cost by the owner, file a notice of compliance in the official real property records of Ellis County,
Texas. Every notice given under this subsection must include an identification, which is not required to
be a legal description, of the structure and property on which it is located, and a description of the
violation of minimum standards that is present at the property.
(g) Within 10 days after the date the order is issued, the city attorney, code official or the building
official shall:
(1) file a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and
(2) publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city an abbreviated copy of the order
containing:
a. the street address or legal description of the property;
b. the date of the hearing;
c. a brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
d. instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
Sec. 205.2.6 Noncompliance with court orders; civil penalties; liens
(a) If the code official or the building official determines that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of a
structure has not timely complied with a municipal court order issued under section 205.2.5 and the
order included a provision authorizing the city to perform work upon failure of the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee to comply with the order, the city may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, repair,
demolish, vacate, or secure the structure, or relocate the occupants of the structure, whichever is
applicable, in accordance with the court order. Before the city begins performance of the work, the city
attorney or the building official shall issue a notice including:
(1) an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the
property on which it is located;
(2) an identification of the court order;
(3) a description of each violation of minimum standards found by the court to be present on
the property when the court order was issued;
(4) a description of any work ordered by the court to correct each violation on the property;
(5) a statement that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee has not timely complied with the court
order and a description of the provisions of the court order that still require compliance;
(6) a statement of the city's intent to cause the repair, demolition, vacation, or securing of the
structure, or the relocation of the occupants of the structure, whichever is applicable; and
(7) the date and time the city will begin performance of the work in accordance with the court
order.
(b) Not later than 10 days before the city begins the performance of work under this section, the
notice required under subsection (a) must be:
(1) mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee
of the structure;
(2) posted on the front door of the structure or as close to the front door as practicable; and
(3) published on one occasion in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
(c) Any costs incurred by the city in performing work under this section 205.2 may be enforced in
accordance with subsection (e) of this section and through any other remedies provided by city
ordinance or state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/598
(d) Civil penalties may be assessed against the owner of property as follows:
(1) If the city attorney, code official or building official determines that the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee of a structure has not timely complied with a municipal court order issued under
section 205.2.5, the city attorney may file an action in municipal court for the assessment of a
civil penalty against the property. The city attorney or the building official shall promptly give
notice to each owner, lienholder, and mortgagee of the hearing to assess a civil penalty. The
notice must include:
a. an identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the structure and the
property on which it is located;
b. an identification of the court order affecting the property;
c. a description of each violation of minimum standards found by the court to be present
on the property when the court order was issued;
d. a description of any work ordered by the court to correct each violation on the property;
e. a statement that the city attorney or the building official has determined that an owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee has not timely complied with the court order and a description of
the provisions of the court order that still require compliance; and
f. a statement that the municipal court will conduct a hearing to consider assessment of a
civil penalty on the property and the date, time, and place of the hearing.
(2) The notice required under subsection (d)(1) for a municipal court hearing to consider the
assessment of a civil penalty on property subject to a court order must be given in compliance
with the notice requirements set forth in section 205.2.3 for other hearings under this section
205.2.
(3) A hearing to consider the assessment of a civil penalty on property subject to a court order
must be conducted in compliance with the requirements and procedures set forth in this article for
other hearings before the municipal court, except that, in addition to any other evidence
presented, an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee may present evidence of any work performed or
completed on the property to comply with the court order.
(4) The municipal court, after hearing evidence from each interested person present, may
assess a civil penalty against the owner in a specific amount in accordance with section
205.2.1(b)(7) of this section 205.2.
(5) Notice of a municipal court order issued under this subsection must comply with the
requirements and procedures of sections 205.2.5(f) and (g) and section 205.2.9 for notice of
other board orders.
(6) A civil penalty assessed under this subsection may be enforced in accordance with
subsection (e) of this section.
(7) A civil penalty assessment hearing may be combined with any other hearing before the
municipal court concerning the same property.
(e) The city may place a lien on property as follows:
(1) The expense of the repair, demolition, vacation, or securing of a structure or the relocation
of the occupants of a structure, when performed under contract with the city or by city forces, and
any civil penalty assessed against the owner of the structure, constitute a nontransferable lien
against the real property on which the structure stands or stood and runs with the land, unless it
is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution. The city's lien attaches when notice of the
lien is recorded and indexed in the official real property records of Ellis County, Texas. The notice
of lien must contain the name and address of the owner, if reasonably determinable, a legal
description of the real property, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance
due.
(2) The city's lien for the expenses is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens, if each
mortgagee and lienholder is given notice and an opportunity to repair, demolish, vacate, or
secure the structure, or relocate the occupants of the structure, whichever applies. Otherwise, the
city's lien for expenses, or for any civil penalties imposed, is superior to all other previously
recorded judgment liens except for any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to
the real property, if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the official real property records of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/598
Ellis County, Texas before the date the civil penalty was assessed or the action for which the
expenses were incurred was begun by the city.
(3) A lien acquired by the city under this section for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if
the structure upon which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a
person 65 years of age or older.
(4) The city may use lawful means to collect expenses and civil penalties assessed under this
article from an owner. Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this article accrues
interest at the rate of 10 percent a year from the date of the assessment until paid in full. The city
may petition a court of competent jurisdiction in a civil suit for a final judgment in accordance with
the assessed civil penalty. To enforce the civil penalty, the city must file with the District Clerk of
Ellis County a certified copy of the municipal court order assessing the civil penalty, stating the
amount and duration of the penalty. The assessment of a civil penalty under this article is final
and binding and constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty. No other proof is required for the
district court to enter final judgment on the penalty.
(f) No utility service, building permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be allowed on any such
property until the assessment is paid and such lien is released by the city.
(g) After the expenses incurred by the city, as set forth in the sworn account of the building official,
have been fully paid with interest of ten percent (10%) per annum from the date the work was
performed, the building official shall execute a release of lien which shall be filed in the official real
property records of Ellis County, Texas.
Sec. 205.2.7 Modification of court orders
(a) Within 15 days after the municipal court enters an order under this article, the city or an owner,
lienholder, or mortgagee of a structure that is the subject of the order may request that the municipal
court modify its order. The request must be in writing and filed with the municipal court.
(b) The municipal court shall schedule a hearing on the motion not less than five days or more than
10 days after the request for modification is filed. The movant must promptly deliver a copy of the
request and notice of the hearing date and time, in writing, to the city attorney and each owner,
lienholder, and mortgagee by either personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested.
(c) If circumstances have changed and the municipal court finds good cause, the municipal court
may modify the order. The city attorney or the building official shall notify the owner, lienholder, and
mortgagee of the structure of the modified order in accordance with section 205.2.5(f) and (g).
Sec. 205.2.8 Appeal of court orders. Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record who is jointly or
severally aggrieved by a municipal court order issued under this section 205.2 may appeal by filing in
state district court a verified petition setting forth that the municipal court's decision is illegal, in whole
or in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder,
or mortgagee of record within 30 calendar days after the respective dates a copy of the municipal court
order is mailed to each in compliance with section 205.2.5(f); otherwise, the order will become final as
to each person upon expiration of each person's respective 30-calendar-day period. An appeal in state
district court is a trial de novo.
Sec. 205.2.9 Miscellaneous notice provisions
(a) Any notice required by this section 205.2 to be given to the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of
any structure must also be given to any legal occupant of the structure, if the subject of the notice
involves the demolition, vacation, or reduction of occupancy load of the structure or the relocation.
Notice required under this subsection must be given to the legal occupants either:
(1) in the same manner required by section 205.2 for notice to the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee of the structure; or
(2) by personal service, using the time and procedural requirements set forth in this article for
notice to the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the structure.
(b) For purposes of this section 205.2, a requirement to use “best efforts” or “a diligent effort” is
satisfied by a search of the following records:
(1) the official real property records of Ellis County, Texas;
(2) records of the Ellis County Appraisal District;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/598
(3) records of the secretary of state for the State of Texas;
(4) assumed name records of Ellis County, Texas;
(5) the city's tax records; and
(6) the city's utility records.
(c) If any notice, order, or other document is mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, as
required by this article, and is returned by the United States Postal Service as “refused” or “unclaimed,”
the validity of the notice, order, or other document is not affected, and the notice, order, or other
document will be deemed as delivered.
Section 205.2.10 Failure to obey order. Any person to whom an order issued pursuant to this article
is directed who fails, neglects or refuses to comply with such order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and may be prosecuted in the municipal court in addition to any other remedies available to the city
provided herein.
Section 205.2.11 Interference prohibited. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any
officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or
holds any estate or interest in the structure which has been ordered repaired, vacated, demolished,
removed or secured under the provisions of this article. Whenever such officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building, or purchaser
is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing, removing, or securing any
such structure pursuant to the provision of this article, or in performing any necessary act preliminary
to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this code.
Section 205.2.12 Permit required. Any work of closure, repair, removal or demolition by the owner or
any lienholder or mortgagee or their agents must be performed pursuant to applicable, valid, and
unexpired permits issued by the city.
Section 301; change to read as follows:
Section 301 - General. For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be
construed as specified in either this chapter or as specified in the building code or the housing code. Where terms
are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.
Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender
include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
BUILDING CODE is the International Building Code promulgated by the International Code Council, as adopted
by the City of Midlothian, Texas with amendments.
BUILDING OFFICIAL is the City of Midlothian employee who is charged with the administration and enforcement
of this code, or any person duly authorized by the city manager to administer and enforce this code.
DANGEROUS BUILDING is any building or structure deemed to be dangerous under the provisions of section
302 of this code.
HOUSING CODE is the Uniform Housing Code promulgated by the International conference of building officials,
as adopted by the City of Midlothian, Texas with amendments.
Section 302; change to read as follows:
Section 302 - Dangerous or substandard buildings. For the purposes of this code, any building, regardless of
the date of its construction, which has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described shall be
deemed to be a substandard building, provided that such conditions on defects exist to the extent that the life,
health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the building are endangered:
(a) Any building that is dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public
health, safety and welfare.
(b) Any building that, regardless of its structural condition, is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other
invitees and is secured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or
other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children.
(c) Any building that is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(1) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/598
(2) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of
the building in the manner described by section 302(b);
(3) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width
or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic.
(d) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped,
worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or
panic.
(e) Whenever the stress in any materials, or members or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is
more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building code for new
buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(f) Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other
cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before
such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar
structure, purpose or location.
(g) Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or
dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.
(h) Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior
thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to
be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one half of that specified in the building code for new buildings of
similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code
for such buildings.
(i) Whenever any portion thereof has wrecked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or
other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case
of similar new construction.
(j) Whenever the building, or any portion thereof, because of:
(1) dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
(2) faulty construction;
(3) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting such building;
(4) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is likely to partially
or completely collapse.
(k) Whenever, for any reason, the building, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for
which it is being used.
(l) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent
that a plumbline passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one third of the base.
(m) Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows 33 percent or more damage or
deterioration of its supporting member or members, or 50 percent damage or deterioration of its
nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings.
(n) Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood or other causes, or has
become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:
(1) an attractive nuisance to children; or
(2) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons.
(o) Whenever any building has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific
requirement or prohibition applicable to such building provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction,
as specified in the building code, or of any law or ordinance of this state or jurisdiction relating to the
condition, location or structure of buildings.
(p) Whenever any building which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and
ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than 50 percent, or in any supporting
part, member or portion less than 66 percent of the strength, fire-resisting qualities or characteristics, or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/598
weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of
like area, height and occupancy in the same location.
(q) Whenever a building, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or
sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the building official to be unsanitary, unfit for human
habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease, including, but not limited to, the
following:
(1) Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house.
(2) Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a
hotel.
(3) Lack of, or improper kitchen sink in a dwelling unit.
(4) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.
(5) Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house.
(6) Lack of adequate heating facilities.
(7) Lack of, or improper operation of, required ventilating equipment.
(8) Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this code.
(9) Room and space dimensions less than required by this code.
(10) Lack of required electrical lighting.
(11) Dampness of habitable rooms.
(12) Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the health officer.
(13) General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
(14) Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
(15) Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the
health officer.
(r) Whenever any building, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage,
inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or
heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard.
(s) Whenever any building is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common
law or in equity jurisprudence.
(t) Whenever any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building.
(u) Whenever any building is abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
(v) Any building constructed and existing in violation of any provision of the building code, the fire code or
any other applicable provision or law of the city.
Chapter 4; delete and replace with the following:
CHAPTER 4 NOTICE AND HEARING
SECTION 401 - NOTICE OF ORDER AND HEARING
401.1 Commencement of proceedings. When the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected a
building and has found and determined that such building is dangerous or substandard building as defined in
section 302 the building official shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, vacation, securing,
removal, or demolition of the building.
401.2 Notice and order. The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the
building as listed in the official records of the Ellis County Appraisal District. The notice and order shall contain:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/598
(a) The street address and legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the
building is located.
(b) A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief, concise
description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of section 302 of
this code.
(c) A statement of the actions required to be taken as determined by the building official, including a
statement that the owner may repair, if feasible, or demolish or remove at his option.
(1) If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, rehabilitated,
or secured; the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically
commenced within such time (not to exceed 30 days from the date of the order) and completed within
such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all the circumstances (not to
exceed 90 days from the date of the order).
(2) If the building official has determined that the building or structure shall be vacated, the order
shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a time certain from the date of the
order as determined by the building official to be reasonable (not to exceed 30 days from the date of
the order).
(3) If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be removed or
demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official
shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 30 days from the date of the order); that all required
permits be secured therefor within 30 days from the date of the order; and that the demolition be
completed within such time s the building official shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 90 days
from the date of the order).
(d) Statement advising that if any required work is not commenced within the time specified, that the city
will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building, and will
charge the cost to the property.
(e) Statement advising (i) that any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may
appeal from the notice and order of the building official to the municipal court as provided in section 205.2.2;
and (ii) that failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to a hearing before the municipal court.
[401.3 Reserved.]
401.4 Service of notice. The notice and any amended notice shall be served upon the record owner, mortgagee,
any lienholders, and posted on the property.
401.5 Method of service. Service of notice shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto, either personally or
by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each
such person at his address as it appears on the last tax roll of the city, or as known to the building official. If no
address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order
shall be published once within ten (10) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The
failure of any such person to receive such notice or order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken
under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner provided in this section shall be deemed effective on the
date of mailing. Service by publication shall be deemed effective on the date of the second publication.
SECTION 402 - RECORDATION OF NOTICE AND ORDER
If compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein, the building official shall file in the official
real property records of Ellis County, Texas a certificate describing the property and certifying (i) that the building
is a substandard building, and (ii) that the owner and lienholders have been so notified. Whenever the corrections
ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a
substandard building on the property described in the certificate, the building official shall file a notice of
abatement in official real property records of Ellis County, Texas certifying that the building has been demolished
or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer substandard, whichever is
appropriate.
SECTION 403 - NOTICE TO VACATE
403.1 Order. An order to vacate immediately may be issued by the building official only if the building or structure
is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or of the
occupants.
403.2. Posting. Every notice to vacate, in addition to being served as provided above shall be posted at or upon
each entrance to the building and shall be in substantially the following form:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/598
“DANGEROUS AND SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.
_________________
Building Official
City of Midlothian, Texas”
403.3. Compliance. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry
may be made to repair, demolish, or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any
such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal have been completed and a
certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. Any person violating this
subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 405 - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
(a) Any person who fails to comply with or to meet the requirements made in any notice duly served as provided
in chapter 4 of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day such failure continues after the date the
notice requires compliance.
(b) If the required repair, removal or demolition has not been commenced, or if required action has not been
completed as required by such notice, the building official shall cause such building to be vacated by posting a
notice as provided in section 403.2.
Chapter 5; delete.
Chapter 6; delete.
Chapter 7; delete.
Chapter 8; delete.
Chapter 9; delete.
(Ordinance 2014-27 adopted 7/8/14)
ARTICLE 3.09 MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Sec. 3.09.001 Application of article
This article shall apply to all houses or buildings, and any parts of houses or buildings, in any stage of construction or
completion, but shall not include the raw materials for construction of houses or component parts or equipment for houses
which have not been assembled into a completed or partially completed part of a house or building. (1990 Code, sec. 4-357)
Sec. 3.09.002 Permit required
Any person moving a house, building, or any part of a house or building on, over and across any street, highway, and alley
within the city shall first obtain a permit therefor, to be issued by the city. Application shall be made at the office of the city
secretary and shall state the name of the owner of the house or building, the route over which same is to be moved, the
approximate time for moving and duration thereof, and the ultimate destination of the house or building being moved. (1990
Code, sec. 4-356)
Sec. 3.09.003 Permit fee
The person seeking a permit required by this article shall pay a fee which is on file in the office of the city secretary. (1990
Code, sec. 4-358)
Sec. 3.09.004 Permit issuance criteria
The granting of a permit under this article, or its denial, shall be determined by the building official based upon the possibility
of damage to the streets, highways, and alleys and to adjoining private property, the possibility of the creation of a traffic or
safety hazard, its duration, the degree of interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, the inconvenience caused thereby,
and the safety of the public generally in relation thereto. (1990 Code, sec. 4-359; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/598
Sec. 3.09.005 Bond
In the event a permit shall be issued under this article, the applicant therefor shall prior to the issuance thereof deposit a cash
bond with the city secretary in the sum which is on file in the city secretary's office, conditioned that the applicant will pay for
any and all damage caused by such move, including any extraordinary damage to the streets, highways, and alleys, as well
as damage to publicly owned property and to privately owned property. Such cash bond shall be held by the city subject to
the following conditions:
(1) In the event that the person moving such house or other building as herein provided shall notify the chief of
police at or prior to the time of entry on the streets so that such officer shall have opportunity to supervise the
move, then upon certification by such officer at the completion of such move that no damage has been done, the
city secretary is authorized to refund such cash deposit.
(2) In the event that any person subject to the terms of this article shall fail to notify such officer as provided in
(1) above or if the report of such officer shows damage caused by such move, the city secretary shall retain such
cash deposit for a period of ten (10) days after the completion of such move. If at the end of such time no claims
for damages have been filed with the city secretary, such deposit shall be returned to the applicant. In the event
claims for damages resulting from such move are filed with the city secretary prior to refund, such deposit shall be
retained until such claims have been settled and a release filed with the city secretary, or until legal proceedings
with regard to any of such claims shall be completed, and satisfactory evidence thereof furnished the city
secretary, or until six (6) months shall have passed from completion of such move, whichever event shall first
occur.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-360; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.10 SWIMMING POOLS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.10.001 Adoption of code
(a) The 1997 edition of the Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code, as published by the International Association
of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, adopted by the city council and on file in the city secretary's office is declared to be
effective within the city.
(b) Any violation of the terms of the code adopted in subsection (a) is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be
subject to abatement by all methods provided by law.
(1990 Code, secs. 4-381, 4-382; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.10.002–3.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Barriers*
Sec. 3.10.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, certain terms, words and phrases are defined as follows:
Barrier. A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof that completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs
access to the swimming pool.
Grade. The underlying surface, such as earth or a walking surface.
Separation fence. A barrier that separates all doors of a dwelling unit with direct access to a swimming pool from the
swimming pool.
Spa, non-self-contained. A hydromassage pool or tub for recreational or therapeutic use, not located in health-care facilities,
designed for immersion of users and usually having a filter, heater and motor-driven blower. It may be installed indoors or
outdoors, on the ground or on a supporting structure, or in the ground or in a supporting structure. A non-self-contained spa
is intended for recreational bathing and contains water over 24 inches deep.
Spa, self-contained. A continuous-duty appliance in which all control, water-heating and water-circulating equipment is an
integral part of the product, located entirely under the spa skirt. A self-contained spa is intended for recreational bathing and
contains water over 24 inches deep.
Swimming pool. Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This
includes inground, aboveground and onground swimming pools, and fixed-in-place wading pools.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/598
(1) Indoor swimming pool. A swimming pool that is totally contained within a residential structure and
surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure.
(2) Outdoor swimming pool. Any swimming pool that is not an indoor pool.
(Ordinance 99-33, sec. 1, adopted 7/13/99)
Sec. 3.10.032 Requirements
An outdoor swimming pool shall be provided with a barrier that shall be installed, inspected and approved prior to plastering
or filling with water. A spa or hot tub shall be provided with a barrier that shall be installed, inspected and approved prior to
filling the spa or hot tub with water. The barrier shall comply with the following:
(1) The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces
away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall
be 2 inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical
clearance at the bottom of the barrier may be increased to four inches when grade is a solid surface such as a
concrete deck, or when the barrier is mounted on the top of the aboveground pool structure. When the barriers
have horizontal members spaced less than 45 inches apart, the horizontal members shall be placed on the pool
side of the barrier. Any decorative design work on the side away from the swimming pool, such as protrusions,
indentations or cutouts, which render the barrier easily climbable, is prohibited.
(2) Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 1-3/4-inch-diameter sphere. Exceptions:
(A) When vertical spacing between such openings is 45 inches or more, the opening size may be
increased such that the passage of a 4-inch-diameter sphere is not allowed.
(B) For fencing composed of vertical and horizontal members, the spacing between vertical members may
be increased up to 4 inches when the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or
more.
(3) Chain link fences used as the barrier shall not be less than 11 gage.
(4) Access gates shall comply with the requirements of subsections (1) through (3). Pedestrian access gates
shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is
located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate, (A) the release mechanism shall be located on the pool
side of the barrier at least 3 inches below the top of the gate, and (B) the gate and barrier shall have no opening
greater than 1/2 inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. Pedestrian gates shall swing away from the
pool. Any gates other than pedestrian access gates shall be equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and
shall remain locked at all times when not in use.
(5) Where an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool
structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then (A) the ladder or steps shall be capable of being
secured, locked or removed to prevent access or (B) the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier that
meets the requirements of subsections (1) through (5). When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed,
any opening created shall be protected by a barrier complying with subsections (1) through (4).
(Ordinance 99-33, sec. 2, adopted 7/13/99)
Sec. 3.10.033 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1.01.009. Each transaction in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be
deemed a separate offense. (Ordinance 99-33, sec. 3, adopted 7/13/99)
ARTICLE 3.11 MANUFACTURED HOUSING*
Sec. 3.11.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as
specified in this section.
Accessory building. Any building or structure, or portion thereof, located on the same property as a manufactured home
which does not qualify as a manufactured home as defined herein.
Addition. An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
Alter or alteration. Any change, addition or modification in construction or occupancy.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/598
Approved. As to materials and types of construction, refers to approval by the building official as the result of investigation
and tests conducted by the building official, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities, technical
or scientific organizations.
Approved agency. An established and recognized agency regularly engaged in conducting tests or furnishing inspection
services, when such agency has been approved by the building official.
Building. Any structure used or intended for support or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building code. The Uniform Building Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
Building official. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, or
his duly authorized representative.
Building service equipment. Refers to the plumbing, mechanical and electrical equipment including piping, wiring, fixtures and
other accessories which provide sanitation, lighting, heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration, fire protection and facilities
essential for the habitable occupancy of a manufactured home or accessory building or structure for its designated use and
occupancy.
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Electrical code. The National Electrical Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
Existing building. A building erected prior to the adoption of this article (August 27, 1996), or one for which a legal building
permit has been issued.
Footing. That portion of the foundation of a structure which spreads and transmits loads directly to the soil or the piles.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-406)
HUD-code manufactured home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is
connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when
erected on site, at least 320 square feet;
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and
(3) Does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
A HUD-code manufactured home is not a mobile home for any purpose under state law.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Listed and listing. Terms referring to equipment and materials which are shown in a list published by an approved testing
agency, qualified and equipped for experimental testing and maintaining an adequate periodic inspection of current
productions and which listing states that the material or equipment complies with accepted national standards which are
approved or standards which have been evaluated for conformity with approved standards. (1990 Code, sec. 4-406)
Manufactured home or manufactured housing. A HUD-code manufactured home or a mobile home, as defined in this section.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Manufactured home installation. Construction which is required for the installation of a manufactured home, including the
construction of the foundation system, required structural connections thereto and the installation of on-site water, gas,
electrical and sewer systems and connections thereto which are necessary for the normal operation of the manufactured
home. (1990 Code, sec. 4-406)
Mechanical code. The International Mechanical Code as adopted by this jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/598
Mobile home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed before June 15, 1976;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is
connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when
erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home.
A mobile home is not a HUD-code manufactured home for any purpose under state law.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Occupancy. The purpose for which a manufactured home or accessory building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be
used. The term “occupancy” as used in this article shall include the manufactured home or accessory building, or part
thereof, housing such use.
Permit. An official document or certificate issued by the building official authorizing performance of a specified activity.
Person. A natural person or a person's executor, administrator or assign, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation,
its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-406)
Plumbing code. The International Plumbing Code as adopted by this jurisdiction. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Privately owned (nonrental) lot. A parcel of real estate outside of a manufactured home community (park) where the land and
the manufactured home to be installed thereon are held in common ownership.
Public way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky which is deeded,
dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use and having a clear width of not less than ten
(10) feet.
Repair. Reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing manufactured home or accessory building, structure or building
service equipment for the purpose of its maintenance.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-406)
Standards code. The Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Code, which standards code consists of the standards and
requirements for:
(1) The installation and construction of manufactured housing that are reasonably necessary to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of the occupants and the public; and
(2) The construction of HUD-code manufactured homes in compliance with the federal standards and
requirements established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974 (42 U.S.C. section 5401 et seq.).
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Street. Any thoroughfare or public space which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for public use.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
U.B.C. standards. Uniform Building Code standards, as adopted by this jurisdiction.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-406)
Sec. 3.11.002 Adoption of regulations for manufactured housing installations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/598
Regulations for manufactured housing installations are hereby adopted by the city and declared to be effective within the city
limits. (1990 Code, sec. 4-401)
Sec. 3.11.003 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare by
regulating and controlling the design, construction and quality of materials for foundation systems and building service
equipment connections which are necessary to provide for the permanent installation of manufactured homes on lots within
this jurisdiction and provide for alterations, additions and repairs to such manufactured homes. (1990 Code, sec. 4-402)
Sec. 3.11.004 Applicability
(a) The provisions of this article shall be applicable only to a manufactured home used as a single dwelling unit and shall
apply to the following:
(1) Construction, alteration and repair of any foundation system which is necessary to provide for the
installation of a manufactured home unit.
(2) Construction, installation, addition, alteration or repair, or maintenance of the building service equipment,
which is necessary for connecting manufactured homes to water, fuel or power supplies and sewer systems.
(3) Alterations, additions or repairs to existing manufactured homes.
(b) The construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of accessory buildings and structures and their building
service equipment shall comply with the requirements of the building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes adopted by
this jurisdiction. This article shall not be applicable to the design and construction of manufactured homes nor shall it be
deemed to authorize either modifications or additions to manufactured homes where otherwise prohibited.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-403)
Sec. 3.11.005 Application to existing manufactured homes and building service equipment
(a) Generally. Manufactured homes and their building service equipment to which additions, alterations or repairs are
made shall comply with all the requirements of this article for new facilities, except as specifically provided in this section.
(b) Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions made to a manufactured home shall conform to one (1) of the following:
(1) Be certified under the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42
U.S.C. section 5401 et seq.).
(2) Be designed and constructed to conform with the applicable provisions of the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. section 5401 et seq.). A certificate of compliance
issued by the manufacturer and verified by an approved agency shall be provided for such structure.
(3) Be designed and constructed in conformance with the building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes
adopted by this jurisdiction.
Additions shall be structurally separated from the manufactured home. Alterations or repairs may be made to any
manufactured home or to its building service equipment without requiring the existing manufactured home or its building
service equipment to comply with all the requirements of this article; provided, the alteration or repair conforms to that
required for new construction and provided, further, that no hazard to life, health or safety will be created by such additions,
alterations or repairs. Alterations or repairs to an existing manufactured home which are nonstructural and do not adversely
affect any structural member or any part of the building or structure having required fire protection may be made with
materials equivalent to those of which the manufactured home structure is constructed, subject to approval by the building
official.
Exception: The installation or replacement of glass shall be as required for new installations. Minor additions, alterations and
repairs to existing building service equipment installations may be made in accordance with the codes in effect at the time the
original installation was made, subject to approval of the building official and provided such additions, alterations and repairs
will not cause the existing building service equipment to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded.
(c) Existing installations. Building service equipment lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of the applicable
codes may have its use, maintenance or repair continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original
design and no hazard to life, health or property has been created by such building service equipment.
(d) Existing occupancy. Manufactured homes which are in existence at the time of the adoption of this article (August 27,
1996) may have their existing use or occupancy continued if such use or occupancy was legal at the time of the adoption of
this article, provided such continued use is not dangerous to life, health and safety. The use or occupancy of any existing
manufactured home shall not be changed unless evidence satisfactory to the building official is provided to show compliance
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/598
with all applicable provisions of the codes adopted by this jurisdiction. Upon any change in use or occupancy, the
manufactured home shall cease to be classified as such within the intent of this article.
(e) Maintenance. All manufactured homes and their building service equipment, existing and new, and all parts thereof
shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by applicable codes or by
the standards code shall be maintained in conformance with the code or standard under which it was installed. The owner or
the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of manufactured homes, accessory buildings,
structures and their building service equipment. To determine compliance with this subsection, the building official may cause
any manufactured home, accessory building or structure to be reinspected.
(f) Relocation. Manufactured homes which are to be relocated within this jurisdiction shall comply with the provisions of this
article.
(g) Alternate materials and methods of construction. The provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the use of
any material of construction not specifically prescribed by this article or the applicable codes, provided any alternate has
been approved and its use authorized by the building official. The building official may approve any such alternate, provided
the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the provisions of this article and that the
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this article or the
applicable codes in suitability, strength, effectiveness, durability, safety and sanitation. The building official shall require that
sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. The details of any
action granted approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in the files of the city's building inspections department.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-404)
Sec. 3.11.006 Enforcement
(a) Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this article. For such
purposes, the building official shall have the powers of a law enforcement officer.
(b) Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever
the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any manufactured home, accessory building or upon
any premises a condition or code violation which makes such manufactured home, accessory building or premises unsafe,
dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such manufactured home, accessory building or premises at all
reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article, provided that if
such manufactured home, accessory building or premises be occupied, the building official shall first present proper
credentials and request entry, and if such manufactured home, accessory building or premises be unoccupied, the building
official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the manufactured
home, accessory building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to
every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-405)
Sec. 3.11.007 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by all methods
provided by law. (1990 Code, sec. 4-412)
Sec. 3.11.008 Permits required
(a) Initial installation. A manufactured home shall not be installed on a foundations system, reinstalled or altered without
first obtaining a permit from the building official. A separate permit shall be obtained for each manufactured home installation.
When approved by the building official, such permit may include accessory buildings and structures and their building service
equipment when the accessory building or structure will be constructed in conjunction with the manufactured home
installation.
(b) Additions, alterations and repairs. A permit shall be obtained to alter, remodel, repair or add accessory buildings or
structures to a manufactured home subsequent to its initial installation. Permit issuance and fees therefor shall be in
conformance with the codes applicable to the type of work involved. An addition made to a manufactured home subsequent
to its initial installation which is a manufactured home as defined in this article shall comply with this article.
(c) Accessory buildings. Except as provided in subsection (a) above, permits shall be obtained for all accessory buildings
and structures and their building service equipment. Permit issuance and fees therefor shall be in conformance with the
codes applicable to the types of work involved.
(d) Exempted work. A permit is not required for the types of work specifically exempted by applicable codes. Exemption
from the permit requirements shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in violation of the provisions
of said codes or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-407)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/598
Sec. 3.11.009 Installation permit application
To obtain a manufactured home installation permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by
the building official for that purpose and give such other data and information as may be required by the building official. The
application and other data filed by the applicant for a permit shall be reviewed by the building official. Such plans may be
reviewed by other departments of this jurisdiction to verify compliance with any applicable laws under their jurisdiction. If the
building official finds that the work described in an application for a permit and the other data filed therewith conform to the
requirements of this article and other pertinent codes, laws and ordinances, and that the fees specified have been paid, the
building official shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant. (1990 Code, sec. 4-408)
Sec. 3.11.010 Inspections
(a) Generally. All construction or work for which a manufactured home installation permit is required shall be subject to
inspection by the building official. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to be accessible and exposed
for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor this jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or
replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
(b) Approval required. Work shall not be done on any part of the manufactured home installation beyond the point
indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. Such approval shall be
given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the
inspections required. There shall be a final inspection and approval on the manufactured home installation, including
connections to its building service equipment, when completed and ready for occupancy or use.
(c) Required inspections.
(1) Structural inspection for the manufactured home installation. Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any
part of any manufactured home foundation system shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining the
approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder's
agent, shall make the following inspections and shall either approve that portion of the construction as completed
or shall notify the permit holder or the permit holder's agent wherein the same fails to comply with this article or
other applicable codes.
(2) Foundation inspection. To be made after excavations for footings are completed and any required
reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. All
materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete from a central mixing plant (commonly
termed “transit mix”) is to be used, the concrete materials need not be on the job. Where the foundation is to be
constructed of approved treated wood, additional framing inspections as required by the building official may be
required.
Concrete slab or underfloor inspection. To be made after all underfloor building service equipment, conduit,
piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place but before any concrete is poured or the
manufactured home is installed.
(3) Anchorage inspection. To be made after the manufactured home has been installed and permanently
anchored.
(4) Structural inspections for accessory buildings and structures. Inspections for accessory buildings and
structures shall be made as set forth in the building code.
(5) Building service equipment inspections. All building service equipment which is required as a part of a
manufactured home installation, including accessory buildings and structures authorized by the same permit, shall
be inspected by the building official. Building service equipment shall be inspected and tested as required by the
applicable codes. Such inspections and testing shall be limited to site construction and shall not include building
service equipment which is a part of the manufactured home itself. No portion of any building service equipment
intended to be concealed by any permanent portion of the construction shall be concealed until inspected and
approved. Building service equipment shall not be connected to the water, fuel or power supply or sewer system
until authorized by the building official.
(6) Final inspection. When finish grading and the manufactured home installation, including the installation of all
required building service equipment, is completed and the manufactured home is ready for occupancy, a final
inspection shall be made.
(7) Other inspections. In addition to the called inspections specified above, the building official may make or
require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this article or
other codes and laws which are enforced by the code enforcement agency.
(8) Special inspections. In addition to the inspections required in this section, the building official may require
the owner to employ a special inspector during construction of specific types of work as described in the building
code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/598
(9) Utility services. Utility service shall not be provided to any building service equipment which is regulated by
this article or other applicable codes and for which a manufactured home installation permit is required by this
article until approved by the building official.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-409)
Sec. 3.11.011 Use and occupancy
A manufactured home shall be limited to use as a single dwelling unit. Accessory buildings shall be classified as to
occupancy by the building official as set forth in the building code. Manufactured homes and accessory buildings shall be
located on the property in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances of this jurisdiction. (1990 Code, sec. 4-410)
Sec. 3.11.012 Design and construction
(a) Generally. A manufactured home shall be installed on a foundation system which is designed and constructed to
sustain within the stress limitations specified in the building code all loads specified in the building code.
(b) Manufacturer's installation instructions. The installation instructions as provided by the manufacturer of the
manufactured home shall be used to determine permissible points of support for vertical loads and points of attachment for
anchorage systems used to resist horizontal and uplift forces.
(c) Rationality. Any system or method of construction to be used shall admit to a rational analysis in accordance with wellestablished
principles of mechanics.
(d) Foundation systems.
(1) Generally. Foundation systems designed and constructed in accordance with this section may be
considered as a permanent installation.
(2) Foundation design. A design for the foundation system shall be designed and evaluated in accordance with
the building code and standard engineering practices by an engineer or architect licensed by the state. Soils
information utilized in the design of the foundation system shall be obtained from geotechnical investigations.
(3) Drainage. Provisions shall be made for the control and drainage of surface water away from the
manufactured home.
(4) Underfloor clearances, ventilation and access. A minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches shall be
maintained beneath the lowest member of the floor support framing system. Clearances from the bottom of wood
floor joists or perimeter joists shall be as specified in the building code. Underfloor spaces shall be ventilated with
openings as specified in the building code. If combustion air for one or more heat-producing appliances is taken
from within the underfloor spaces ventilation shall be adequate to assure for proper appliance operation.
Underfloor access openings shall be provided. Such openings shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches in any
dimension and not less than three (3) square feet in area and shall be located so that any water supply and sewer
drain connections located under the manufactured home are accessible.
(e) Skirting and perimeter enclosures.
(1) Skirting or permanent perimeter enclosures. Skirting or permanent perimeter enclosures need to be
installed. Skirting, when installed, shall be of material suitable for exterior exposure and contact with the ground.
Permanent perimeter enclosures shall be constructed of materials as required by the building code for regular
foundation construction. Skirting shall be installed in accordance with the skirting manufacturer's installation
instructions. Skirting shall be adequately secured to assure stability, to minimize vibration and susceptibility to
wind damage, and to compensate for possible frost heave.
(2) Retaining walls. Where retaining walls are used as a permanent perimeter enclosure, they shall resist the
lateral displacement of soil or other materials and shall conform to the building code as specified for foundation
walls. Retaining walls and foundation walls shall be constructed of approved treated wood, concrete, masonry or
other approved materials or combination of materials as for foundations as specified in the building code. When
retaining walls or foundation walls are used as a load-bearing foundation, the manufactured home shall be
anchored to the wall in accordance with the building code. Siding material shall extend below the top of the
exterior of the retaining or foundation wall or the joint between siding and enclosure wall shall be flashed in
accordance with the building code.
(f) Structural additions. Accessory buildings shall not be structurally supported by or attached to a manufactured home
unless engineering calculations are submitted to substantiate any proposed structural connection.
(g) Building service equipment. The installation, alteration, repair, replacement, addition to or maintenance of the building
service equipment within the manufactured home shall conform to regulations set forth in the standards code. Such work
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/598
which is located outside of the manufactured home shall comply with the applicable plumbing, mechanical or electrical code,
or other code or ordinance.
(h) Exits.
(1) Exterior stairways and ramps. Exterior stairways and ramps which provide egress to the public way shall
comply with applicable provisions of the building code.
(2) Accessory buildings. Every accessory building or portion thereof shall be provided with exits as required by
the building code.
(i) Occupancy, fire safety and energy conservation standards. Alterations made to a manufactured home subsequent to its
initial installation shall conform to the occupancy, fire safety and energy conservation requirements set forth in the standards
code.
(1990 Code, sec. 4-411)
ARTICLE 3.12 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.12.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated the
responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore the city council,
does ordain as follows.
Sec. 3.12.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services and extraordinary public expenditures for flood
prevention and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood
heights, velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands
because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
Sec. 3.12.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in
such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.12.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/598
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are
involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.12.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and
is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable
flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan
becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a
variance.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the
use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Areas of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year)
flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Areas of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed
rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH,
A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying
flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from the base flood as defined in this article.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and
construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building
or supporting foundation system.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection
provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground
level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before this date. “Existing construction”
may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/598
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood related
erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expanded
and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community
subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in
conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood
damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications
of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for
the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flood
or flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce
or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary [of the Interior] to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which historic preservation programs have
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs
that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/598
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound
engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and
drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is
designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured
home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured
home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the NFIP, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the
“start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities,
the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; not does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. This term
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/598
includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does
not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements, see
section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without an elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in section 60.3 (b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as the documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where
specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Sec. 3.12.006 Lands to which article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.12.007 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and
engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study for Ellis County, Texas and Incorporated Areas” dated June 3, 2013,
with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) dated June 3, 2013, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this article.
Sec. 3.12.008 Establishment of development permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.12.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.12.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the
more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.12.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit or repeal any other powers granted under state statues.
Sec. 3.12.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part
of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Sec. 3.12.013 Penalties for noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/598
its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute
a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any provision of this article or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction be found guilty of a misdemeanor and be fined not more than
$1,000.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day a violation
occurs is a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Secs. 3.12.014–3.12.040 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 3.12.041 Designation of floodplain administrator
The city engineer or their designated representative is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance -
National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.12.042 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including
the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas
Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is
maintained. Fill within the special flood hazard area shall result in no net loss of natural floodplain storage. The
volume of the loss of floodwater storage due to filling in the special flood hazard area shall be offset by providing
an equal volume of flood storage by excavation or other compensatory measures at or adjacent to the
development site.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.12.007, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30
and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water
surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.25 feet at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, and AH on the community's
FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 0.25 feet, provided that the
community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
Sec. 3.12.043 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her
and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of
proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/598
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially
improved structures;
(2) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed
structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.12.062(c)(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result
of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.12.042(1);
(6) Volumetric calculations demonstrating compensatory storage (as applicable).
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on
the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and
repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the
effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive land use plan for that area.
Sec. 3.12.044 Variance procedures
(a) The board of adjustment, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances
from the requirements of this article.
(b) The board of adjustment shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment may appeal such decision in the courts of
competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this
article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing
the relevant factors in section 3.12.043(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the board of adjustment may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section
3.12.003).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/598
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood
discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed
repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant;
and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of
the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be
permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conducting of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)–(i) of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Secs. 3.12.045–3.12.060 Reserved
Division 3. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 3.12.061 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that
minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them
during flooding.
Sec. 3.12.062 Specific standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/598
(a) In all areas of special flood hazards identified as zones A with no base flood elevation determined, it shall be required
that the base flood elevation be established through an engineering study using fully urbanized (ultimate) hydrology, and
such data shall be used for requiring the lowest floor elevation, as specified herein below, unless waived by the floodplain
administrator, in addition to any necessary FEMA requirements for a base flood elevation study.
(b) Platted lots approved prior to the adoption of this specific article with minimum finished floor elevations established at
two (2) feet above the fully urbanized (ultimate) base flood elevation are still valid and meet the minimum elevation
requirements of this article. Any other minimum elevations indicated on plats will be reviewed for compliance with this article
by the floodplain administrator.
(c) In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 3.12.007,
section 3.12.042(8), or section 3.12.063(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall
have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation as determined
by a study using fully urbanized (ultimate) hydrology when such data is available. If a fully urbanized (ultimate)
hydrology study does not exist on the reach and there is an existing FEMA flood insurance study with a given
base flood elevation, then the lowest floor (including basement) of any residential structure must be elevated a
minimum of three (3) feet above that base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer or land surveyor
shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in
section 3.12.043(a)(1) is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial
or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base
flood elevation as determined by a study using fully urbanized (ultimate) hydrology when such data is available. If
a fully urbanized (ultimate) hydrology study does not exist on the reach and there is an existing FEMA flood
insurance study with a given base flood elevation, then the lowest floor (including basement) of any nonresidential
structure must be elevated a minimum of one (1) foot above that base flood elevation or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that the structure is watertight up to one (1) foot above the base flood
level; with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional
engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in
relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain
administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement
and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that
they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM
shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this
requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH
and AE on the community's FIRM on sites
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/598
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has
incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood;
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is
elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation as determined by a study using fully urbanized
(ultimate) hydrology when such data is available and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. If a fully urbanized (ultimate)
hydrology study does not exist on the reach and there is an existing FEMA flood insurance study with a
given base flood elevation, then the lowest floor (including basement) of any manufactured home must
be elevated a minimum of three (3) feet above that base flood elevation and be securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are
not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation as determined by a study using fully urbanized (ultimate) hydrology when such data is
available and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement. If a fully urbanized (ultimate) hydrology study does not exist on the
reach and there is an existing FEMA flood insurance study with a given base flood elevation, then the
lowest floor (including basement) of any manufactured home must be elevated a minimum of three (3)
feet above that base flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of
at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on
the community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.12.043(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements
for “manufactured homes” in subsection (4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site
only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
Sec. 3.12.063 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent
with sections 3.12.002, 3.12.003 and 3.12.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.12.008; section 3.12.043; and the provisions
of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not
otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.12.007 or section 3.12.042(8) of this article.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be generated by an engineering study using fully urbanized (ultimate) hydrology for all
zone A areas, zone X areas within 100 feet of the contour lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as
indicated on the community's FIRM.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(f) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
Sec. 3.12.064 Floodways
Regulatory floodways are designated as areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.12.007. Since the floodway is
an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/598
the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and
hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of base flood
discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division.
(3) Under provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations,
a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in
base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(4) New construction of any residential or nonresidential structure is prohibited.
(Ordinance 2013-16 adopted 4/9/13)
ARTICLE 3.13 RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION
Division 1. Standards
Sec. 3.13.001 Thoroughfare and circulation design standards
Ordinances concerning the establishment of engineering design standards and construction design requirements in effect at
the time of adoption of this article, as amended, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 3.13.002 Construction standards for paving and drainage facilities
Ordinances concerning general construction standards for paving and drainage facilities, in effect at the time of adoption of
this article, as amended, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 3.13.003 Exclusive control of streets
No entity, including other political subdivisions of the state, may extend a street into the city's corporate limits or connect a
street to an existing city street without the prior written approval of the city council.
Secs. 3.13.004–3.13.030 Reserved
Division 2. Right-of-Way Management
Sec. 3.13.031 Administration
The right-of-way manager appointed by the city manager is the principal city official responsible for the administration of the
right-of-way, right-of-way permits, the regulation of same and ordinances related thereto including, but not limited to, the
provisions of this article. The right-of-way manager may delegate any or all of the duties set forth in this article. The right-ofway
manager shall have the duties, responsibilities and authority as specified for the right-of-way manager stated in this
article.
Sec. 3.13.032 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the following
meanings:
Abandoned facilities. Facilities no longer in service or physically disconnected from the operating facilities, or from any other
facilities, or from any other facilities that are in use or that still carry service.
Administration fee. The fee established by ordinance or resolution of the city council from time to time, included in the city's
master fee schedule, and charged by the city to recover its costs incurred for right-of-way management; including, but not
limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying right-of-way permit applications;
inspecting jobsites and restoration improvements; determining the adequacy of the right-of-way restoration; revoking right-ofway
permits and other costs the city may incur in implementing the provisions of this article.
Applicant. An owner or authorized agent of an owner, who submits an application for a permit under the provisions of this
article.
Area of influence. That area around a utility excavation where the pavement and sub-grade is impacted by the excavation
and is subject to more rapid deterioration due to the trench excavation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/598
Backfill. The following:
(1) The placement of new dirt, fill, or other material to refill an excavation; or
(2) The return of excavated dirt, fill or other material to an excavation.
Certificated telecommunications provider or “CTP”. A person who has been issued a certificate of convenience and
necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility
Commission or “PUC” to offer local exchange telephone service or a person who provides voice service as defined by
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283 or “the act.”
City project. The construction, location, maintenance, relocation, alteration, improvement, repair, removal or other work
performed by the city, or its designee, in the public right-of-way or on any city utilities or city facilities.
City utilities. Any water, sewer or drainage line or services owned and operated by the city.
Compaction. Refers to consolidating backfill material in a trench to prevent future settlement.
Comprehensive plan. The city's comprehensive plan as adopted and amended pursuant to chapter 213 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended.
Construction. Boring, the breaking of pavement, or the installation, modification, upgrade, maintenance, removal, or similar
activities, within the right-of-way. The definition includes, but is not limited to, providing primary service, restoration, or
maintenance of existing facilities within the right-of-way.
Contractor. Any public or private person, subcontractor or organization, other than the city.
Day. Calendar day unless otherwise specified.
Department. The city department of public works or a successor department that is responsible for management of the rightof-
way and roadway infrastructure.
Emergency operations. Are defined as those operations and repairs necessary to prevent damage or injury to the health or
safety of the public or any person and the work necessary to address or prevent an immediate service interruption.
Upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood improvement projects are not emergency operations.
Excavation. Any activity that removes or otherwise disturbs soil, pavement, driveways, curbs, or sidewalks in the right-of-way
and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity removes or disturbs the paved portion of the right-of-way. This
term shall include directional boring, ramming, jacking or tunneling.
Facilities. The equipment, and property, including but not limited to, lines, poles, mains, pipes, conduits, ducts, cables,
valves, manholes, handholes and wires located under, on, or above the surface of the ground within the right-of-way, and
related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of utility services.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Governmental entity. Any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road district, drainage or levee
district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasi-municipal corporation or political
subdivision of the state or of any other state of the United States and any agency or instrumentality of the state or of any
other state of the United States.
Holiday. Shall refer to days in which city offices are closed in observance of a holiday.
Main line. Shall refer to lines other than service connections used to convey the right-of-way user's product.
Major project. Any project, which includes 50 or more linear feet of excavation or any excavation under pavement.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a
communication network.
Network provider. A wireless service provider, or a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric
utility but builds or installs, on behalf of a wireless service provider, network nodes or node support poles or any other
structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node.
Pavement. Shall refer to streets containing Portland cement, asphalt, brick or other rigid or semi-rigid material that covers the
surface of a street and their underlying subgrade and base.
Permit. A permit issued under this article authorizing excavation in the right-of-way.
Permittee. Any person or right-of-way user to whom a permit is issued to excavate a right-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/598
Perpendicular excavations. Any trench with a centerline that when projected toward the centerline of the street, the two lines
intersect at an angle of 90 degrees.
Provider. A person, including any certificated telecommunications utility and excluding network providers, as defined herein,
that delivers telecommunications service within the city to person(s) by way of a network and that places facilities in, on or
over the public rights-of-way. A provider does not include persons who are authorized by the city to occupy the public rightsof-
way in specifically approved routes within the city, unless they also have a municipal consent under this article. To the
extent allowed by law, “provider” also means a person that does not deliver telecommunications service within the city, but
who uses, constructs or maintains facilities or transmission media within the public rights-of-way.
Public inconvenience penalty. Shall refer to a penalty assessed to the right-of-way user who denies the public the use of
public property for a time period greater than allowed by this article.
PUCT. The Public Utility Commission of Texas.
Registration. The application process of the right-of-way user to use any portion of the right-of-way.
Registration certificate. Shall refer to the document provided by the city, annually, upon approval of the application for
registration.
Repair. The temporary or permanent construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable.
Repair area. That area around excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by an excavation.
Restoration. The process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including, but not limited to, pavement
and foundation structures, ground cover, landscaping, and monuments are returned to the same condition, or better than that
which existed before the commencement of the work.
Resurfacing. Any repaving, overlay, seal or reconstruction which creates a new pavement surface over the entire width of the
street, excluding crack seals and localized base and pavement repairs.
Right-of-way or public right-of-way. The surface of, and the space above and below, any street, road, highway, freeway,
tollway, lane, path, drainageway, channel, fee interest, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, boulevard, parkway, drive, fire
lane or other easement now or hereafter held by the city or over which the city exercises any rights of management or control
and shall include, but not be limited to, all easements now held, or hereafter held, by the city, but shall specifically exclude
private property.
Right-of-way manager. The right-of-way manager of the city, or his designee.
Right-of-way user. A person, its successors and assigns, that uses the right-of-way for purposes of work, excavation,
provision of services, or installing, constructing, maintaining, or repairing facilities thereon, including, but not limited to,
landowners and service providers.
Routine service operation. A work activity that makes no material change to the facilities and does not disrupt traffic.
Service. A commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery system that is comprised of facilities located or to be
located in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television, Internet services, open video
systems, alarm systems, steam, electric, water, telegraph, data transmission, petroleum pipelines, or sanitary sewage.
Service connection. Shall refer to the line that serves no more than two individual customers or two-meter banks.
Street. The paved portion of the right-of-way, whether fee or easement, that has been constructed, reconstructed, or
resurfaced with concrete or asphalt or some other surface.
Surface mounted markers. Refers to any sign, post or other marker, which rises above the surface of the ground to show the
location of an underground utility.
Thoroughfare. All roadways and streets classified on the city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be amended,
including but not limited to a highway, tollway, major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare, major collector, minor collector or local
collector.
TMUTCD. The Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, as it exists or may be amended.
Traffic-control representative. Shall refer to the designated representative of the right-of-way user who is responsible for work
zone safety and compliance with TMUTCD. The right-of-way user shall ensure such person has adequate training,
knowledge and authority to perform the responsibilities listed above.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network
node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/598
Trench. Shall refer to excavation deeper than 12 inches. This shall include linear trenches, holes, pits and etc.
Underground Facility Damage Protection Safety Act. Shall refer to the V.T.C.A., Utilities Code sec. 251.001 et seq. as it exists
or may be amended.
Utility. Any privately or publicly owned entity which uses right-of-way to furnish the public any general public service,
including, without limitation, sanitary sewer, gas, electricity, water, telephone, petroleum products, telegraph, heat, steam or
chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances belonging to such entity and located within and
near the right-of-way. Poles are regulated herein only as specifically set forth in this article.
White lining. Marking the excavation site with white washable marking paint or flags prior to requesting a utility location in
order to further identify the site.
Wireless service. Any service using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi, whether at a fixed
location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless services to the public.
Sec. 3.13.033 Utility coordinator
Each utility and right-of-way user shall name a utility coordinator who shall be the representative and point of contact for all
communications from the city and who shall meet with the right-of-way manager when so requested.
Sec. 3.13.034 Field utility coordination
(a) The right-of-way user shall notify the department at each of the following times during a project:
(1) Forty-eight hours before the start of construction;
(2) Upon completion of the initial backfill; and
(3) Upon completion of the project.
The right-of-way user shall make a request for a utility locate in compliance with the Underground Facility Damage
Prevention and Safety Act and execute an excavation permit with the city.
(b) The use of markers, stakes, poles, barricades or other devices shall be used in such a way to avoid damage to
adjoining property. The use of “nonwashable” markers is prohibited.
(c) Compliance with the Texas Utilities Code, as amended, is required at all times.
(d) All barricades, plates, cones, traffic directional equipment and all other traffic-control devices owned, leased or used by
the right-of-way user and used on or near any excavation shall be clearly and visibly marked with the name of the permittee
and/or right-of-way user or subcontractor, as applicable, at all times such equipment is used on or near the right-of-way. An
exception to the marking requirement may be made in the sole discretion of the right-of-way manager in the event the trafficcontrol
equipment is not owned by the permittee or right-of-way user.
Sec. 3.13.035 Maps and records of registrants
(a) Within 60 days of passage of this article, each right-of-way user shall provide the city an accurate map of their service
area within city corporate limits. The map shall be in electronic format overlaid over the Ellis County and North Central Texas
Council of Governments digital map, as applicable. In dual coverage areas, the city may request additional information to
enable identification of right-of-way users.
(b) Each right-of-way user must maintain accurate maps and records of its facilities. If available, the city's road network
may be provided in digital format upon request. The right-of-way user shall maintain their system maps geo-referenced to the
city's geodetic network, which is on the county digital map or the North Central Texas Council of Governments digital map, as
applicable. The map shall include true bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines and official monuments,
which shall be accurately described on the map. The right-of-way user will provide the city with digital information within 90
days of a request for maps from the city for any user with less than 50 miles of utilities within the city. All other right-of-way
users shall provide the digital information within one year of the request. Thereafter, the data is to be provided to the city on
an annual basis by January 1st.
(c) If the maps and records submitted in response to any request by or requirement of the city include information
expressly designated by the right-of-way user as a trade secret or other confidential information protected from disclosure by
state law, the city and its agents, employees, or other representatives may not disclose that information to the public without
the consent of the right-of-way user, unless otherwise compelled by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas
Public Information Act, as amended, or by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection
may not be construed to authorize a right-of-way user to designate all matters in its maps and records as confidential or as
trade secrets.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/598
Sec. 3.13.036 Notice
Notice for purposes of this article shall be made to the city via electronic message (e-mail), overnight courier (generally used
carrier with tracing available) or hand delivery with signed receipt, facsimile to the department, or United States mail return
receipt required.
Sec. 3.13.037 Registration
(a) Nothing in this section relieves a right-of-way user and/or utility from obtaining a permit under this article to perform
work in the right-of-way.
(b) In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, a utility maintaining or operating existing facilities in the rightof-
way must register with the right-of-way manager in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The registration must be on a form furnished by the right-of-way manager and made in the name of the
right-of-way user that owns the facilities.
(2) Registration expires December 31st of the following fifth year after the first registration occurs. If the utility
fails to renew registration by that date, the city will send by certified mail a notice of noncompliance to the address
listed on the registration. For utilities with a current franchise or license to use the right-of-way for its facilities, the
franchise or license will be evidence of renewal. If the utility fails to renew registration within 60 calendar days
after the date of sending the notification, the facilities of the utility will be deemed to have been legally abandoned.
(3) If information provided as part of the registration changes, the utility must inform the right-of-way manager,
in writing, not more than 30 days after the date the change occurs.
(4) The utility shall also include the following registration:
(A) The name of the utility using the right-of-way, including any business name, assumed name, or trade
name the utility operates under or has operated under in the city within the past five years.
(B) If the utility is a CTP, the certificate number issued by the Texas Public Utility Commission.
(C) The ordinance number of any franchise or license issued by the city that authorizes the utility to use
the right-of-way.
(D) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two persons who will be general, day-today
contacts for the utility. At least one of the addresses must be within the Dallas/Fort Worth metropolitan
area.
(E) The name and mailing address of the officer or agent designated as the person authorized to receive
service of process on behalf of the utility.
(F) The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, who will be working in
the right-of-way on behalf of the utility. This list may be amended as needed by the utility; however, no work
shall be performed in the right-of-way by a contractor or subcontractor that is not on the list, regardless of
whether a permit is required.
(G) The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons serving as emergency contacts who can
be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The telephone numbers should be accessible
without the city having to pay long distance telephone or toll charge.
(H) Proof of existing insurance that complies with section 3.13.122.
(c) Upon completion of registration, the city will provide the right-of-way user a registration certificate valid until the end of
the fifth calendar year during which the registration was completed. The right-of-way user may make as many photocopies of
the registration certificate as necessary. The right-of-way user is responsible for ensuring that all contractors, listed in
accordance with subsection (b)(4)(F) above have a copy of the registration certificate on site when work is being conducted
under the provisions of the registration certificate.
(d) Right-of-way users with facilities located in the right-of-way on December 31, 2018, shall be required to register
pursuant to this section not later than January 31, 2019.
Sec. 3.13.038 Traffic handling training
The right-of-way user is responsible for work zone safety including, but not limited to, traffic control through the designated
traffic-control representative. The representative is responsible for compliance with the TMUTCD and the traffic-control plan
(if required) at all work zone sites. The traffic-control representative shall ensure employees on the jobsite have adequate
training.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/598
Sec. 3.13.039 Reporting obligations
All right-of-way users shall, upon request, provide proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant, registration,
franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the city,
state, or federal government, or railroad or pipeline company, including a description of the right-of-way user's intended use
of the right-of-way, information sufficient to determine whether the right-of-way user is subject to franchising or licensing by
the city, and information to determine whether the right-of-way user has applied for and received any certificate of authority
required by the PUCT. The information provided shall be sufficient enough to determine whether the right-of-way user has
applied for and received any permit or other approvals required by the FCC. Right-of-way user shall provide all such other
information as may be reasonably required by the city to complete the registration statement.
Sec. 3.13.040 Surface mounted markers
Where surface mounted markers are needed, curb mounted medallions shall be used whenever possible.
Sec. 3.13.041 Relocation of facilities for city projects and public improvements
(a) In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all uses of the right-of-way. The city reserves
the right to, among other things, lay water, sewer, drainage, and other pipelines or cables and conduits, and to do
underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes in street facilities in across, along, over, or
under a public street, alley or right-of-way occupied by an agency or right-of-way user, and to change the curb, sidewalks, or
the grade of streets.
(b) The right-of-way user must relocate its facilities, at its own expense and in accordance with section 3.13.076, prior to
the start of construction of a city project or project in which the city is participating in financially either through a development
agreement or other form of agreement. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject the right-of-way user to the
enforcement provisions contained herein.
(c) A permit will be required when making facility adjustments in preparation for city projects.
Sec. 3.13.042 Permit required
It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to dig, plow, blast, make cuts, openings, bore, tunnel,
excavate or close lanes on a thoroughfare without first having made application and obtained a permit therefor in compliance
with the Public Right-of-Way Permitting, North Central Texas Council Of Governments (NCTCOG), Technical Construction
Standards and Specifications (TCSS) and/or node design manuals, promulgated and amended by the right-of-way manager
and adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council, except as allowed by this section. It is unlawful for any person,
its agents, servants or employees to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any right-of-way for
the installation, repair or removal of any facilities, or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the right-of-way
manager a permit in compliance with this article.
(1) Before issuing a permit, the right-of-way manager shall have been provided a written application, on a form
furnished by the right-of-way manager, setting forth the name and residence or business address of the applicant;
the location and approximate area of the excavation, including its approximate length and width, and, if the
excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse to the direction of the travel lanes; and, the purpose of
the excavation. The application form shall include plans prepared in accordance with city specifications. Plans
shall be drawn at a reasonable scale that legibly and accurately show all existing improvements and proposed
work. All proposed work must be shown in heavy or bold type lines and fonts. If proposed work is in phases or
part of another overall drawing, show all existing and future work in lighter or faded out lines and fonts. If right-ofway
user cannot show distinctive line weights, the plans shall clearly label the above information using text. When
required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as amended, the plans must be sealed by a professional
engineer licensed to practice in the state.
(2) At the time the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee in an amount
as provided for in the master fee schedule of the city.
(3) The proposed location, depth and other characteristics of any facilities for which the permit is issued shall be
subject to approval of the right-of-way manager, and all backfilling, compaction and pavement restoration
performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of this article.
(4) No fee or requirement authorized or imposed pursuant to this article shall be construed to affect or alter in
any way any obligation of public and/or private utilities with facilities installed in any right-of-way to relocate the
facilities, at no cost to the city, subject to state law, if applicable, in the event that relocation is required by the city
to accommodate a proper governmental use of the right-of-way.
(5) Combinations of permits shall be permitted at the sole discretion of the right-of-way manager. Fees shall be
assessed based on the excavations permitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/598
(6) Subdivision monuments, historical markers, and any other signs or structures with foundations in the rightof-
way, excluding billboards, are subject to this article.
Sec. 3.13.043 Exceptions to required permit
(a) The right-of-way manager reserves the right in his discretion to require a right-of-way permit on service connections.
Unless otherwise required by the right-of-way manager, service connections do not require a permit if all of the following
conditions are satisfied:
(1) The service connection excavation does not encroach inside the right-of-way;
(2) All excavation is in accordance with service connection drawings;
(3) The address for the service connection is on the city-provided form, which is submitted to the right-of-way
manager via e-mail. Work shall not begin until the electronic form is transmitted to the right-of-way manager;
(4) The excavation required is less than 12 inches in depth; and
(5) The service connection does not require boring.
(b) Irrigation system installation requires a permit per existing city codes.
(c) Installation of network nodes and related equipment shall not require a permit pursuant to this section provided such
equipment is installed pursuant to chapter 284 of the Local Government Code and division 7 of this article.
Sec. 3.13.044 Permit application
(a) Each application for a permit shall be addressed to the right-of-way manager and made on a form furnished for that
purpose, stating the extent, dimensions, character and purpose of the cut or excavation to be made, the location, by street
and number if possible, where the work is to be done, and the time in which it is to be completed. The application form shall
be accompanied by maps of the existing facilities in the area, to the extent available, and the location of the proposed
facilities, methodology of construction, and proposed start and completion dates. When the work includes excavating, which
will exceed five feet in depth, a trench safety design sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall also accompany the
application, unless otherwise provided by law.
(b) A permit shall only be valid for the area of the right-of-way specified within the permit. No permittee may cause any
work to be done outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee who determines that an
area is greater than that which is specified in the permit must apply for and receive a new right-of-way permit.
(c) Fees shall apply to all right-of-way users unless governed by an existing agreement with the city. Applicants may apply
jointly for permits to excavate the right-of-way at the same time and place. Applicants who apply jointly for a right-of-way
permit may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall
pay. The city will recognize only one point of contact.
(d) Permits will be issued or denied within ten (10) days of the city receiving a complete application. Permits shall be valid
for the dates specified in the permit. The applicant may request but is not guaranteed the permit be valid for such longer
period as may be necessary in the circumstances, in advance, as part of the application. The city may approve or deny the
application for such extended permit period. No permittee may commence work before the permit start date and, except as
provided herein, no permittee may continue working after the end date. If a permittee does not complete the work by the
permit end date, the permittee must apply for and may receive a new right-of-way permit or a permit extension for additional
time. This supplementary application must be submitted to the city prior to the permit end date. Applicants are encouraged to
request a pre-submission meeting for large projects.
(e) An expedited permit may be requested and shall be issued or denied within five (5) days of application upon a showing
of good cause, as solely determined by the right-of-way manager, and the payment of any applicable fee established for
expedited consideration.
Sec. 3.13.045 Issuance of permit
Every person making application for a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article, and having complied with such
provisions, shall be entitled thereto, and, upon filing such application with the right-of-way manager, it shall be their duty to
issue the permit if and when the application complies with the provisions of this article.
(1) Upon receiving a written application for a permit and a plan prepared in accordance with the city
specifications, the right-of-way manager's designee shall set forth all requirements, approve or disapprove the
application, sign and return it to applicant. Except in emergency excavations, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to
the start of work, the applicant shall notify the right-of-way manager of the date the work will commence when
traffic-control devices are necessary on a thoroughfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/598
(2) No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the excavation to be made pursuant thereto is
commenced within the time stated therein and the work diligently completed.
(3) Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done hereunder. The right-of-way
manager may in their sole discretion, grant extensions of time.
(4) No person in violation of any requirement of this article shall be issued an excavation permit, nor shall any
contractor or agent apply for or be issued a permit on the person's behalf, until the outstanding violation is/are
corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the right-of-way manager. The foregoing requirement is in
addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be imposed or sought by the city at law or equity.
(5) No work shall be done under any permit issued under this article except as stated in the permit. If the permit
is allowed to expire, the right-of-way user shall procure a new permit, paying the applicable fee, prior to
proceeding with any such work.
Sec. 3.13.046 Posting of signs
The right-of-way manager may direct that the right-of-way user and contractor (if used) be identified by three feet by three
feet information signs on all work requiring a permit. The signs shall state the name and phone number of the right-of-way
user and contractor (if used). The signs shall be placed in the right-of-way on each approach to the location where
construction is occurring from the time of the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the
location during the entire time the work is occurring.
Sec. 3.13.047 Excavation to be under supervision of the right-of-way manager
(a) Any right-of-way user engaged in making or backfilling any excavation in any right-of-way shall, at all times while such
work is in progress, keep at the job location the permit, or a copy thereof, and shall provide of the same, when requested by
any authorized city employee. At all times while the work is in progress, the right-of-way user shall also maintain, at the job
location, a sign, barricade or other device bearing the right-of-way user's name.
(b) The right-of-way user shall protect from damage, all utility conduits, sewer lines, water lines, storm drain lines, lawns,
shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, irrigation, sidewalks, streets, signs, street lights, or other property and associated
appurtenances at, near or encountered in its work. The right-of-way user shall determine the boundary of the right-of-way
prior to commencing work.
(c) All excavations and other construction in the streets shall be conducted so as to interfere as little as practicable with the
use of right-of-way and with the use of private property, in accordance with any lawful and reasonable direction given by or
under the authority of the city council pursuant to the policy and regulatory powers of the city necessary to provide for public
convenience. The right-of-way user shall not trespass upon private property. The right-of-way user shall determine the
boundary between right-of-way and private property and place stakes/markers indicating the boundary to remain in place for
the duration of the work.
(d) The city reserves the right to among others, lay, and allow to be laid, electricity, sewer, gas, water and other pipe lines
or cables and facilities, as well as drainage pipes, and channels and streets, and to perform, and allow to be performed, any
underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city council, in,
across, along, over or under any right-of-way or public place occupied by a right-of-way user and to change any curb or
sidewalk or the grade of any street and to maintain all of the city's facilities. In allowing such work to be performed by others,
the city shall not be liable to a right-of-way user for any damage caused by those persons or entities. Nothing herein shall
relieve any third party from responsibility for damages caused to a right-of-way user by such third party.
(e) All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment and facilities erected by a right-of-way user within the city
right-of-way shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the right-of-way, and to cause
minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of said streets. No pole
may be placed in an area prohibited by another section of this article or which interferes with the public's unimpeded use of
the right-of-way or creates a safety concern, as determined by the right-of-way manager.
(f) If the city requires a right-of-way user to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any way or manner to alter, relocate or
change its property to enable any other person, except the city, to use, or to use with greater convenience, any right-of-way
or public place, the right-of-way user shall not be required to make any such changes until such other person shall have
undertaken, with solvent bond, to reimburse a right-of-way user for any loss and expense which will be caused by, or arise
out of such removal, change, adaptation, alteration, conformance or relocation of a right-of-way user's facilities; provided,
however, that the city shall never be liable for such reimbursement.
Sec. 3.13.048 Registration certificate required
It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to perform construction in the right-of-way without first having
made either application and obtained a permit therefor or have in possession a valid registration certificate. A registration
certificate may only be used for construction activities not requiring a permit in accordance with this article. These activities
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/598
include tree trimming, general maintenance, line work and providing a service connection from the property line to a
customer provided the activity complies with section 3.13.047.
Sec. 3.13.049 Hours of operation for nonemergency work
(a) Excavation and boring shall be conducted between 7:00 a.m. and thirty (30) minutes before sundown on Monday
through Friday, except on city-designated holidays. No excavation or boring shall be performed on city-designated holidays.
(b) All other work requiring an inspection shall be done between 7:00 a.m. and thirty (30) minutes before sundown on
Monday through Friday, except on city-designated holidays. No work shall be performed on city-designated holidays. A rightof-
way user may work on Saturday subject to the approval of the right-of-way manager and a notification no later than noon
on Thursday before the Saturday in which the work is to be performed. The Saturday inspection fee must be paid prior to
noon on Thursday prior to the Saturday in which the work is to be performed.
(c) Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section:
(1) No excavation and boring shall occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and between 4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m. on any major arterial street or thoroughfare unless authorized by the right-of-way manager; and
(2) No excavations shall be allowed within fifty (50) feet of a city-owned utility line between the hours of 5:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., Monday through Thursday, and 12:00 noon on Friday to 7:00 a.m. Monday.
Sec. 3.13.050 Denial of permit
A permit may be denied or suspended for any of the following reasons:
(1) Failure to provide proof of a surety bond or liability insurance acceptable to the city or notice of termination
of the same.
(2) Failure to secure a contractor's license or other required license.
(3) Failure to perform in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(4) The excavation would be in a street and not otherwise permitted by this article.
(5) The proposed warning or other traffic-control procedures or equipment do not comply with the requirements
of the TMUTCD or the requirements of the right-of-way manager.
(6) The proposed activity would violate any city ordinance or state or federal law, rule, regulation or statute.
(7) The permit application contains false or misleading information.
(8) The activity would cause a public health or safety hazard.
(9) The right-of-way user is not authorized within the city.
(10) The right-of-way user is in violation of this article relative to work in progress.
(11) The right-of-way user has not compensated the city, unless the user is not legally obligated to compensate
the city by contract, by agreement or by law, for using the public property; or the right-of-way user has failed to
timely make required payments.
Sec. 3.13.051 Appeal
A right-of-way user that: (i) has been denied registration; (ii) has been denied a permit; (iii) has had a permit revoked; or (iv)
believes that fees imposed are invalid, may have the denial, revocation, or fee imposition reviewed, upon written request as
follows:
(1) If an applicant desires to appeal a decision, the applicant may file a written notice of appeal with the right-ofway
manager within five business days of the date the decision was rendered. The notice must state the
alternatives available and routes explored, hardship encountered, cost comparison of other alternatives and a
statement of any other significant factors. The right-of-way manager shall provide a written decision within five
business days. Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial.
(2) If a further denial is given, the appellant may thereafter file a written notice of appeal to the city manager
within five business days of receipt of the right-of-way manager's written decision. The city manager shall provide
a written decision within five business days of receipt of an appeal in accordance with this section. Failure to
render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial.
Secs. 3.13.052–3.13.060 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/598
Division 3. Technical Specifications
Sec. 3.13.061 Lawful use of right-of-way
(a) The use of the right-of-way in any manner which violates federal, state, or local laws, or city codes, ordinances and
regulations, including, without limitation, those relating to health, safety, noise, environmental protection, waste disposal and
water and air quality, is prohibited. All permittees shall provide satisfactory evidence of compliance with the foregoing upon
request by the city.
(b) The permittee shall dispose of all material removed from the right-of-way and any waste created by permittee in
compliance with all state, federal and local laws and requirements.
(c) If a permittee excavates any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the right-of-way, such permittee shall
be responsible for environmental assessment, excavation, testing, transportation and disposal of that material in accordance
with applicable law. The permittee shall promptly notify the city, orally, of the condition within two hours of discovery of any
contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the right-of-way, and within eight hours provide the aforementioned
information to the city in writing. The permittee must consult with and receive written authorization from the city before
undertaking any of the steps/actions set forth in this subsection.
Sec. 3.13.062 Compliance with safety regulations
The permittee and right-of-way user shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local safety regulations and
requirements, including, by example and not limitation, the occupational safety and health standards for the construction
industry.
Sec. 3.13.063 Conformance with the thoroughfare plan
A right-of-way user should consult the city's thoroughfare plan prior to the acquisition of any interest in real property in the city
for the installation or relocation of service lines or other equipment or facilities along or adjacent to any street, right-of-way,
thoroughfare, highway, or any proposed street, right-of-way, highway or thoroughfare to attempt to minimize any future
conflict regarding the location of such facilities. All right-of-way users are charged at all times with constructive notice of the
thoroughfare plan. The city shall, at a minimum, have no liability for the value of or loss by a right-of-way user of any
improvements constructed in the area shown on the thoroughfare plan, except as provided herein. Typical locations of city
facilities are depicted in the city standard details.
Sec. 3.13.064 Tree trimming and graffiti abatement
Permission is granted to a right-of-way user, subject to the requirements of this article, as it exists or may be amended from
time to time, to trim trees upon and overhanging the right-of-way on property other than property owned by the city, so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a right-of-way user's facilities. When so directed by the city,
the tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city. The right-of-way user shall make the
necessary repairs or restoration, including, but not limited to, cleaning of graffiti, as soon as practicable but not to exceed
seven days after the right-of-way user discovers or learns of any misuse, destruction, damage or vandalism to its facilities.
Sec. 3.13.065 Employee communication
The right-of-way user shall ensure that there is at least one employee on the jobsite, during any type of work activity, who can
read, write and speak English fluently.
Sec. 3.13.066 Routing and spatial assignment
The city reserves the right, in the permit or otherwise, to restrict or determine the route (pathway) and/or spatial location,
whether horizontal, vertical or depth, of any facility and/or structure or improvement in the right-of-way. The city reserves the
right to reserve space for future utilities.
Sec. 3.13.067 Commencement and completion
After obtaining the permit and prior to commencing the work, the permittee shall notify the right-of-way manager, and shall
commence and complete all work within the time specified in the permit, unless an extension of time is granted by the rightof-
way manager. No work shall commence until erosion control measures (e.g. silt fence, rock check dams, etc.) and
advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades are in place.
Sec. 3.13.068 Notification of affected property owners
Except in the case of an emergency, whenever excavation is required in the right-of-way adjacent to an occupied property,
the right-of-way user shall notify the property owner of the activity through use of a door hanger, which shall include the
following information:
(1) Permit number;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/598
(2) Identity of the contractor and the right-of-way user, including a contact name and phone number by which
more information regarding the project could be obtained and a 24-hour a day emergency phone number; and
(3) The anticipated duration of the construction work.
Sec. 3.13.069 Safe conduct of work
Every permittee and right-of-way user shall prosecute its work diligently and in a good, safe, and workmanlike manner, and
shall safeguard and protect the public, using the street or right-of-way where the work is being performed, from accidents or
damage by placing barriers, lights and other sufficient safeguards around all cuts, openings and excavation, in accordance
with TMUTCD. All material, implements and tools stored upon the premises and used in connection with the excavation shall
be stored in a safe and nonhazardous manner.
Sec. 3.13.070 Revocation or suspension of permit
(a) The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke or suspend any permit, without refund of the permit fee, in the
event of a breach by the permittee of the terms and/or conditions of the permit, this article and/or any other city ordinance. A
breach of the terms of the permit shall include, but not be limited to any of the following:
(1) The violation of any provision of the permit.
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any provision of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any
fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens.
(3) Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit application.
(4) The failure to meet insurance, surety bond or indemnification requirements.
(5) The failure to complete the work as specified in the permit.
(6) The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article.
(7) Repeated traffic-control violation(s).
(8) Failure to protect facilities or repair facilities damaged in the right-of-way.
(9) Violation of any part of this article.
(10) Recognition by the right-of-way manager that a permit was issued in error.
(11) Failing to comply with an order of the right-of-way manager on the permit and any other valid permit held
by the right-of-way user.
(12) Any safety violation or other action that threatens the health, welfare and/or safety of the public as solely
determined by the right-of-way manager.
(b) If the right-of-way manager determines that the permittee has committed a breach of any law or condition of the rightof-
way permit, the right-of-way manager shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such violation.
Continued violation may be cause for revocation of the permit or legal action, or both. The right-of-way manager may, in their
discretion, revoke the permit, provide specifications to cure the breach, or both. Within two business days of receiving
notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the right-of-way manager with a plan, acceptable to the right-of-way
manager, for correction of the breach. Permittee's failure to do so or permittee's failure to timely implement the approved plan
shall be cause for revocation of the permit.
Sec. 3.13.071 Work not in accordance with permit declared unlawful
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made, any excavation, or to install, cause or allow to
be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance in or under the surface of any street,
alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place, at any location, other than that described in the application for the permit
and as shown on the plans filed with the right-of-way manager, and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the
circumstances appearing after the excavation is commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the right-of-way
manager may, in their sole discretion, grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account.
(b) Failure to comply with requirements set forth in this article or on any permit shall be cause for revocation of the subject
permit and of any other permits held by the same permittee until the violations have been corrected or the right-of-way
manager has approved alternative requirements.
Sec. 3.13.072 Work done without a permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/598
No cut, excavation, grading or disturbing of the right-of-way, in any way, or wires on poles, shall be made, other than
excavations necessary for emergency work, without first securing a permit. No person or right-of-way user shall, at any time,
open or encumber more of the right-of-way than shall be reasonably necessary to complete a project in the most expeditious
manner.
Sec. 3.13.073 Cessation of work
At any time, the right-of-way manager may order the immediate cessation of any work that poses a threat to the health,
safety or well-being of the public. The right-of-way manager may revoke the permit of any permittee in any instance where
there is a threat to the health, safety or well-being of the public.
Sec. 3.13.074 Violations of standards; notice
The right-of-way manager may issue a written notice to the permittee indicating work that does not conform to the terms of
the permit, applicable standards, conditions, codes or other applicable regulation. Within five days after issuance of written
notice, the permittee shall present proof to the right-of-way manager that the violation has been corrected. If such proof has
not been presented within the required time, the right-of-way manager may revoke the permit.
Sec. 3.13.075 Location and relocation of facilities
Subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws, the right-of-way user shall, upon the request of the city, which shall be in
writing, locate and/or relocate its facilities situated within any right-of-way, at no expense to the city, where reasonable and
necessary to accommodate any city project. The written request provided by the city shall state the date by which the
relocation by the right-of-way user shall be completed and a reasonable amount of time shall be provided by the city. When
relocation is necessitated by federal government requirements, which includes reimbursements of costs, the city will
reimburse applicant for its proportionate share from funds provided to the city in such reimbursements.
Sec. 3.13.076 Relocation facilities for the city
In the event the city finds it necessary to move a right-of-way user's facilities to protect the right-of-way, any city utilities
and/or street, the city shall notify the local representative of the right-of-way user. The right-of-way user shall promptly move
or facilitate the relocation of the subject facilities at right-of-way user's sole expense.
Sec. 3.13.077 Abandoned facilities
(a) A right-of-way user owning abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall:
(1) Remove its facilities and repair, at its sole expense, any damage caused by the removal. The right-of-way
manager may allow some or all facilities to remain if the right-of-way manager determines same is in the best
interest of the public to do so; or
(2) Provide information satisfactory to the city that the right-of-way user's obligations for its facilities in the rightof-
way have been lawfully assumed by another authorized right-of-way user.
(b) The facilities of the right-of-way user who fails to comply with this section, and those facilities which remain unused for
two years, shall be deemed to be abandoned unless, within the aforesaid two-year period, the city receives written
confirmation and reasonable evidence, as solely determined by the city, that the right-of-way user intends to use the facilities.
The city may exercise any remedies and/or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, taking possession of
the abandoned facilities or requiring the removal of the facilities by the right-of-way user at the right-of-way user's sole
expense.
Sec. 3.13.078 Underground service requirements
Placement of new utility support structures (poles) shall be prohibited for electrical distribution lines with 60,000 volts and less
and all communication utilities, unless otherwise allowed by other law or an existing franchise agreement between the rightof-
way user and the city or a PUCT tariff. This does not prohibit replacing existing poles for maintenance purposes, nor does
it prohibit placement of antennas aboveground. Utilities shall be located underground to the extent required by the city's
subdivision regulations.
Sec. 3.13.079 Location of poles and conduits
All poles in the right-of-way shall be of sound material, and straight, and shall not interfere with the flow of water in any gutter
or drain and shall be placed so as not to interfere with vehicular and pedestrian travel. The location and route of all conduits,
fiber, cables, utilities and facilities placed and constructed by a right-of-way user in the construction and maintenance of its
system in the city shall be subject to the reasonable and proper control, direction and approval of the city. Placement of poles
and anchor guys along curvilinear streets shall comply with city ordinances and regulations. Poles located in the right-of-way
in a subdivision where nonstandard decorative poles are installed or otherwise required shall be of the same material and
design of such decorative poles.
Sec. 3.13.080 Size and location of aboveground facilities
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/598
The maximum dimensions for ground mounted utility structures above the ground in the right-of-way adjacent to streets are
seven feet long (parallel to the road), two feet wide (perpendicular to the road) and six feet in height. For structures three feet
or less in height, the width may be 44 inches. This does not include poles. The height of utility structures shall be measured
from the lowest grade at any point 18 inches or less from the side of the structure that faces the street to the highest point of
the structure. Utility structures exceeding those dimensions shall not be located in the right-of-way adjacent to streets, unless
otherwise approved in writing by the right-of-way manager. All aboveground facilities shall be located outside of the corner
visibility triangle at all intersections, future intersections and all driveways. No aboveground facilities may be placed in a
parkway that is across from a median opening. Ground mounted utility structures exceeding the dimensions in this section
installed prior to January 31, 2019, may remain, and be replaced only with ground mounted utility structures with dimensions
no larger than such existing structures.
Sec. 3.13.081 Height of overhead lines
When overhead power lines are otherwise allowed, the user shall ensure all overhead lines are constructed and maintained
so that the minimum clearances are in compliance with the National Electrical Code as it exists or may be amended.
Sec. 3.13.082 Attachments to poles
(a) Nothing shall obligate or restrict a right-of-way user from exercising its rights to enter into pole attachment, pole usage,
joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power companies or with other wire-using
companies authorized to operate within the city.
(b) A right-of-way user shall utilize existing pole space, conduit, and other facilities whenever reasonably and/or
economically possible.
(c) Antennas must be mounted to the top of the pole, or flush to the pole near the top, in a screen that is coated or painted
an approved color to match the pole to camouflage the installation.
(d) Equipment, other than antennas, must be in an underground vault. Vaults must be flush to the ground.
(e) If the existing pole already has more than two existing risers/drops, the pole must be replaced with a metal, concrete,
synthetic or approved equal pole and all wires and cables must be run in conduit inside the pole. The existing drops will also
be relocated inside the new pole and underground entry into the pole through the foundation is required. When installation
will result in two or fewer risers/drops on the pole, the wires and cable may be installed as a riser/drop in conduit painted an
approved color.
Sec. 3.13.083 Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires
The right-of-way user shall rearrange its transmission media temporarily as necessary to permit the moving of houses or
other bulky structures. The requesting parties shall pay the reasonable and necessary expense of such temporary
rearrangements. The right-of-way user shall in a reasonable time frame and reasonable cost remove its transmission media
in connection with the demolition of unsafe structures, including emergency or ordered demolitions at no cost to the city. The
right-of-way user may invoice the requesting parties for the cost of this work, where applicable.
Sec. 3.13.084 Street closures
(a) All lane closures on any thoroughfare shall comply with TMUTCD and shall include a lane closure exhibit to be
submitted with the permit to the right-of-way manager. The right-of-way manager may require a traffic-control plan. Arrow
boards and message boards may be required for lane closures on thoroughfares.
(b) Except in an emergency, no thoroughfare will be closed on weekdays during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and
3:30 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. or outside normal working hours of the city. Every day of the week, all roadways shall be open to traffic
by sunset on the same day as the construction.
(c) All lane closures require 24-hour notification of the police and fire departments prior to closing.
Sec. 3.13.085 Site maintenance during construction and prior to full restoration
(a) Erosion control and stormwater management. The right-of-way user shall be responsible for stormwater management,
erosion control and excavation safety measures that comply with city, state and federal laws, regulations, and ordinances.
Requirements shall include, but not limited to, construction fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt
fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion
areas will require wire backed silt fencing. Upon request of the right-of-way manager, the right-of-way user may be required
to furnish documentation submitted or received from the federal or state government.
(b) Dust control. The right-of-way user shall ensure that the work is conducted and site maintained to minimize blowing
dust. At any time dust leaves the jobsite so that it is a nuisance, the work will stop until measures can be taken to eliminate
the dust.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/598
(c) Traffic-control safety. In the event of noncompliance with the TMUTCD, the right-of-way user shall be notified of the
violation. In the event of continued noncompliance, the right-of-way manager may revoke the permit, in addition to any other
remedies available to the city. At any time the right-of-way manager determines the work threatens public safety, they may
take immediate action as necessary including but not limited to, stopping all work, or have a third party make the repairs at
the expense of the applicant.
(d) Responsibility for signs, barricades and warning devices. The right-of-way user working in any right-of-way is
responsible for the safe movement of traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, through the construction area. The right-of-way
user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic control as specified in the TMUTCD.
(1) Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic-control practices and
have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and regulations, including
without limitation, those in TMUTCD, may place and maintain the traffic-control devices in a construction area.
(2) The right-of-way user must either: (A) subcontract the barricading to a firm specializing in traffic control; or
(B) submit the qualifications and name of employees to the right-of-way manager for approval prior to the work
commencing. The right-of-way user must also submit a traffic-control plan for review when required by this article.
All signs and barricades must conform to the requirements of the TMUTCD.
(3) All barricades, plates, and other traffic-control equipment must conform to TMUTCD specifications and must
be inspected and maintained by the traffic-control representative.
(4) All barricades, plates and other traffic-control equipment must display accurate and sufficient information
including without limitation, the name of the right-of-way user, contractor or barricade firm.
(5) Noncompliance with the TMUTCD shall be cited in writing. In the event of noncompliance after citation, the
right-of-way manager may place the necessary devices as required, and the right-of-way user shall reimburse the
city for all such expenses as well as $500.00 for noncompliance. Failure to comply with this provision may result in
denial of application for future permits.
(6) All traffic-control devices must be removed immediately upon completion of work.
(e) Duty to barricade. At all times during construction activity, the contractor and/or right-of-way user, as applicable, shall
place and maintain all necessary and proper barriers and other safeguards, including without limitation, watchmen certified in
accordance with the safety training described in this article, if necessary, upon and around the work and for the prevention of
accidents, and after daylight hours, shall place, maintain and keep suitable sufficient lights, in accordance with the TMUTCD.
Sec. 3.13.086 Inspection
The permittee shall make the work site accessible to the city, and others as authorized by law, for inspection at all reasonable
times during performance of the work.
Sec. 3.13.087 Materials testing
The city will require testing of materials used in construction in or near the right-of-way to determine conformance with city
construction specifications, including, but not limited to, compaction tests on backfill materials, subgrade, aggregate base
course, Portland concrete (rigid pavement), asphaltic concrete (flexible pavement) and other construction materials as
deemed necessary by the city. The right-of-way user shall, at their expense, hire a testing laboratory with current
accreditation by the American Association for Laboratory Accreditation, American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) or another nationally recognized accreditation agency that verifies compliance with ASTM
E 329 and that demonstrates the laboratory's capabilities to perform applicable ASTM or AASHTO test procedures, as may
be required.
Sec. 3.13.088 Duties of persons making excavations or creating obstructions
Any person who shall cause to be made any excavation or obstruction in any street or right-of-way shall not allow the same
to remain there beyond a time reasonably sufficient for the completion of the work and/or removal of the obstruction, and
shall repair the subject portion of such street and/or right-of-way so as to restore the same to its condition previous to the
making of such excavation or obstruction. It shall be the duty of such excavators to protect the area while such condition
exists and promptly to repair the same so as to leave the street or right-of-way in as good condition as before the excavation.
Sec. 3.13.089 Emergency excavations
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit, cable or duct in or under any
street, or right-of-way by virtue of any law, article or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for
compliance with law or for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided that the person making the
excavation shall notify the right-of-way manager within 24 hours. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this article for
excavations authorized by this section, permittee shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/598
Sec. 3.13.090 Excavation in streets
Except in case of an emergency there shall be no excavation in any street without the prior, specific written approval of the
right-of-way manager. Any request for a permit to excavate a street shall include a description of the proposed work and
proposed restoration of the area, as well as a statement of clear and convincing evidence is provided to the right-of-way
manager as to why alternate procedures cannot or should not be used in lieu of excavating a street. All pavement cuts and
repairs shall be performed by a contractor with experience in street repair work. Any damage to pavement outside the
removal area shall also be repaired subject to approval of the right-of-way manager.
(1) Excavation in Portland cement concrete (PCC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is PCC, the
concrete shall be cut first with a saw to a depth of the full the thickness of the concrete or 6", whichever is greater,
and the full width of the concrete panel(s) to be removed (joint-to-joint), which shall also cut any reinforcing steel.
A second cut shall be 12 inches parallel to the first cut to full thickness of the concrete and excavated to
undisturbed soil. Further criteria are set forth in the city's standard details.
(2) Excavation in hot-mix asphalt concrete (HMAC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is HMAC, the
HMAC shall be cut first with a saw to a depth of the full thickness of the pavement or 6", whichever is greater, and
the full width of the trench. A second cut shall be 12 inches parallel to the first cut to full thickness of the pavement
and excavated to undisturbed soil. Further criteria are set forth in the city's standard details.
(3) Jacking and boring. A permittee or right-of-way user shall perform all work in conformance with methods
approved by the city and in such a manner as to not interfere or disturb existing or planned infrastructure.
(4) Responsibility of excavated area maintenance. A permittee or right-of-way user shall warrant and be
responsible for its repairs in the right-of-way for two years from the completion date of any repair.
Sec. 3.13.091 Backfill of excavated area
(a) Open trenches may be temporarily backfilled for the convenience of the permittee or the public safety. Traffic bearing
plates can be used temporarily in conformance with city requirements. At least one hour prior to beginning permanent backfill
operations, the permittee shall notify the right-of-way manager of the time the backfill will begin.
(b) All excess water and mud shall be removed from the trench prior to backfilling. Any backfill placed during a rainy period
or at other times, where excess water cannot be prevented from entering the trench, will be considered temporary and shall
be removed as soon as weather permits. All disturbed base material or any base that has been undermined shall be
removed and discarded. Compaction of all backfill shall be 95 percent of maximum density with a moisture content of minus
two percent to plus four percent of optimum moisture content as determined by ASTM D698 under or near paved surfaces,
future paved surfaces or otherwise as determined by right-of-way manager. Outside of pavement surfaces, compaction of all
backfill shall be 95 percent of maximum density with a moisture content of minus two percent to plus four percent of optimum
moisture content as determined by ASTM D698, and be smoothed, raked, and topsoil and grass or other landscaping
installed to match the surrounding conditions.
Sec. 3.13.092 Right-of-way restoration requirements
(a) The work to be done pursuant to the permit and any repair and/or subsequent restoration of the right-of-way must be
completed within the dates specified in the permit. In the event of circumstances beyond the control of the permittee or when
work is prohibited by unseasonable or unreasonable conditions, the right-of-way manager may, in their sole discretion,
extend the dates on receipt of a substantiated supplementary application for a permit extension.
(b) All earth, materials, sidewalk, pavement, utilities, conduits, crossing, irrigation, landscaping, monuments, manhole
covers, valve covers, meter box lids or improvements of any kind, which are owned or possessed by the city, and damaged,
disturbed, or removed by a right-of-way user shall be fully repaired promptly by the right-of-way user, at its sole expense, to
the reasonable satisfaction of the right-of-way manager with material approved by the city.
(c) After any excavation, the right-of-way user shall, at its expense, restore the right-of-way, trench envelope, pavement
structure and the surrounding area, to the same or better condition than it was prior to the excavation. The restoration shall
be made in accordance with specifications set forth herein, and the repair shall be covered by a maintenance bond for two
years from the completion date of any repair.
(d) In the event the right-of-way user fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition required herein, or
fails to satisfactorily and/or timely complete all restoration, the city may, at its option, serve written notice upon the right-ofway
user that, unless within five days after serving of such notice a satisfactory arrangement can be made for the proper
restoration of the right-of-way by the right-of-way user, the city may take over the work and prosecute same to completion, by
contract or otherwise, at the sole expense of the right-of-way user, and right-of-way user, and its surety, shall be liable to the
city for any and all costs incurred by the city by reason of such prosecution and completion including, without limitation, the
applicable public inconvenience penalty. Nothing contained herein shall limit any other remedies available to the city.
(e) If any excavation cannot be backfilled immediately, the right-of-way user shall securely and adequately cover the
excavation and maintain proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of the opening of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/598
excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel.
(f) In all right-of-way restoration, the right-of-way user guarantees its work and shall maintain it two years from the date of
completion of any restoration. During the period following completion, the right-of-way user shall, in the event of any failure of
the restoration, and upon notification from the right-of-way manager, reimburse the city for pavement restoration costs as
provided for in this article. Additionally, the right-of-way user, in the event of such failure, shall within 48 hours of notice from
the city, repair the subject failure.
(g) The two-year guarantee period shall be applicable to, among others, failure of the pavement surface as well as failure
of the trench envelope. Notwithstanding remediation of the pavement structure by the city, the right-of-way user retains repair
responsibility at all times during the guarantee period for the trench envelope. In locations where two or more right-of-way
users have made repairs in the exact same location, the last right-of-way user to excavate shall be responsible for the twoyear
guarantee in that location, unless the right-of-way manager determines, in their sole discretion, that a failure was most
likely a result of work performed by another right-of-way user. That right-of-way user shall be responsible for the two-year
maintenance period.
(h) All street excavations shall be perpendicular excavations, as possible, unless otherwise approved by the right-of-way
manager. Excavations in streets, which are not perpendicular excavations require full panel(s) and curb-to-curb pavement
reconstruction, or other method of repair approved by the right-of-way manager. All repairs shall be equal or better than that
which existed prior to the commencement of any work.
(i) No trench shall be opened for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts for a distance greater than can be
backfilled on the same workday before sunset. Any exception from this requirement must be granted in writing from the rightof-
way manager prior to work beginning.
Sec. 3.13.093 Restoration of pavement
Unless otherwise specified in the permit, restoration of the pavement of any street, alley, right-of-way or other public place
shall be performed by the permittee.
(1) No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more than 200 feet
in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, other than with the prior written consent of the
right-of-way manager.
(2) All excavations shall comply with the city construction standards, as amended, and requirements of this
article. Unless otherwise required by city standards, as amended, or if unusual conditions are encountered, the
right-of-way manager may require new standards for compaction, backfill and pavement restoration.
(3) Any excavated pavement, debris and/or other rubble shall be removed, together with any surplus material,
within one working day from the time such material is placed upon the street. After backfilling is completed, and
prior to repaving the cut, the right-of-way user shall remove all loose paving material and trim the edges of the
excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the right-of-way manager.
(4) Whenever any caving occurs in the sidewalks of any excavation, the pavements above such caving shall be
cut away, trench backfilled, compacted and sidewalk pavement restored. In no case shall any side or lateral
tamping fill any void under a pavement.
Sec. 3.13.094 Permanent pavement repairs
The right-of-way user will maintain the excavated area until permanent pavement restoration of the excavated area is
complete. The right-of-way user shall make the final repairs within seven days on thoroughfares that are classified as major
and within 30 days on residential, local and alley streets after the right-of-way manager makes final inspection. Backfill
failures shall remain the responsibility of the right-of-way user.
Sec. 3.13.095 Substandard repair of pavement of right-of-way
In case the pavement or the surface of the street, alley, or right-of-way in, over or near any excavation should become
distressed, cracked or broken at any time or fails in any way at any time after the excavation has been made and during the
two-year warranty, the right-of-way user shall comply with any applicable obligations of this article, including, without
limitation, reimbursement to the city of the cost to restore the street and/or right-of-way.
Sec. 3.13.096 Failure to complete work within specified time
In the event any work governed by this article is not completed by the right-of-way user within the time required or in
accordance with the specifications required herein or by the right-of-way manager, the right-of-way manager may cause such
work to be performed as is necessary to secure the work area to a safe and passable condition. The right-of-way user shall
reimburse the city for the costs of securing the site.
Sec. 3.13.097 Removal and reconstruction where work is defective
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/598
All construction work in the streets, alleys, rights-of-way, sidewalks and public places of the city is declared to be subject to
the exclusive control of the city, and whenever, in the sole opinion of the right-of-way manager, any such work shall not have
been duly completed within a reasonable time or shall have been executed in a defective manner, whether because of bad
workmanship or materials or because not true to the lines or grades or specification therefor given to them by the right-of-way
manager, then upon written demand or notice from the right-of-way manager, such right-of-way user or contractor shall
promptly remedy, complete and/or remove and reconstruct such incomplete or defective work as the right-of-way manager
may require, and these provisions shall also apply to all repair and maintenance work. If the contractor or right-of-way user
shall fail or refuse to do so within a reasonable time to be specified by the right-of-way manager, then, if required by the rightof-
way manager, such work shall be completed or corrected or removed and wholly or partially reconstructed by the city, in
such a manner as in the opinion of the right-of-way manager may be necessary to make such work as good as originally
required, and such work may be done by contract or otherwise, under the direction of the right-of-way manager, and the
contractor or right-of-way user shall reimburse city for any and all cost incurred by the city performing the work described in
this section.
Sec. 3.13.098 Cleanup of right-of-way
In every case, and at all times, the work of removing from the right-of-way all obstructions, surplus materials, debris and
waste matter of every description caused by and/or accumulated from the excavation shall be the sole responsibility of the
right-of-way user. The right-of-way user shall maintain the area on and around the excavation and related work in a clean,
safe and orderly fashion at all times during conduct of the excavation and shall clean the same area upon completion of
work. Streets shall be cleaned by use of a vacuum street sweeper or other acceptable means as determined by the right-ofway
manager. The right-of-way user shall clean the surrounding area, as outlined above, within one day upon completion and
approval of all trench work and pavement restoration unless the right-of-way manager, sufficient reason therefore having
been given to their satisfaction, grants a written extension of time.
Sec. 3.13.099 Reporting completion of work
When the work under permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the city in accordance with the requirements
placed on the permit. The city will schedule a final walk-through with the contractor to develop a final punch list of items to be
remedied.
Sec. 3.13.100 Effect of article on persons engaged in construction
Any permit issued prior to the adoption of this article will remain subject to the terms and conditions of city ordinances and
requirements in effect at the time of issuance of the permit and is not affected by this article, except that, upon expiration or
conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be obtained in accordance with this article.
Secs. 3.13.101–3.13.120 Reserved
Division 4. Indemnification, Insurance, Bonding and Liability
Sec. 3.13.121 Liability of right-of-way user
To the extent allowed by law, the right-of-way user shall be liable to the city for any damage or loss occasioned by any act
and/or omission occurring in connection with its excavation, and subject to state law, the right-of-way user shall fully
indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, agents, representatives and
volunteers from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including
reasonable attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees,
agents, representatives and volunteers may be subjected for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or
connected with any such act and/or omission. The city shall promptly notify a permittee, or right-of-way user, at the address
set forth in the permit, or last known address, of any claim, suit or demand served upon the city and alleging negligent or
wrongful conduct by the permittee or right-of-way user in connection with an excavation.
Sec. 3.13.122 Insurance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, unless exempt under this chapter, to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk,
driveway, curb or curb and gutter in any street, alley, easement or right-of-way of the city without having first executed and
delivered to the city a current policy of liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 combined single limit per
occurrence, and such insurance must be conditioned as follows: that the principal shall fully indemnify and hold the city
harmless from any and all cost, expense or damage, whether real or asserted, on account of any injury done to any person
or property in the prosecution of the work, or that may arise out of or be occasioned by the performance of such work. Such
policies shall be endorsed to name the city as an additional insured and to waive subrogation against the city. The city shall
have no duty to perform under this article until such certificate has been delivered to the department.
(b) The city shall be entitled, upon request and without expense before issuing a permit, to receive copies of the policies
and all endorsements thereto as they apply to the limits required by the city, and may make a reasonable request for
deletion, revision, or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions (except where policy
revisions are established by law or regulation binding upon any party to the policy or the underwriter of such policy). Upon
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/598
such request by the city, the right-of-way user shall exercise reasonable effort to accomplish such changes in policy coverage
and shall pay the cost thereof.
(c) Right-of-way user shall notify the city in the event of any notice of cancellation, nonrenewal or material change in
coverage and shall give such notices not less than 30 days prior to the change, or ten days' notice for cancellation due to
nonpayment of premiums, which notice must be accompanied by a replacement certificate of insurance.
(d) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the right-of-way user may be
held responsible for payments of damages to persons (including death) or property resulting from the right-of-way user's, or
its subcontractors', performance of the work performed in the public right-of-way.
(e) The city-owned utilities shall not be required to provide the insurance specified herein.
(f) With respect to the right-of-way user's obligation to comply with the requirements for commercial general (public) liability
insurance coverage, the city right-of-way manager may, in their discretion, allow the right-of-way user to self-insure upon
annual production of evidence that is satisfactory to show the user has sufficient assets and history of performance to justify
the user to self-insure.
Sec. 3.13.123 Performance/assurance bond
Before a permit shall be issued, the right-of-way manager may, in their discretion, require the applicant and/or the person or
entity for which the applicant is performing, to execute and deliver to the city, to be kept on file with the city, a good and
sufficient bond of performance or assurance, in the sum to be determined by the city and conditioned that the person making
the application shall promptly adjust, pay and settle all legitimate claims for damages that may result by reason of
carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing such work or by reason of any defects therein caused or arising from
careless, negligent or imperfect construction thereof, and to hold the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees,
volunteers, agents, and representatives, free and harmless from liability on all such claims for damages to the performance
or assurance bond which shall cover the cost of repairs in or upon the street, sidewalk or other public place where the work is
to be done that may become necessary by reason of such cut or excavation having been made. The bond shall be
maintained until the work is accepted by the city.
Sec. 3.13.124 Liability of contractor and sureties for maintenance and repair work
Any defects of workmanship or material relating to work done by a contractor during the initial project or becoming known, or
which should have been known, during the guarantee period (the two years) shall be known as maintenance or repair work,
and both the contractor and the sureties and/or the contractor's bond shall be fully liable for any default of such contractor
under this section. In the event of a failure in the restoration of an excavation, the right-of-way user shall, at its sole expense,
have one opportunity to repair, in a timely manner, the section of the restoration that has failed, which repair shall be in
accordance with the standards set forth in this article. In the event of any subsequent failure of that section of the restoration,
the city retains the right and option to terminate the right-of-way user's guaranty, upon written notice to the right-of-way user.
In such event, the right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for its direct costs associated with the repair of the failure of the
restoration work.
Sec. 3.13.125 When additional security required
In the event the right-of-way manager reasonably believes the contractor's or right-of-way user's solvency is threatened, the
right-of-way manager may, at any time, make written demand on a contractor and/or right-of-way user for bonds, and the
contractor and/or right-of-way user shall immediately furnish such additional bond or bonds to the city.
Sec. 3.13.126 Decision of right-of-way manager binding on contractor, right-of-way user and sureties
If any question arises as to when any work was actually begun or other specific dates, the decision of the right-of-way
manager shall be conclusive on the contractor, right-of-way user, and the sureties on all such bonds.
Secs. 3.13.127–3.13.140 Reserved
Division 5. Exceptions and Exemptions
Sec. 3.13.141 Exception/exemptions
A permittee or right-of-way user may request an exception from any of the requirements of this article by filing a written
request with the right-of-way manager stating the requirement and the basis for the exception. The right-of-way manager may
reject incomplete exception requests. The applicant shall bear its own expenses of the application process.
(1) Any request for an exception from any right-of-way restoration requirement shall be made in writing, in
advance of any contemplated work and shall be accompanied by digitally formatted detailed plans of the
substituted reconstruction and/or repair of the excavated area, if applicable.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/598
(2) Any request for an exemption and/or exception from any penalty and/or fee, other than as provided in this
article, shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a written detailed request stating the reasons
therefore.
(3) Any request for an exemption and/or exception from any permit, or any other requirement of this article shall
be made in writing, stating in detail all reasons for the requested exemption and/or exception.
(4) The department shall grant or deny an application for an exception and/or exemption within ten days of
receipt of the application for exception and/or exemption.
Secs. 3.13.142–3.13.160 Reserved
Division 6. Certified Telecommunication Providers
Sec. 3.13.161 Authority required/nonexclusive use
A CTP must provide evidence that the CTP has acquired authorization from the PUCT pursuant to state law, prior to
obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way. The CTP's right to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive,
and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public right-of-way, based on the act and all
other state or federal laws.
Sec. 3.13.162 Transfer and notice
A CTP shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or control of a
CTP's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A CTP shall also maintain and provide current
point-of-contact information with the right-of-way manager at all times during which the CTP uses the right-of-way.
Sec. 3.13.163 Exemption from fees
CTPs are exempted from the following fees provided for in this article:
(1) Permit application fee, including expedited application fee and permit expiration fee;
(2) Additional permit fee;
(3) Saturday inspection fee;
(4) Registration fee.
Sec. 3.13.164 Waiver bonds
Unless determined otherwise by the right-of-way manager, a CTP will be exempt from the bonding requirements of this
article, however, in the event that the right-of-way manager determines, based upon reasonable grounds, that a bond is
necessary to protect the public assets, and/or the health and safety of the public, then the right-of-way manager may require
that a CTP post a reasonable bond not to exceed $100,000.00. Factors to be considered in determining reasonable grounds
may include, but are not limited to, a conviction for violation of this article, a general pattern of substandard adherence to the
provisions of this article or the failure to comply with this article. If three years pass from the date that the right-of-way
manager requires a bond of a CTP and it has not been necessary for the city to seek performance under the bond, then a
bond will no longer be required pursuant to this section.
Sec. 3.13.165 Indemnity
A CTP shall indemnify the city as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 283.057, as may be amended. A CTP
shall be exempt from all indemnity requirements of this article that are inconsistent with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code
sec. 283.057, as amended.
Secs. 3.13.166–3.13.180 Reserved
Division 7. Network Providers
Sec. 3.13.181 Authority required/nonexclusive use
A network provider must provide evidence that the network provider has acquired all required authorization pursuant to state
law, prior to obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way for installation of a network node and/or related equipment. The
network provider's right to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, shall be in compliance with the
terms of this article, and the city shall have the further right to exercise its police powers and manage its public right-of-way,
based on the Texas Local Government Code chapter 284 and all other state or federal laws.
Sec. 3.13.182 Transfer and notice
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/598
A network provider shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or
control of a network provider's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A network provider shall
also maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the right-of-way manager at all times during which the
network provider uses the right-of-way.
Sec. 3.13.183 Fees
(a) Exemptions. Network providers are exempted from the following fees provided for in this article:
(1) Permit application fee, including expedited application fee and permit expiration fee;
(2) Saturday inspection fee;
(3) Registration fee.
(b) Network provider fees.
(1) Annual network node rate. Network providers shall pay the city an annual network node rate for each
location for which the network provider has obtained permit(s) for the installation of network nodes, regardless of
whether or not a network provider installs network nodes in the public right-of-way. The amount of the annual
network rate shall be set in the city's master fee schedule. The annual network node public right-of-way rate
payment for the first year at any location (“initial annual network node payment”) begins accruing when the permit
is issued and is due 30 days after network provider obtains a permit to install or collocate a network node at the
location. The initial annual network node payment shall be pro-rated for the months remaining in the calendar year
after the permit issuance date.
(2) Subsequent years' annual network node rate due date. The annual network node public right-of-way rate for
every year after the initial annual network node payment shall be paid in advance on or before December 31st of
each calendar year for each network node in the public right-of-way for the next calendar year period.
(3) Annual network node rate adjustment. The city may adjust the annual network node public right-of-way rate
by an amount equal to one-half the annual change in the consumer price index for all urban consumers for the
state, as published by the federal bureau of labor statistics. The city shall provide written notice to each network
provider of the new rate, and the rate shall apply to the first payment due to the city on or after the 60th day
following that notice.
(4) Monthly transport fee. To the extent a network provider has transport facilities permitted from the network
nodes in the public right-of-way it shall pay the city a monthly transport facilities fee on a quarterly basis, in the
amount set in the city's master fee schedule, as adopted and amended by resolution of the city council, which
begins accruing when the permit is issued. This transport facility fee is in addition to any annual network node
public right-of-way rate payment required by section 284.053, V.T.C.A. Local Government Code.
(5) Application fees. Network provider shall pay the city the network node application fees set forth in the city's
master fee schedule contemporaneously with the submittal of the application for the permits.
Sec. 3.13.184 Indemnity
A network provider shall indemnify the city as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 283.057, as may be
amended.
Sec. 3.13.185 Compliance with design manual
A network provider shall comply with the city design manual for the installation of network nodes and node support poles, as
adopted and amended by ordinance of the city council from time to time, the official copy of which shall be maintained in the
office of the city secretary. Any applications submitted for installation of network nodes, node support poles and related
equipment, the plans and specifications of which do not comply with the design manual and for which an exception has not
been granted, will not be approved.
Sec. 3.13.186 Certificates of operation
As part of the application process for the installation of network nodes, the network provider must certify that the proposed
network node will be placed into active commercial service by or for a network provider no later than the 60th day after the
date the construction and final testing of the network node is completed. An updated certification of active service must be
submitted annually, by no later than December 31st, with or prior to payment of the applicable annual fee(s). If the network
provider is not in active commercial service for a period in excess of one hundred and twenty (120) consecutive days, the
equipment will be deemed abandoned and the permit will be revoked. The network provider will be required, within ninety
(90) days from notification from the city, to remove the equipment at the network provider's sole expense.
Secs. 3.13.187–3.13.200 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/598
Division 8. Miscellaneous
Sec. 3.13.201 Penalty provision
Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense.
The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 2019-02 adopted 1/8/19)
ARTICLE 3.14 EXCAVATIONS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY*
Sec. 3.14.001 Work standards
Any person who makes use of public property in the city for new construction or repairs or maintenance work on utility lines,
facilities or who makes use of public property for any purpose permitted by this article must perform such work in a manner
which will interfere as little as possible with automobile or pedestrian traffic, or entrances of private drives to public roads, or
with city utility lines. Existing city utility lines shall have precedence over other utility lines, and not be interfered with nor their
maintenance made more difficult by the placement of other utility lines, unless absolutely necessary for the placement of the
other utility lines. (1990 Code, sec. 11-26)
Sec. 3.14.002 Permit required
Any person who makes use of public property in the city for new construction or repair or maintenance or for any other
purpose, which work will probably result in damage to such public property, shall be required to obtain a permit from the city
before commencing such use. (1990 Code, sec. 11-27)
Sec. 3.14.003 Permit fee
The fee for the issuance of each permit or any extension of time is on file in the city secretary's office. (1990 Code, sec. 11-
29)
Sec. 3.14.004 Time required for completion
Persons seeking permits under this article shall give an estimate of the time required to complete use of city property and
repair same. Estimates of time required shall be approved by the city. All work and repairs shall be performed within the
estimated time unless such person shall have filed a request for extension of time and such request has been approved by
the city for good cause shown. (1990 Code, sec. 11-28)
Sec. 3.14.005 Inspections; approval of work
Persons obtaining permits under this article shall, immediately after the work is completed, notify the city and within ten (10)
days after such notification the city shall inspect the work. The city will either give preliminary approval or state what defects
need to be corrected. After all defects are corrected to the satisfaction of the city preliminary approval will be given by the
city. After preliminary approval such persons shall remain liable for all defects in materials and workmanship. (1990 Code,
sec. 11-30)
Sec. 3.14.006 Protection, restoration of public property
Any person in the city who constructs, repairs, or maintains any utility lines or facilities or who performs any other work on,
across, or along any public streets, alleys, thoroughfares, sidewalks, drainage channels, or other public property in the city,
which work will probably result in damage to said public property, is hereby required to repair such public property pursuant
to city specifications. (1990 Code, sec. 11-31)
Sec. 3.14.007 Bond required
In order to guarantee performance under this article, a bond shall be required of the persons or their contractors in the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or twice the amount of the reasonably anticipated repair costs from the point of
most extensive damage during such work, whichever is greater in amount. Such bond shall be signed by at least one (1)
surety acceptable to the city. The bond shall be conditioned that, if such public property is not promptly restored to condition
at least equal that before the work was started, the principal and surety shall be bound to pay the cost of repairs, up to the
face amount of the bond. Such bond shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year after preliminary approval of the repairs
by the city to insure that all defects in material and workmanship that become evident during such one-year period will be
corrected. Such one-year period affects only the bond requirement of this article and in no way seeks to change the statute of
limitation existing elsewhere in the laws of the state. (1990 Code, sec. 11-32)
Sec. 3.14.008 Exemption of public utilities
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/598
Any public utility regulated by the city may be exempted from the bond requirements of this article by providing other
evidence of financial responsibility acceptable to the city. (1990 Code, sec. 11-33)
ARTICLE 3.15 BUILDING AND STREET ADDRESSES
Sec. 3.15.001 New street names
(a) Names shall be chosen so as to be pleasant sounding, appropriate, and easy to read so that the public, and children in
particular, can handle the name in an emergency situation. Large developments shall use a single significant category of
names; small subdivisions shall use the same category as the surrounding or adjacent area in order to establish locational
identity. The following names shall be unacceptable for new streets: numerical names; alphabetical letters; surnames of living
persons (pioneer families, etc., excepted); frivolous, complicated, or undesirable names; unconventional spelling; compound
names.
(b) Unnecessary affixes are prohibited. To indicate direction the following terms may be utilized: “east,” “west,” “north,” and
“south.” The following terms may be used to designate arterial streets and highways: “boulevard,” “drive,” “road,” and
“parkway.”
(c) No duplication of names shall be permitted within the service area of the fire department. Similar sounding names are
considered to be duplication regardless of spelling.
(d) A continuous street, or one proposed to be continuous, shall bear the same name throughout, even though it changes
directions. If it is interrupted by a channel, freeway, railroad, etc., and eventual connection is not probable, the segments shall
bear different names. Loop or U-shaped streets which would create duplication of house numbers require two names, the
change to occur at a knuckle or sharp turn, but may be exempted from the above in the event that such an identifiable break
point does not exist. In these cases, appropriate affixes shall be assigned. No separate name shall be used for a cul-de-sac
that provides street frontage for three or less lots or units. The name shall be the same as that of the intersecting street.
(e) After approval of a tentative tract map, the subdivider shall submit a street naming and numbering proposal to the
building official. The proposal shall contain a map of the overall tract illustrating street layout, the name proposed for each
street and the proposed numbering for each lot, and an alphabetical list of the proposed street names together with an
alternate name for each name proposed. The building official shall review the proposed street naming and numbering
program for duplication of names, appropriateness of names, and for overall compliance with this article. The building official
may modify or amend the program as he deems necessary in order to bring it into conformance with this article. The decision
of the building official may be appealed to the city council within fifteen (15) days after action by the building official. The
approved street names and numbering shall be included in the final map which is submitted to the city council for approval
and for recordation.
(1990 Code, sec. 11-126)
Sec. 3.15.002 Existing street names
The building official shall examine all current street names for the purpose of determining any duplication or similar sounding
names which, in his opinion, may cause confusion to public safety responders. The building official shall notify the city council
of all such conflicting streets and the number of structures on each street. The city council shall hold a public hearing to
consider renaming these existing streets to eliminate the confusion and shall determine which street names shall be changed
and what the new names shall be. (1990 Code, sec. 11-127)
Sec. 3.15.003 Street numbering system
For the purpose of assigning street numbers, Ninth Street (or Ninth Street extended) is hereby designated as the north-south
axis and Avenue G (or Avenue G extended) is hereby designated as the east-west axis. All avenues, streets, and alleys
running generally north and south shall be numbered from the east-west axis consecutively to the corporate limits of the
extremity of such avenue, street, or alley. Avenues, streets, or alleys running generally east and west shall be numbered from
the north-south axis in the same manner. Whenever possible, one hundred (100) numbers shall be allowed to each block so
that the number of each consecutive block shall commence with consecutive hundreds. Where possible, block lengths shall
be approximately four hundred (400) feet. Odd numbers shall be assigned to the west side of the street on all north-south
streets, and even numbers to the east side. On east-west streets, odd numbers shall be assigned to the north side of the
street and even numbers to the south side. (1990 Code, sec. 11-128)
Sec. 3.15.004 Designation of street numbers
Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business or assembly on all public and private streets shall be assigned by
the building official to conform with this article. The building official shall keep a record of all numbers assigned under this
article. (1990 Code, sec. 11-129)
Sec. 3.15.005 Posting of designated street address
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/598
The owner or occupant or person in charge of any house or building to which a number has been assigned will be notified in
writing by the building official of the number assigned to the same at any time after the adoption of this article (February 12,
1991). Within sixty (60) days after the receipt of such written notification from the building official, the owner or occupant or
person in charge of a house or building to which a number has been assigned shall affix the number in a conspicuous
manner in a conspicuous place. It shall be the duty of such owner or occupant or person in charge thereof upon affixing the
new number to remove any different number which might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned to the
structure by the building official. Each principal building shall display the number assigned to the frontage on which the front
entrance is located. In case a principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate
front entrance may display a separate number. Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each
front entrance to such building shall be posted in a manner as to be legible and distinguishable from the street on which the
property fronts. (1990 Code, sec. 11-130)
Sec. 3.15.006 New structures
Numbers shall be assigned to each proposed lot or tract on the surveyors' copies of final subdivision plans by the building
official. No building permit shall be issued for any principal building until the owner or developer has procured from the
building official the official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any principal building
erected or repaired after the effective date of this article (February 12, 1991) shall be withheld until permanent and proper
numbers have been displayed in accordance with the requirements of section 3.15.005 above. (1990 Code, sec. 11-131)
Sec. 3.15.007 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this article is declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to be guilty thereof shall be
punishable by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable accordingly. (1990 Code, sec. 11-132)
ARTICLE 3.16 MAILBOXES*
Sec. 3.16.001 Adopted
The requirements for the placement of mailbox assemblies within public rights-of-way in the city and made part hereof for all
purposes is, and the same hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city.
Sec. 3.16.002 Definitions
Words or phrases not expressly prescribed herein are to be defined in accordance with their customary usage as it relates to
this specific application.
Breakaway support. A supporting post that yields or breaks away safely if struck by a vehicle. Such supporting post shall
consist of a maximum nominal 4-inch by 4-inch square or 4-inch diameter wood post or 1.5-inch to 2-inch diameter standard
steel or aluminum pipe post, which is buried no more than 24-inches deep with or without the use of concrete. Wood, steel or
aluminum pipe posts exceeding the aforementioned size and installation depth requirements are permitted up to a maximum
6 inch nominal dimension when specifically designed as a breakaway support system in accordance with American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines.
Cluster-style mailbox assembly. A style whereby mailboxes, meeting the specifications of the United States Postal Service
(USPS), are assembled and grouped together on a single area of land so they are regarded as one unit. The use of clusterstyle
mailboxes must be reviewed and approved by both the city and the USPS.
Custom-built mailbox assembly. An assembly constructed using materials that do not meet the definition of a “standard
mailbox” and “breakaway support” (e.g., brick, stone or other masonry type materials and/or heavy gauge steel or other
substantial materials), which is erected near the edge of the roadway or curbside of a street and is intended or used for the
collection of mail and is to be served by a mail carrier from a vehicle.
Damaged mailbox assembly. Damage of any origin sustained whereby over fifty percent (50%) of the mailbox assembly has
been affected.
Standard mailbox assembly. An assembly consisting of lightweight sheet metal or plastic mailbox meeting the specifications
of the USPS, which is located near the edge of the roadway or curbside of a street and is mounted on an approved
breakaway support post, and is intended or used for the collection of mail and is to be served by a mail carrier from a vehicle.
Standard mailbox assembly includes decorative/architectural style boxes and posts that meet USPS specifications. Multiple
standard mailbox assembly installations must meet the same criteria as a single standard mailbox assembly installation.
Sec. 3.16.003 Placement of mailbox assemblies
(a) No new or replacement mailbox assembly will be allowed to be installed within the city's rights-of-way if its placement
interferes with the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance, or operation of the city's roadway or utility
systems. Any new or replacement mailbox assembly installation that does not conform to the provisions of these
requirements is an unauthorized encroachment and is subject to removal as specified in this document.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/598
(b) The location and construction of mailbox assemblies shall adhere to the rules and requirements of the USPS, as well
as to city requirements. In the event that there is a conflict between USPS and city requirements, the more stringent
requirements shall apply.
(c) Standard mailboxes mounted on an approved breakaway support posts are permitted within public rights-of-way along
all city maintained roadways. The face of the mailbox assembly shall be set a minimum of 18 inches from the edge of
pavement or between 6 and 8 inches from the face of the curb. The post-to-box attachment shall be of sufficient strength to
prevent the box from separating from the post under vehicle impacts. Lightweight sheet metal or plastic newspaper boxes
may be mounted below the mailbox on the support. Refer to figure 1 for a general detail of this type of placement.
Figure 1
(d) Custom-built mailbox assemblies are only permitted along local and minor collector classified roadways. The face of
these types of mailbox assemblies shall be set a minimum of 18 inches from the edge of pavement or between 8 and 12
inches from the face of the curb. Custom-built mailboxes shall not be larger than two (2) feet wide by two (2) feet deep and
five (5) feet high. Additionally, these types of strictures shall not be permanently attached to any type of concrete pad or
foundation. Refer to figure 2 for a general detail of this type of placement.
Figure 2
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/598
(e) Mailboxes made of heavy gauge steel or other substantial materials that are designed and sold as deterrents to
vandalism and that meet USPS requirements shall adhere to the same requirements as custom-built mailboxes.
(f) All mailbox assemblies must be placed in a manner that does not interfere with visibility from intersections, driveways,
side streets, alleys or other access points.
(g) Mailbox assemblies must not interfere with pedestrian traffic and shall not encroach into sidewalks or other accessible
routes without providing a minimum of five (5) feet of clear, unobstructed and accessible space from all points around the
assembly.
(h) Cluster-style mailboxes are encouraged, whenever possible, for the purpose of public safety.
(i) For individual-type mailbox assemblies, the property owner shall be responsible for the erection, maintenance, repair,
replacement or removal of the roadside mailbox assembly serving their individual place of dwelling or business.
(j) Mailbox assemblies located within public rights-of-way along state maintained roadways shall adhere to the
requirements of the Texas Department of Transportation or their successor agency.
Sec. 3.16.004 Permit
(a) A permit must be obtained from the city before a new mailbox assembly is installed within city rights-of-way. If the
mailbox assembly is being installed in association with a new residence or business that has a valid building permit, the
mailbox assembly will be inspected along with the building construction.
(b) A copy of the mailbox assembly permit application form is included as exhibit B to Ordinance 2012-05. This form may
be revised or updated from time-to-time as needed without having to amend these requirements.
Sec. 3.16.005 Relocation and replacement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/598
(a) The city reserves the right to remove, relocate or cause to be relocated and/or replace any existing mailbox assembly
located within public right-of-way that interferes with the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance, or
operation of the city's roadway or utility systems or that interferes with pedestrian traffic, including the removal and
replacement of custom-built mailbox assemblies with standard mailbox assemblies.
(b) Any type of mailbox assembly located in city right-of-way is subject to damage or destruction at any time. The city shall
not assume any liability for damaged or destroyed mailbox assemblies of any type installed within city rights-of-way.
(c) If a standard mailbox assembly or cluster-style mailbox located in city right-of-way is damaged or destroyed as the
result of city or utility company activities, the city or utility company that damaged or destroyed the mailbox assembly shall
replace said mailbox assembly with one of the same or similar design.
Sec. 3.16.006 Removal of nonconforming or unsafe mailbox assemblies
(a) Any new mailbox assembly that is found to violate the provisions of these requirements shall be removed by the
property owner upon notification by the city. The city will provide the property owner with a written notice of violation, after
which time, based on an assessment of hazard to the public, the property owner will be granted not less than 24 hours nor
more than 30 calendar days to remove the mailbox assembly. Upon expiration of the specified removal period, the mailbox
assembly will be removed by the city at the property owner's expense.
(b) Unless the placement or location of an existing mailbox assembly that does not meet these requirements interferes
with the safety of the traveling public or the function, maintenance, or operation of the city's roadway or utility systems or
interferes with pedestrian traffic as detailed within this document, the mailbox assembly will be permitted to remain.
(Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 3/13/12)
ARTICLE 3.17 FUEL AND GAS CODE
Sec. 3.17.001 Adoption
Certain provisions of the 2015 edition of the International Fuel and Gas Code (IFGC) are hereby adopted by the city, and
declared to be effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary
of one copy of said IFGC.
Sec. 3.17.002 Amendments
In accordance with the IFGC local amendments are adopted as well as amendments recommended by the North Central
Texas Council of Governments. For code uniformity with other regional cities and local practices certain sections of the 2015
International Fuel and Gas Code are amended. The amendments attached to Ordinance 2017-39 entitled “Amendments to
the 2015 International Fuel and Gas Code” are made a part of this article by reference. The city adopts these amendments,
all of which are on file in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 3.17.003 Violations declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 3.17.004 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to be
guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2017-39 adopted 5/23/17)
ARTICLE 3.18 SPECIAL DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR THE EAGLE FORD GROUP
Sec. 3.18.001 Adoption
The special design and construction standards for the Eagle Ford Group is, and the same hereby, adopted as the official
policy of the city.
Sec. 3.18.002 Purpose
(a) The western portion of the city is underlain by expansive clay derived from shale of the Eagle Ford Group. The purpose
of these standards is to provide requirements relative to design and construction to reduce the potential for post-construction
movement of residential structures and infrastructure associated with active clay and weathered shale (also referred to as
shaley clay).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/598
(b) Significant settlement of utility backfill has also been experienced when using soils derived from the Eagle Ford Group.
These standards shall also apply to utility backfill within the special standards area. The purpose of the standards as it
applies to utility backfill is to limit post-construction heave and/or settlement.
Sec. 3.18.003 Scope
(a) These standards apply to all development within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) underlain by the Eagle
Ford Group. The general boundary of the area is shown on attachment 1 to this article.
(b) These standards address required:
(1) Geotechnical studies;
(2) Remedial earthwork;
(3) Utility location and backfill;
(4) Pavement subgrade;
(5) Minimum pavement design sections;
(6) Observation and testing; and
(7) Requirements to reduce post-construction soil shrinkage.
Sec. 3.18.004 Required geotechnical investigations
(a) A geotechnical investigation and report is required for all development within the city in conformance with the Texas
Engineering Practice Act. The following requirements shall be considered a minimum scope of geotechnical engineering
services for projects involving public infrastructure or residential structures within the boundary shown on attachment 1 to this
article.
(b) These standards are not intended to replace the professional judgment of the geotechnical engineer for any specific
project. Results of the field and laboratory investigations, engineering analyses and recommendations shall be presented in a
report and is subject to review and acceptance by the city engineer or their designated representative.
(1) Field investigation.
(A) Borings shall be drilled along the center of roadway or underground utilities at 250-foot spacings (or
less), alternating between each roadway direction. As an alternative, roadway and utility design within a
proposed subdivision can be based on a maximum 200-foot grid throughout the subdivision. Borings shall
be drilled to a depth of at least 20 feet below finished subgrade. Where utilities extend to depths greater than
20 feet, borings shall be drilled to a depth of 3 feet below the deepest utility at that location. For single
residential lots not covered by a subdivision analysis, the investigation will include a minimum of two core
borings to a minimum depth of 20 feet.
(B) Borings shall be sampled continuously to a depth of six feet and at 5-foot intervals or less thereafter.
Samples shall be either obtained by minimum 3-inch diameter Shelby tubes (cohesive soils), or standard
penetration test (cohesionless soils). Disturbed samples obtained from the augers are not accepted as being
part of the required sampling.
(C) Logs shall be developed to provide a depiction of the soil types encountered in each boring, sample
types, descriptions of each layer and groundwater conditions.
(2) Laboratory investigation.
(A) Each sample of cohesive soil or weathered shale shall be evaluated for consistency using a calibrated
hand penetrometer.
(B) Soil types in each boring shall be subjected to classification tests to include, but not necessarily limited
to; Atterberg Limits (ASTM D 4318), percent passing No. 200 sieve (ASTM D 1140), moisture content
(ASTM D 2216), and unit dry weight. Where logs show uniform conditions, the number of tests can be
reduced by visual classification, as long as there is at least one set of classification tests for each strata per
each 2 borings.
(C) Due to the variability in moisture contents within the seasonally active zone over the year, the design
engineer shall assess the condition of the samples and the season. When, in the design engineer's opinion,
the samples are within the seasonally active zone and are wetter than should normally be expected, the
samples shall be air dried such that the samples represent the drier portion of the year. Alternatively, for the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/598
seasonally active portion of the profile, the potential for heave can be calculated using TxDOT 124E (method
for determining the potential vertical rise, PVR) and applying the dry condition for the analysis.
(D) Two samples per boring will be evaluated for swell potential using ASTM D-4546 at overburden stress
at depths below the seasonal active zone, or using the absorption pressure swell method as described by
Johnson and Snethen( (this method is also commonly referred to as the classic swell test) to evaluate with
reasonable certainty the average swell potential of the subgrade.
(E) For pavement subgrade design, perform a lime stabilization series for each soil type expected to be in
the upper 12 inches of the subgrade. Minimum criteria for the percent lime shall be that required to meet
both the Eades-Grimm method of pH testing and maximum plasticity index as determined by lime series.
Minimum design criteria for pavement subgrade shall be the percent lime, plus one percent, to achieve the
following:
(i) pH = 12.4 after mellowing (ASTM D 2976); and
(ii) Plasticity index of 15 or less.
(3) Engineering.
(A) The design engineer shall utilize the results of the field and laboratory investigation to provide an
engineered pavement section including moisture-treated subgrade to reduce the potential for movement as
discussed below. The pavement shall consist of city standard sections identified in section 3.18.008 for the
street classification.
(B) The design engineer shall calculate the potential for vertical heave based upon a minimum 20-foot
moisture penetration depth and shall provide recommendations to limit the potential for movement below all
roadways to less than four inches and residential structures to less than two inches. The depth of analysis
may be reduced to less than 20 feet if it can be demonstrated that geologic conditions support a shallower
active zone (i.e., where shallow unweathered shale or static groundwater is present or swell pressures do
not exceed overburden stress). Recommendations may include moisture treatment or excavation and
replacement. An example of a design procedure to calculate the potential for vertical heave is provided in
attachment 2 to this article.
(C) Attachment 2 to this article is intended to provide a guideline relative to the analysis for potential
movement. It is not intended to replace the judgment of the design engineer.
(D) The design engineer shall submit all calculations and assumptions involved in calculating the potential
for vertical heave and the recommended depth of moisture treatment to the city for review. Guideline
procedures for moisture treatment are included in section 3.18.005.
(E) For studies used in pavement design, the report shall identify the type of subgrade stabilization. For
materials stabilized in-place, the estimated percent of lime or cement shall be identified based on the results
of lime or cement series. A minimum 8-inch stabilized base is required below all municipal paving dedicated
to the city.
Sec. 3.18.005 Remedial earthwork
(a) The potential for heave can be reduced by remedial earthwork, which generally consists of either excavation and
recompaction at elevated moisture (mechanical preswelling), preswelling via pressure injection, excavation and replacement
of a portion of the active materials with less active soils, or injection with chemical.
(b) The depth of remedial earthwork will vary with geologic conditions. The design geotechnical engineer shall incorporate
the anticipated cut and fill in the potential vertical heave calculations and identify the specific depth and method to reduce the
potential vertical heave to less than two inches.
(c) For mechanical preswelling, in general, it is recommended clay or weathered shale (shaley clay) used as fill be
compacted in approximate 8-inch lifts to a density of between 93 and 98 percent of maximum density as determined by
ASTM D-698, at a moisture of +1 to +5 percentage points above optimum moisture. Swell tests shall be conducted on
composite samples compacted to the required density and moisture to confirm the reduction in swell. Alternative moisture
and density criteria can be specified by the design engineer provided swell tests confirm the desired reduction in swell.
Higher minimum density may also be desired for fill depths greater than 10 feet.
(d) Preswelling via injection can be utilized to obtain the desired reduction in swell. Injection shall consist of multiple
passes using water and surfactant or alternatively chemical injection. The design engineer shall determine the required depth
to reduce the potential for heave below residential structures to less than two inches. The design engineer shall develop an
observation and testing protocol to confirm the desired post-injection reduction in swell.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/598
(e) Maintenance of the moisture in the subgrade shall be addressed by the design engineer. Typical alternatives to
maintain the moisture consist of stabilization of the exposed surface soils or capping the remedial soil with inert fill.
Residential lots have also been effectively sealed using 10-mil polyethylene with a six- to 12-inch thick soil cover to protect
the polyethylene.
(f) The design engineer shall provide a letter to the city at the completion of remedial earthwork confirming the desired
reduction in movement.
Sec. 3.18.006 Utility location and backfill
(a) All utilities shall be located outside of pavement, unless otherwise permitted by the city. In areas where utilities cross
future public streets, backfill of the crossings must meet the requirements specified below.
(b) Below ground utilities shall be excavated to allow for mechanical compaction, testing and inspection of the backfill.
Excavation sidewalls shall be sloped to allow for safe ingress/egress of testing and inspection personnel. As a minimum
where space allows, the excavation sidewalls shall be constructed at a one horizontal to one vertical slope or flatter where
dictated by OSHA considerations.
(c) In general, vertical sidewalls will not be allowed unless dictated because of space limitations. For these conditions,
trench boxes and shoring will be allowed; however, special provision for testing of the backfill during placement will have to
be incorporated into the design. In no case will testing of the backfill via test pits after completion of fill placement be allowed.
(d) The design engineer shall specify the required density to meet settlement and heave considerations. In general, it is
recommended that utility fill less than 10 feet in depth be compacted to a density of between 93 and 98 percent of maximum
density as determined by ASTM D 698, at a moisture of +1 to +4 percentage points above optimum moisture. Utility fill
depths greater than 10 feet typically should be compacted to a density of between 95 and 100 percent of maximum density
as determined by ASTM D 698, at a moisture of +1 to +5 percentage points above optimum moisture.
(e) The observation and testing program shall be developed by the design engineer to confirm that the fill has been placed
and compacted to meet the project specifications. Minimum observation and testing is discussed in section 3.18.009.
Sec. 3.18.007 Pavement subgrade
(a) All pavement within the special standards area shall have a subgrade stabilized to a minimum depth of 8 inches.
(b) The type of stabilization will be dependent upon the specific material exposed at completion of grading. Where lime is
required by the design engineer, lime series tests shall be conducted on the exposed subgrade. Initial testing may be
performed during the geotechnical investigation; however, it shall be required that samples of the subgrade be obtained at a
maximum spacing of 250 feet on center at completion of initial grading. Each sample will be tested to determine its plasticity
index (PI). Lime series and the Eades-Grimm method of pH (ASTM D 2976) tests shall then be conducted on representative
samples to evaluate the required percent lime for PI reduction and to obtain a pH of 12.4 after mellowing. If the lime series
indicates the PI of the lime-stabilized material cannot be reduced to 15 or less, an initial application of lime followed by
stabilization with cement will be required. The percent lime will be the percentage, plus one percent, required to reduce the PI
to its lowest value.
(c) If the required PI reduction is obtained, the specified percent lime for stabilization shall be that required to obtain a pH
of 12.4 after mellowing plus one percent.
(d) For soils where the PI is reduced to 15 or less, lime stabilization will be performed in accordance with the latest edition
of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) “Standard Specifications for Construction of Highways, Street and
Bridges.” Stabilized soils shall be compacted to a minimum of 95 percent of modified proctor, ASTM D-1557, at or above
optimum moisture.
(e) For soils where lime cannot reduce the PI to 15 or less, an initial application of lime followed by cement stabilization is
required. The initial lime application will be in accordance with TxDOT item 260. A mellowing period of 48 to 72 hours is
required before the second mixing. Upon completion of the second mixing, stabilization with a minimum of 8 percent cement
shall be performed in accordance with TxDOT item 275. Cement stabilized material shall be compacted to a minimum of 95
percent of modified proctor, ASTM D-1557, at or above optimum moisture.
Sec. 3.18.008 Minimum pavement sections
(a) The standard pavement section shall consist of concrete curb and gutter and a hot mix asphaltic concrete (HMAC)
base and surface course, having a minimum design thickness as shown in table 7.0. The concrete curb and gutter shall
conform to the city's standard construction details, as may be amended, and the HMAC shall meet the material and
construction methods contained in the latest edition of the TxDOT standard specifications manual. This pavement material
and section may only be modified upon approval of the city engineer or their designated representative.
Table 7.0
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/598
Minimum Design Thickness (Inches)
Street Classification Minimum Thickness
of Base Course
(Type “B”)
Minimum Thickness of
Surface Course (Type
“C” or “D”)(1)
Total Minimum
Thickness
Residential/local 4.5 1.5 6.0
Minor collector 5.0 2.0 7.0
Industrial 6.0 2.0 8.0
Major collector and
arterial
6.0 2.0 8.0
(1) Surface course type shall be based upon street classification, surrounding land use and as directed by the city.
(b) All pavement sections shall be constructed over a treated subgrade in accordance with section 3.18.007.
Sec. 3.18.009 Compaction criteria and testing
(a) The developer shall be responsible for hiring a preapproved geotechnical engineering company for compliance testing
of remedial earthwork, construction of the pavement subgrade and placement of utility backfill. The city may elect to perform
its own testing; however, these tests will be for the sole use of the city and will not be used for acceptance.
(b) The design engineer shall develop an observation and testing protocol to confirm that the desired density and moisture
has been obtained in all fill and/or remedial earthwork to reduce the potential for post-construction movement.
(c) All mass earthwork shall be tested for compaction and moisture at a minimum rate of one test per 8-inch thick lift per
5,000 square feet of fill area. Remedial earthwork involving preswelling via pressure injection shall be tested using
continuous sample borings to the full injection depth at a maximum spacing of one boring per 10,000 square feet, or one
boring per lot for residential subdivisions.
(d) The pavement subgrade shall be tested for gradation and compaction at maximum 10,000-square foot intervals. The
gradation tests shall meet TxDOT specifications. The upper 6 inches of subgrade below the stabilized layer shall be
compacted to a minimum of 95 percent of standard proctor, ASTM D 1557, at or above optimum moisture.
(e) Utility trench backfill shall be tested at a minimum rate of one test per 100 linear feet of trench, per 8-inch thick lift.
(f) At completion of testing, the design engineer shall provide a letter to the city engineer or their designated representative
confirming that the required remedial earthwork has been performed in accordance with the plans and specifications and that
all fill has been placed to meet the specifications.
Sec. 3.18.010 Shrinkage control
(a) Remedial earthwork to reduce the potential for heave utilizing preswelling alternatives (either mechanical or pressure
injection), shall incorporate irrigation and landscape plans to reduce the potential for shrinkage, including the restriction of
water thirsty plant species.
(b) In addition, sidewalks along residential/local streets shall be located adjacent to the back of [the] curb and shall be a
minimum of six (6) feet in width, unless permitted otherwise by the city.
ATTACHMENT 1
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/598
PRELIMINARY DRAFT–AUSTIN CHALK/EAGLE FORD SHALE CONTACT
Note: Contact is approximate, based on the Geologic Atlas of Texas - Dallas Sheet (1972) published by the University of
Texas at Austin Bureau of Economic Geology.
ATTACHMENT 2
EXAMPLE OF CALCULATION OF POTENTIAL VERTICAL RISE
(a) Example incorporates seasonally active soils to 12 feet with dry expansive weathered shale to 20 feet.
(b) Swell test results:
Depth, ft. Initial Moisture, % Final Moisture, % % Swell1
14 22.0 28.5 6.2
18 23.4 26.3 3.2
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/598
1 Percent swell at final overburden pressure
(c) Seasonally active zone, 0 to 12 feet, calculate using TxDOT 124E, applying the dry condition. Laboratory results
indicate the soils have a plasticity index from 0 to 6 feet of 38 and from 6 to 12 feet of 41. PVR of upper 12 feet from the dry
condition equals 3.1.
(d) Direct application of swell tests; apply 6.2 percent swell for soils from 12 feet to 16 feet and 3.2 percent swell for soils
from 16 feet to 20 feet. Potential movement from 12 to 16 feet equals 2.98 (3.0) inches and from 16 to 20 feet equals 1.54
(1.5).
(e) Total potential movement equals; 3.1 + 3.0 + 1.5 for a total of 7.6 inches.
(Ordinance 2010-28 adopted 10/12/10)
ARTICLE 3.19 ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 3.19.001 Scope
This article establishes alarm permits and related controls in the city.
Sec. 3.19.002 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:
Alarm administrator. A person or persons designated by the chief to administer, control and review false alarm deduction
efforts and administer the provisions of this article.
Alarm permit. Authorization granted by the alarm administrator and the city to an alarm user to operate an alarm system.
Alarm permit application. The written application for and alarm permit filed by an alarm user with the alarm administrator or
city.
Alarm site. A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each unit in a multi-unit building or
complex, if served by a separate alarm system, shall be considered a separate alarm site, and is further defined:
(1) Commercial site. Every premises or location where any business activity is regularly conducted and which is
served by an alarm system. Each unit of a business premises or a business location if served by a separate alarm
system in a multi-unit building or complex shall be considered a separate commercial alarm site.
(2) Financial site. Every premises or location or a financial institution which is required to have an alarm system
pursuant to the Bank Protection Act.
(3) Residential site. A single-family residence and each residential unit of a multi-unit building or complex
served by an alarm system.
Alarm system. A device or system that emits or relays a signal intended to summon or that would reasonably be expected to
summon an emergency service of the city. “Alarm system” does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle (unless such
vehicle is permanently located at an alarm site), nor an alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of the premises.
Alarm user. The person designated in the alarm permit application who owns, controls, or occupies any structure, residence
or vehicle used for a residence within the city, wherein an alarm system is maintained and who is responsible for responding
to alarms and giving access to the alarm site and who is also responsible for proper maintenance and operation of the alarm
system and payment of fees and fines assessed under this article.
Automatic protection device. An electrically-operated instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which
automatically sends, over regular telephone lines, a prerecorded voice alarm upon receipt of a stimulus from the sensory
apparatus that has detected a physical force or condition intrusion.
Chief. Chief of police of the City of Midlothian or authorized representative.
City. The City of Midlothian, Texas.
Disabled veteran exemption. An individual qualifies for a disabled veteran alarm permit/renewal fee exemption if the
individual is a veteran who was designated as 100% disabled while serving with the U.S. Armed Forces. Any individual
claiming this exemption must provide official documentation to the alarm administrator or designee at the time of the alarm
permit application from either the veteran's administration or the branch of the armed forces that clearly reflects the 100%
disability rating.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/598
False alarm. An alarm notification to the police/fire communications center when the responding police or fire personnel, after
an inspection of the interior or exterior of the premises, find no evidence of unauthorized intrusion, robbery, attempted
robbery, attempt to take a person hostage, fire or an activated sprinkler system; or, no reasonable visual proof of possible
criminal activity recorded by an alarm systems monitor is provided to the city at the time of the inspection of the premises by
the police. However, any call for assistance summoned manually through an alarm system because of a perceived medical
or personal threat will not be considered false, nor any activation by natural causes such as thunderstorms or lightning.
Local alarm. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure, but
is not transmitted from the alarm site.
Robbery alarm. An alarm which is activated by the overt action of a person to signal an intrusion, attempted unauthorized
intrusion, robbery, attempted robbery, or a hostage situation.
Sec. 3.19.003 Permits
(a) Permit required; offense. A person commits an offense punishable by a fine of not less than $1.00 and not more than
$250.00 if he/she activates, operates or causes to be operated an alarm system without first obtaining a permit from the
alarm permit administrator and, thereafter, fails to renew the permit on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the
initial alarm permit. Each day that the person activates, operates or causes an alarm system to be operated without a permit
constitutes a separate offense.
(b) Permit application required; fees. Any individuals, homeowners, businesses and corporations using an alarm system
within the city shall complete the application for an alarm permit as required by subsection (d)(2) of this section; shall
maintain in full force and effect an alarm permit issued by the city pursuant to this article; and, shall pay such permit fees,
renewal fees, reinstatement fees and service fees, as applicable, as set forth in the alarm systems fee schedule in section
3.19.010 herein.
(c) Multifamily and apartments. Each residential unit of a multifamily unit, apartment, condominium, duplex, triplex, and/or
quadraplex will be classified as single-family residential. Each apartment dwelling shall be classified as single-family
residential and require a separate permit. A tenant of a multifamily unit shall obtain an alarm permit. The annual fee for this
permit shall be same as the fee for a residential alarm.
(d) Permit application process.
(1) The city must receive the initial permit fee at the time of submission of the completed alarm permit
application.
(2) The permit application shall include, as a minimum, the following information, on a form acceptable to the
city:
(A) The name, address, organization (corporation, partnership, etc.) and telephone number of the person,
firm, corporation, or other entity in whose name the permit will be held;
(B) The name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for the maintenance
and operation of the alarm system;
(C) The name, address, and telephone number of the persons to be notified should the alarm system be
activated;
(D) Purpose of the alarm;
(E) Classification of the system as financial, commercial or residential (to include multifamily units);
(F) Description of the operation of the system;
(G) Description of the methods by which the police/fire communications center will be notified of alarm
activation or if a local alarm only;
(H) Indication of whether the alarm system is audible or silent; and
(I) The name and address of the installer of the system.
(3) A residential alarm user who is over the age of 65 or eligible to receive the disabled veteran exemption may
be issued a permit without payment of the applicable fee, provided that at the time of the alarm permit application,
said permit applicant provides proof of age on a state-issued identification card or driver's license or official
documentation from either the veteran's administration or the branch of the armed forces that clearly reflects the
100% disability rating.
(4) Upon receipt of a completed permit application form and the required permit fee, the alarm permit
administrator shall issue an initial alarm permit to an applicant unless the applicant has:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/598
(A) Failed to pay any fee assessed under this article as set forth in the alarm systems fee schedule in
section 3.19.010 herein; or
(B) Had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended for any reason.
(e) Permit renewal. An alarm permit must be renewed on or before the anniversary date of its initial issuance each year by
paying the required renewal fee (as provided for in the alarm systems fee schedule in section 3.19.010 herein) to the city and
by submitting an updated alarm permit application. Regardless of the date that the renewal fee and late fee (if applicable) are
paid and the application to renew the alarm permit is submitted to the city, the alarm permit shall be valid for the one (1) year
period from the initial date that the alarm permit was first issued. The failure to timely renew the alarm permit on or before the
anniversary date of the initial issuance of the alarm permit shall be deemed a violation of subsection (a) of this section, and
shall subject the person operating the alarm system without a permit to late fees and reinstatement fees as set forth in the
alarm systems fee schedule in section 3.19.010 herein. The foregoing notwithstanding, no permit shall be deemed expired
unless and until the alarm permit administrator has sent thirty (30) days notice to the alarm user of the obligation of the alarm
user to renew the alarm permit on the one (1) year anniversary date of the initial issuance of the permit.
(f) Duty of permittee to update information. Should any change occur in any of the information required by subsection (d)
(2) herein during the term of the permit, the permittee shall, within ten (10) days of the change of such information on the
permit application, be kept current at all times. Violation of this subsection may result in class C misdemeanor charges and/or
suspension of the permit.
(g) Permits nontransferrable. No alarm permit shall be transferable to any other person, firm, corporation or entity. New
owners/tenants must apply for new alarm permit within ten (10) days of occupancy or control of property.
(h) Confidentiality. Information furnished to the city in all permit applications or by an alarm user regarding the alarm
system shall be considered confidential and not subject to public disclosure unless required by law.
Sec. 3.19.004 Operating requirements
(a) Permittees or their designated service representative shall adjust or modify sensory mechanisms to suppress false
indications of force so that the alarm system will not be activated due to transient pressure changes in water pipes, flashes of
light, wind noise caused by rattling of windows or doors, vehicular noise, electrical power fluctuations, acts of nature or other
forces unrelated to an actual emergency.
(b) The alarm system shall be adjusted to allow for a total of no more than five (5) minutes of sound after activation, if the
alarm was activated due to a false alarm.
(c) Permittees or an authorized representative shall be required to arrive at the alarm site within sixty (60) minutes after
being notified by the alarm company or the police/fire communications center of alarm activation. Failure to respond as
required shall result in a letter of warning from the chief of police or designee on the first occasion of nonresponse. A second
failure to respond may result in suspension of the alarm permit until the permit holder satisfactorily completes the
requirements for reinstatement set forth in section 3.19.009 herein.
(d) Posting of permit identification decal. Each permittee shall conspicuously post the city alarm permit identification decal
in a window or door facing the street or viewable from the front of the structure.
Sec. 3.19.005 Service fee for false alarms
(a) At the time of permit renewal as required in section 3.19.003(e), the alarm administrator shall review the permittee's
permit records and assess a service fee (as set forth in the alarm systems fee schedule in section 3.19.010 herein) for the
city's response to false alarms that occurred at an alarm site during the preceding permit year.
(b) Failure to pay a service fee as required in this section within thirty (30) days of billing shall subject the permittee to the
penalties prescribed in section 3.19.011 and may result in suspension of the permit.
(c) The police officer or department designee assigned to respond to an alarm site shall make the initial determination as
to whether or not an alarm notification is a false alarm as defined by this article. The officer will prepare a report for the chief
of police or his representative. Should the initial decision be appealed, the chief of police or his representative shall make the
final decision of whether any alarm notification was a false alarm.
Sec. 3.19.006 Reporting
(a) Businesses that monitor and relay alarm notifications to the police/fire communications center shall be licensed by the
state private security bureau as provided by state law. The relay of such alarm notification shall be by a human operator on a
telephone line designated by the chief of police or his designee.
(b) No alarm system shall be permitted to have a direct connection from the alarm site to the city police/fire
communications center.
Sec. 3.19.007 Suspension; offense
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/598
(a) The alarm administrator may suspend any permit upon the occurrence of any of the following conditions:
(1) The alarm applicant or user provides false information in or in connection with the alarm permit application;
(2) The alarm user has failed to renew the alarm permit after thirty (30) days written notice from the alarm
administrator;
(3) If the alarm site has eight (8) or more false alarms during the alarm permit year;
(4) If permit fees are not timely paid; and
(5) If any false alarm fines or service fees are more than sixty (60) days past due.
(b) The alarm user may appeal the suspension of an alarm permit in accordance with the provisions of appeal set forth in
section 3.19.008 herein.
(c) The alarm administrator will notify the alarm user in writing by regular mail thirty (30) calendar days prior to the effective
date an alarm permit has been suspended and the reason for the suspension. The notice of suspension may also include the
amount of the fine or service fee associated with the false alarms, if applicable.
(d) A person commits an offense punishable by a fine as set forth in section 1.01.009 of this code if he/she operates an
alarm system during the period in which the alarm permit is suspended.
Sec. 3.19.008 Appeals
(a) If the alarm administrator assesses a fee or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm permit, the
alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right of appeal to the applicant or the alarm
user.
(b) The alarm user may appeal an assessment of a fee or the suspension of the alarm permit to the alarm administrator
within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of the notice sent to the user regarding the suspension. The appeal request by
the user must be made in writing and given to the alarm administrator within fourteen (14) calendar days of the notice of
suspension letter setting forth the reason for the appeal and by submitting a certified check in the amount of $25.00 payable
to the city to cover the cost of processing the appeal. The payment for the cost of the appeal will not be refunded.
(c) Within fourteen (14) calendar days of the request for the appeal, the designated hearing officer for the police
department will contact the alarm user and the alarm administrator to schedule the appeal hearing. The hearing administrator
will hear the appeal and facts as presented by the appellant and alarm administrator, affording both parties a reasonable and
equal amount of time for the presentation of facts, evidence and questioning. Within ten (10) business days of the hearing,
the hearing administrator shall render a final, written decision affirming or reversing the decision of the alarm administrator.
Such written decision will be filed with the alarm permit.
(d) Filing a notice of appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator suspending an alarm or requiring payment of a
fine until the hearing administrator hears the appeal. If an appeal is not requested to the alarm administrator or hearing officer
within fourteen (14) calendar days of notice of suspension, the action of the alarm administrator is final.
Sec. 3.19.009 Reinstatement
(a) An applicant for an initial permit or an alarm user whose alarm permit application has been denied or suspended may
be issued a new alarm permit if the person:
(1) Submits a new alarm permit application to the alarm administrator;
(2) Pays a reinstatement fee as set forth in the alarm systems fee schedule in section 3.19.010 herein prior to
reissuance of the permit;
(3) Pays all outstanding late fees and/or false alarm service fees assessed under this article for which a bill has
been issued;
(4) Pays or otherwise resolves all citations in municipal court issued to the person under this article, and
(5) Submits documentation to the alarm permit administrator stating that the permit holder has performed all
necessary repairs or adjustments required by the city, and has complied with all provisions of this article.
(b) Reissuance of the permit runs from the time it is reissued until the permit's renewal date, unless suspended again.
Sec. 3.19.010 Alarm systems fee schedule
The following alarm systems fee schedule is hereby adopted in relation to fees assessed according to this article:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/598
Alarm Systems Fee Schedule
Effective Fee Amount
Fee Type
Initial permit fee $25.00
Annual renewal fee $25.00
Reinstatement fee $100.00
Service Fee (based on number of false
alarms in preceding 12-month period)
0–3 false alarms No fee
4–5 false alarms $50.00
6–7 false alarms $75.00
8 or more false alarms $100.00
Sec. 3.19.011 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article as amended hereby shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine as provided in section 1.01.009
for each offense, and every day shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2015-16, sec. 1, adopted 7/28/15)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 4.02 VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Sec. 4.02.001 Scope of article
(a) This article governs the operation of all vehicle for hire services in the corporate limits of the city.
(b) This article does not apply to a vehicle for hire service or to a person operating a vehicle for hire service that is:
(1) Transporting a person from a point outside the corporate limits of the city to a destination inside the
corporate limits of the city if the vehicle for hire leaves the corporate limits of the city without receiving a new
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/598
passenger inside the corporate limits of the city and the vehicle for hire service is licensed by another
governmental entity;
(2) Operated under state or federal authority unless subject to the city's regulatory authority; or
(3) Operated by a funeral home in the performance of funeral services.
Sec. 4.02.002 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
Chief of police. The chief of police of the city or designee.
City. The City of Midlothian.
City council. The governing body of the city.
Compliance certification. A sworn and notarized certification signed by an applicant for an operating license or a licensee.
Driver. Any individual who drives or operates a vehicle for hire in the corporate limits of the city to provide vehicle for hire
services.
Hailable service. A motorized vehicle for hire service that can be immediately summoned by a passenger communicating in
person with the driver of the vehicle.
Licensee. A person, association or corporation that is licensed to operate a vehicle for hire service under this article.
Motorized vehicle for hire. Every vehicle for hire that is self-propelled.
Operating license. A license issued by the city authorizing a vehicle for hire service to operate within the corporate limits of
the city.
Person. An individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision, agency, trust, partnership, or two or more
persons having joint or common economic interest.
(Ordinance 2016-37 adopted 10/25/16)
Street. Any street, alley, lane, right-of-way or highway within the corporate limits of the city.
Substantially similar ownership. Any business entity that is owned or controlled by 51% or more of the same persons who
own or control another business entity.
(Ordinance 2017-01 adopted 1/10/17)
Taximeter. A device that mechanically or electronically computes and registers in dollars and cents for viewing by the
passenger, the fare based upon the distance traveled, the time the vehicle for hire is engaged, or any other basis for charges
which are specified in the rates of fares set by the city council for hailable vehicle for hire services. (Ordinance 2016-37
adopted 10/25/16)
Vehicle. A device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a public street within the corporate limits of
the city. (Ordinance 2017-01 adopted 1/10/17)
Vehicle for hire. Every motorized vehicle that is chauffeured that transports passengers over city streets for a fare or
compensation. The term vehicle for hire shall not include:
(1) Vehicles operated by a transportation authority or transit authority in accordance with state or federal law;
(2) Vehicles involved in an organized car pool not available to the general public;
(3) A vehicle being operated pursuant to a franchise, grant of privilege or permit issued by the city under its
authority outside of this article; or pursuant to permission duly granted by proper authority of the city under its
authority outside of this article for a vehicle to operate over a regular route upon a set schedule; a vehicle being
operated as a chartered bus not available to the general public and under a contract to carry 12 or more
passengers; or any vehicle that is not available to the general public;
(4) Vehicles being used as ambulances; or
(5) Vehicles rented or leased for self-operation by the person who drives the vehicle, unless such a vehicle is
transporting persons for compensation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/598
Vehicle for hire service. The business of offering transportation to customers in one or more vehicles for hire in exchange for
a fee or compensation.
Sec. 4.02.003 Operating licenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to drive or operate a vehicle for hire in the corporate limits of the city unless the driver
and vehicle for hire are operating under a valid operation license.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person to employ, permit or allow another to drive, operate or cause to be operated any vehicle
for hire in the corporate limits of the city unless that person is a licensee in possession of a valid operation license.
(c) Any person desiring to operate a vehicle for hire service in the corporate limits of the city shall submit an application for
an operation license on a form provided by the chief of police. The applicant must be the person who will own, control, or
operate the proposed vehicle for hire service. No application shall be considered for approval unless it meets all the
requirements of this article. Each application must contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, if a natural person, or, if a corporation, its name, date and place of
incorporation, address of its principal place of business and the names of all its officers and directors together with
their respective business addresses, as well as a copy of the articles of incorporation, the trade name, if any,
under which the applicant proposes to operate and the address of the place or places of business from which the
applicant proposes to operate;
(2) A nonrefundable operation license fee must be submitted with the application; and
(3) The compliance certification required by this article.
(d) Upon receipt of a completed application for an operation license in compliance with this article and payment of the
required fee, the chief of police shall issue an operation license to the applicant, unless the application is prohibited by this
article from receiving an operation license.
(e) An operation license shall commence on the date of issuance and shall expire two (2) years from the date of issuance.
A licensee shall apply for a new operation license at least thirty days (30) prior to the expiration date of the operation license.
Sec. 4.02.004 Compliance certification
(a) A compliance certification shall be submitted to the chief of police with each application for an operation license and
one (1) year after the issuance of each operation license.
(b) A compliance certification shall contain the following language:
(1) I certify that within the past sixty (60) days, the undersigned has conducted a national criminal background
and driver's license check on each driver who will operate a vehicle for hire under the operation license.
(2) I certify that the undersigned will conduct a national criminal background and driver's license check before
allowing any new driver to operate a vehicle for hire under the operation license who has become associated with
the undersigned since the last compliance certification.
(3) I certify that the undersigned shall not allow any person to operate a vehicle for hire under the operation
license if the person does not meet the qualifications of section 4.02.009.
(4) I certify that within the past sixty (60) days the undersigned has verified that all vehicles that will operate as
a vehicle for hire under the operation license are covered by an insurance policy that meets the requirements of
section 4.02.008 and comply with the vehicle inspection and emission testing requirements of the state.
(5) I certify that before allowing any new vehicle to operate as a vehicle for hire under the operation license that
has become associated with the undersigned since the last compliance certification, the undersigned shall verify
that the vehicle is covered by an insurance policy that meets the requirements of section 4.02.008 and complies
with the vehicle inspection and emission testing requirements of the state.
(6) I certify that the undersigned shall not allow any vehicle to operate as a vehicle for hire under the operation
license if the vehicle is not covered by an insurance policy that meets the requirements of section 4.02.008, or the
vehicle does not comply with the vehicle inspection and emission testing requirements of the state.
(7) I hereby certify that the undersigned shall comply with all requirements of section 4.02.008 and federal,
state and municipal laws in providing vehicle for hire services in the corporate limits of the city.
(c) A licensee commits an offense and the operation license is subject to revocation in accordance with the provisions of
this article if the licensee knowingly fails to submit a compliance certification to the chief of police one (1) year after the
issuance of an operation license.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/598
Sec. 4.02.005 Revocation of operating license
(a) Prior to revocation of an operation license, the chief of police shall send the licensee written notice of any violation by
certified mail, return receipt requested. A licensee shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of a written notice of a violation to
provide written proof to the chief of police that the licensee did not violate this article as set forth in subsection (b). Failure of
the licensee to submit a written response to the chief of police as required by this subsection shall result in revocation of the
operation license.
(b) The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a licensee's operation license if a licensee:
(1) Fails to submit a compliance certification as required by this article;
(2) Fails to perform a national background check and driver's license check as required by this article;
(3) Fails to verify that a vehicle is covered by an insurance policy and meets the state requirements for vehicle
inspection and emission testing as required by this article; or
(4) Knowingly allows a driver or vehicle to operate in violation of this article.
(c) An operation license that is revoked shall be of no force and effect from and after the date of revocation.
(d) A licensee whose operation license is revoked in accordance with this article will not be granted an operation license
before the expiration of twenty-four months (24) from the date of revocation.
(e) A business entity that has substantially similar ownership to a licensee whose operation license has been revoked in
accordance with this article, will not be granted an operation license before the expiration of twenty-four (24) months from the
date of revocation.
Sec. 4.02.006 Fees
(a) The city council shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees applicable to this article which shall be on file in the city
secretary's office.
(b) Each licensee shall pay the operation license fee as approved by city council before the issuance of an operation
license. Fees may be prorated for any partial period for which an operation license is issued. The chief of police shall provide
each licensee with written notice of the due date for any prorated fees. A licensee shall pay the prorated fees by the due
date.
Sec. 4.02.007 Compliance with federal, state and municipal law
Licensees and drivers shall comply with all federal, state and municipal laws while providing vehicle for hire services.
Sec. 4.02.008 Insurance requirements
(a) Vehicles for hire that are subject to chapter 1954 of the Texas Insurance Code must comply with the requirements of
that chapter at all times.
(b) Vehicles for hire that are not subject to chapter 1954 of the Texas Insurance Code must provide and maintain at all
times insurance coverage that meets the minimum requirements of chapter 1954 of the Texas Insurance Code, or the
requirements set forth in subsection (c).
(c) A vehicle for hire that is not subject to chapter 1954 of the Texas Insurance Code or elects to not maintain the
insurance coverage meeting the requirements of chapter 1954 of the Texas Insurance Code, shall have in force, twenty-four
(24) hours, seven days a week the amount and character of insurance coverage for vehicles for hire as required by this
subsection.
(1) The minimum insurance required under this subsection must:
(A) Be obtained from a carrier that is admitted and licensed to transact insurance in the state or an eligible
surplus lines insurer authorized under the laws of the state;
(B) Be written on an occurrence basis;
(C) Cover the vehicle for hire and any driver of the vehicle for hire;
(D) Name the city as an additional primary insured;
(E) Provide minimum coverage in an amount no less than $500,000.00 combined single limit liability
(CSL) per occurrence;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/598
(F) Provide that all claims will be paid on a first dollar basis by the insurance provider;
(G) Not be obtained from an assigned risk pool; and
(H) Not contain policy exclusions that would change or limit coverage for passengers entering or exiting
the vehicle.
(2) All liability insurance coverage must include a rider that provides that at all levels of coverage there must be
notification to the city in writing not less than 30 days before canceling or making a material change in the policy.
(3) A driver or licensee of a vehicle for hire shall not have operational control in any insurance company
providing coverage to a vehicle for hire utilized by the driver or licensee.
Sec. 4.02.009 Driver qualifications
(a) To qualify as a driver, a person must:
(1) Hold a valid driver's license or operator's license issued by any state of the United States, Washington D.C.,
or any territory of the United States;
(2) Not be under indictment, have charges pending, have been convicted, or have been placed on probation or
deferred adjudication for the following offenses:
(A) Criminal homicide as described in Texas Penal Code chapter 19;
(B) Aggravated kidnapping as described in Texas Penal Code section 20.04;
(C) An offense involving trafficking of persons as described in Texas Penal Code chapter 20A;
(D) Continuous sexual abuse of a young child or children as described in Texas Penal Code section
21.02;
(E) Indecency with a child as described in Texas Penal Code section 21.11;
(F) Improper relationship between educator and student as described in Texas Penal Code section 21.12;
(G) Sexual assault as described in Texas Penal Code section 22.011;
(H) Aggravated sexual assault as described in Texas Penal Code section 22.021;
(I) Sale or purchase of a child as described in Texas Penal Code section 25.08;
(J) Aggravated robbery as described in Texas Penal Code section 29.03;
(K) Sexual performance by a child as described in Texas Penal Code section 43.25;
(L) Employment harmful to children as described in Texas Penal Code section 43.251;
(M) Possession or promotion of child pornography as described in Texas Penal Code section 43.26;
(N) Electronic transmission of certain visual material depicting a minor as described in Texas Penal Code
section 43.261;
(O) Intoxication manslaughter as described in Texas Penal Code section 49.08;
(P) Criminal attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit any offense described in subsections (a)(2)(A)–
(a)(2)(O); and
(Q) An offense under the laws of another state, federal law or another country in which the elements of the
offense under the laws of that state, federal law or country are substantially similar to the elements of an
offense listed in subsections (a)(2)(A)–(a)(2)(P);
(3) Except as provided by subsection (2), not be under indictment, have charges pending or within the previous
seven (7) years have been convicted of, released or discharged from probation, parole or deferred adjudication for
any felony offense as defined by the laws of this state, another state, federal law or the law of another country;
(4) Except for an offense described by the Texas Transportation Code that is designated as a class C
misdemeanor or the law of another state in which the elements of the offense are substantially similar to an
offense in the Texas Transportation Code that is designated as a class C misdemeanor, not be under indictment,
have charges pending or within the previous three (3) years have been convicted of, released or discharged from
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/598
probation, parole or deferred adjudication for any misdemeanor offense as defined by the laws of this state,
another state, federal law or the laws of another country;
(5) Within the previous three (3) years, not have been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication or
deferred disposition for an offense involving the operation of a motor vehicle at a speed exceeding one hundred
(100) miles per hour;
(6) In any ten (10) year period, not have been convicted of or placed on probation or deferred adjudication for
three (3) or more offenses in which the elements of the offense involve the operation of a motor vehicle, boat, or
aircraft while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol;
(7) Not be required to register as a sexual offender under the laws of this state, another state, federal law or the
laws of another country; and
(8) Not have been convicted of, or placed on deferred adjudication or deferred disposition within the previous
three (3) years for more than three (3) moving traffic violations arising out of separate transactions within any
twelve (12) month period.
(b) A driver shall not operate a vehicle for hire for the purpose of providing vehicle for hire services if the driver does not
meet the driver qualifications in this section.
(c) A licensee shall not intentionally, knowingly or recklessly allow a person to operate a vehicle for hire to provide vehicle
for hire services if the person does not meet the driver qualifications in this section.
Sec. 4.02.010 Inspection of records
(a) The city may make a written request to a licensee to inspect the licensee's records relating to a driver or the licensee if
the city receives a complaint or information that a driver or licensee does not meet the requirements of this article.
(b) A licensee shall make the requested records available for inspection by the city at a location within the corporate limits
of the city, within ten (10) calendar days of the licensee receiving a written request from the city.
(Ordinance 2016-37 adopted 10/25/16)
Sec. 4.02.011 Requirements for hailable service
No person shall provide hailable service unless the name of the licensee is permanently displayed on the outside of the rear
door or front door, in letters not less than two and one-half inches in height and not less than five-sixteenths inch wide.
(Ordinance 2017-01 adopted 1/10/17)
Sec. 4.02.012 Council to fix rates; schedule; display
(a) The city council shall have the power to fix the rates, charges and fares of all taxicabs operating within the city.
(b) The city council may authorize permittees to implement new rate schedules under the following provisions:
(1) Taxicab companies may propose their own rates by providing a copy of the proposed rate schedule and the
proposed effective date to the city secretary at least thirty (30) days prior to the proposed date of said rates being
placed into effect, which rates shall then be forwarded to the city council for approval. The city council may accept
the proposed rates, refuse said rates, or set such rates as it may see fit and proper.
(2) Each taxicab permittee may operate under its own rate schedule in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection.
(3) There shall be posted at all times in each operating taxicab within the city limits of the city, a zoned map of
the city (if applicable) and a rate charge.
(c) Permittees may follow the rate schedule adopted by the City of Dallas, Texas, or the City of Fort Worth, Texas, as an
alternative to subsection (b)(1).
Sec. 4.02.013 Criminal penalties
(a) A violation of any provision of this article is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each
separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) If an offense defined under this article does not include a culpable mental state, then a culpable mental state is not an
element of the offense and the offense shall be one of strict liability.
(c) The issuance of a citation shall not limit the chief of police's authority to revoke an operation license or the city's ability
to pursue civil remedies as provided by state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/598
(Ordinance 2016-37 adopted 10/25/16)
ARTICLE 4.03 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS*
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
Charitable purpose. Philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugee or
handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans'
association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civic organization, service organization, fundraiser or the
benefit of any educational institution. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include any direct benefit to the individual
making the commercial home solicitation, to include the benefit of any political group or political organization which is subject
to financial disclosure under state or federal law.
Commercial home distribution or distribute. The door-to-door distribution of advertisements or handbills (other than through
the United States mail).
Commercial home solicitation or soliciting. The solicitation at a residence through the attempt or act of asking, bartering, or
communicating in any manner for the purpose of selling or offering to sell goods, services, or realty for a for-profit purpose
which includes promoting, advertising, receiving or obtaining money, gifts or items of value for said individual or group of
individuals, or for-profit organization, club, company, corporation.
Dusk. 30 minutes before sunset.
Handbill. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed
or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature.
Handbill distributor. Any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of distributing handbills, other than
newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the
distribution of such handbills.
Handbill sponsor. Any person, firm or corporation who utilizes handbills as a medium of advertising or spreading a message.
Itinerant operations. Refer to the conduct of business operations at one or more locations or properties throughout the day,
provided that the mobile food vendor does not remain or linger at any particular property or location for longer than 30
minutes.
Itinerant vendor. Any person who sets up and operates a temporary business on privately owned property, whether improved
or unimproved, in the city, soliciting, selling, or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for any goods or services.
Mobile food vendors. Any person who operates a vehicle on the streets of the city for the purposes of soliciting sales of hot or
cold food, either made or produced at the time of the sale, or prepackaged and wrapped in a covering.
Mobile frozen dairy food vendors. Any person who operates a vehicle on the streets of the city for the purposes of soliciting
sales of frozen dairy food, either made or produced at the time of the sale, or prepackaged and wrapped in a covering.
Mobile ice cream truck. A mobile food unit that operates from a motor vehicle and sells only prepackaged, single-portion, ice
cream or frozen confections.
Peddler. Any person traveling by foot, wagon, vehicle or any other type of conveyance from street to street carrying,
conveying, or transporting goods, wares or merchandise and offering or exposing them for sale, or making sales and
delivering articles to purchasers; or who, without traveling from place to place, exhibits, displays, sells, or offers for sale such
products from a wagon, handcart, pushcart, motor vehicle, conveyance or from his person while on the public ways of the
city. A peddler also includes any street vendor, itinerant vendor or transient vendor.
Public right-of-way. For the purposes of this article shall mean a legally established area or strip of land, either public or
private, on which an irrevocable rite of passage has been recorded, and which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, utility service, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or other similar use. Right-of-way also includes the travel
portion of the roadway and all traffic medians.
Pushcart food vendors. Any person who operates a pushcarts on the streets or sidewalks of the city for the purposes of
soliciting sales of frozen dairy food, either made or produced at the time of the sale, or prepackaged and wrapped in a
covering.
Residential street. A thoroughfare or public driveway, other than an alley, not on the city's master thoroughfare plan, which
has been dedicated or deeded to the public for general use and affords a principal means of vehicular or other access to
property abutting thereon.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/598
Seasonal business. One that continues for less than 180 days permitted on city property (i.e. farmers market, city park
concession stands, etc.) and, exists whether solicitation is from a stand, vehicle, or freestanding. Any business that exists
more than 180 days shall be deemed to be a permanent occupancy and is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy from
the building inspection department.
Temporary business. One that continues for 45 days or less; and, exists whether solicitation is from a stand, vehicle, or
freestanding. Any business that exists more than 45 days shall be deemed to be a permanent occupancy and is required to
obtain a certificate of occupancy from the building inspection department.
Transient vendor. Vendors who sell items for a limited time and have no permanent place of business at that location.
Examples of places where transient vendor sales may take place are at fairs, bazaars, flea markets, art or craft shows, or
concerts.
Sec. 4.03.002 Duty of police to enforce
It shall be the duty of any police officer or other designee of the chief of police, to require any person observed soliciting,
vending, distributing handbills, mobile vending to enforce the provisions of this article to include the requirement of licensing
and permitting and all other requirements of the article.
Sec. 4.03.003 Investigation of applicant
In addition to all permit fees, each applicant for any type of permit in this article shall pay a nonrefundable fee of $20.00 to
cover the cost of conducting a criminal background check on the applicant(s). It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his
designee to investigate each applicant for a permit under this article before issuance of such a permit based on a review of
the applicant's background.
Sec. 4.03.004 Records
The chief of police or designee shall maintain records of all permits and licenses applied for, issued, revoked or denied in
addition to any complaints against vendors in accordance with applicable laws.
Sec. 4.03.005 Permit application/issuance; permit fees and renewals
If the applicant passes the required background check a solicitor's permit may be applied for. Each applicant is required to
pay a $50.00 nonrefundable application fee. If a permit is issued, the approved applicant is required to pay a permit fee of
$75.00 per person. Permit(s) granted under this article shall be valid only until the termination of the solicitation period
specified in the permit or for 60 days, whichever is less, but may be renewed once for an additional 60 days, if made within
the initial 60-day period of the original permit. Each application for renewal must verify permit information as correct. A permit
renewal application shall be $50.00 if submitted within 60 days of the original application. If permit is not renewed within first
60 days of original application date, a new permit must be taken out to include the nonrefundable application fee.
Sec. 4.03.006 Permit issuance denial and/or revocation
(a) The chief of police or his designee may issue the applicant a commercial home solicitation, commercial home
distribution, mobile or itinerant vendor permit if the chief or designee determines that the application has been fully and
accurately completed, the applicant passes the background check, the permit application fees have been paid, and that the
applicant has satisfied each requirement of this article. If not, the chief or designee may deny the permit.
(b) A commercial home solicitation, commercial home distribution, mobile or itinerant vendor permit may be revoked if the
chief of police or designee so determines that reasonable cause exists to believe that:
(1) A statement of fact contained in the application was false or materially misleading;
(2) The permit holder has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article;
(3) Any of the conditions of this article is, or has become applicable to the permit holder; or
(4) The permit holder has engaged in a commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution that
involves the use of false, misleading, fraudulent, or deceptive acts.
(c) The chief of police or his designee shall provide notice of the revocation by certified mail, personal service, or courier
receipted commercial delivery sent to the address provided on the permit holder's application. A permit will not be issued if
there is an affirmative statement as to whether the applicant has ever been:
(1) Convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a misdemeanor involving fraud, theft, embezzlement, burglary,
fraudulent conversion, or misappropriation of property within the preceding ten years, or convicted of or pleaded
nolo contendere to any felony;
(2) Found liable in a civil or administrative action in which the complaint or petition alleged fraud, theft,
embezzlement, fraudulent conversion, misappropriation of property, or the use of untrue or misleading
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/598
representations in an attempt to sell or dispose of property or to obtain money or a thing of value from another;
(3) Found liable under any law regarding the use of unfair, unlawful, or deceptive business practices; or subject
to an injunction or restrictive court order relating to business activity as the result of an action brought by a federal,
state, or local public agency, including an action affecting a vocational license; or
(4) For cause as determined by chief of police or designee.
(d) No fees will be refunded as result of denial or revocation of permit.
Sec. 4.03.007 Appeal
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or designee in the denial or revocation of a permit as provided by
the article shall have the right of appeal to the designated hearing officer. Such appeal shall be requested in writing by the
aggrieved party within 14 calendar days of denial or revocation. The hearing officer shall set the time and place for the
hearing of the appeal and notice of the hearing shall be given to the aggrieved no less than 10 calendar days before the
hearing. The decision of the hearing officer is final.
Sec. 4.03.008 Application process
Application for permits for commercial home solicitation, handbill distribution, canvassers, commercial home distribution,
group distribution and itinerant and mobile vending.
(1) A person or organization seeking a permit for the purpose of conducting home solicitation, handbill
distribution, group distribution, itinerant and mobile vending shall file an application with the city's police
department. The application shall contain the following information:
(A) The full and legally recognized names and any associated aliases, logos, nicknames, and abbreviated
names of the entity or person applying for a permit to solicit;
(B) Whether the person applying is an individual, partnership, corporation or association, and:
(i) The business or residence address and telephone number of the applicant;
(ii) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone
number of each partner;
(iii) If a corporation, the person applying shall state whether it is organized under the laws of this
state, another state or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business location,
telephone number, name of the individual in charge of such corporation, and, if a foreign corporation,
the place of incorporation;
(iv) If an association, the application shall show the association's principal business address and
telephone number, if any, and shall show names and principal business or residence addresses and
telephone numbers of all members of the association unless they exceed ten in number, in which case
the application shall so state and the person registering may alternatively list the name and principal
business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and directors or trustees of the
association;
(v) If the association is a part of a multistate organization or association, the mailing address and
business location of its central office shall be given, in addition to the mailing address and business
location of its local office.
(C) The names, mailing address and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct charge or
control of the solicitation;
(D) The time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of
solicitation and its projected conclusion and the specific location(s);
(E) A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation is to be accomplished;
(F) The type of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or the nature of the services to be furnished;
(G) Whether such applicant, upon any such order so obtained, will demand, accept or receive payment or
deposit of money in advance of final delivery;
(H) The names of any cities where the applicant has worked in the previous 365 days;
(I) Two full-face photographs of each applicant, two inches square;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/598
(J) A copy of a valid state tax sales certificate, if applicable;
(K) An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant;
(L) Any other information which the city deems necessary for the administration of this article.
(2) The application must be signed by the applicant and accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of
$50.00 per person and a permit fee of $75.00 per person if approved. Such application shall also show
satisfactory written proof of the individual's authority to represent the company.
(3) Information provided by applicant will be subject to verification by the police department.
(4) Failure to provide a complete and thorough application or falsification of any part of the application shall be
grounds for the denial or revocation of a permit.
(5) After review of the permit application and within ten business days of the receipt of the application, the chief
of police or his designee shall either issue a permit, as provided in this article, or notify the person applying that
the application does not comply with the requirements of this article, specifying why the application is incomplete
or otherwise does not comply.
(6) If the applicant is 15 years of age or less, a copy of the parental consent form required by section 51.0145 of
the Texas Labor Code and the name, address and telephone number of all persons who will be responsible for
supervising the activities of the applicant must be provided.
(7) A permit granted under this article shall be valid only until the termination of the solicitation period specified
in the permit or for 60 days, whichever is less, but may be renewed once for an additional 60 days, if made within
the initial 60-day period of the original permit. Each application for renewal must verify permit information as
correct.
(A) A permit renewal application shall be $50.00 if submitted within 60 days of the original application. If
permit is not renewed within first 60 days of original application date, a new permit must be taken out to
include the nonrefundable application fee.
Sec. 4.03.009 Group registration (applies to commercial home distribution permits only)
(a) A person may apply for a group registration applicable to five or more persons who desire to engage in commercial
home distributions. The registration application shall contain all of the information required above for each person who will be
engaging in commercial home distributions under the group registration. The application must be signed by a person
responsible for the group application and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $50.00 and an
additional permit fee of $75.00 for each person to be included under the group application.
(b) Provided that, if the applicant registers ten or more persons under a group application, the additional permit fee shall be
reduced down to $50.00 per person. The applicant for group registration shall provide each person distributing under the
applicant's registration an identification badge to be worn and displayed while the person is engaging in a commercial home
distribution. The nonrefundable application fee of $50.00 per person of the group is still required for each person.
Sec. 4.03.010 Commercial home solicitation and commercial home distribution; restrictions, requirements;
display of permit/identification; soliciting in right-of-way
(a) Commercial home solicitation and commercial home distribution on private property.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution
upon residential property within the city without first obtaining a written permit as prescribed by this article.
(2) It shall be unlawful to approach any part of a residence other than the front door.
(3) It shall be unlawful to solicit, peddle, or distribute on residential property:
(A) Prior to 9:00 a.m. or after dusk of any day Monday through Saturday, or any time on Sunday or any
other federally designated holiday; or
(B) On any day where the Department of Homeland Security has issued a formal alert regarding a specific
or credible terrorist threat resulting in an imminent or elevated threat level, the chief of police may suspend
any commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution activities until such time that the threat
level is rescinded;
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person, handbill distributors, or commercial home solicitors to distribute or cause
to be distributed, deposited, placed, thrown, scattered, or cast any handbill upon any residential property except, if
person distributing handbills has a valid solicitor permit issued through the city, permit holder may:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/598
(A) By handling or transmitting such handbill directly to the owner or occupant then present in or upon
such private premises; or
(B) By placing or depositing the same in a manner to secure and prevent such handbill from being blown
or drifting about such premises, except that mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by federal postal
laws or regulations.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed, deposited, placed, thrown,
scattered or cast any handbill upon any residential property or to go upon any residential premises for the purpose
of commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution and ring the doorbell, knock upon the door or
create any sound for the purpose of attracting the attention of the occupants of the residence if:
(A) Requested by anyone thereon not to do so; or
(B) If there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the
residence, a weatherproof sign, not less than three inches by four inches in size bearing the words “no
trespassing,” “no peddlers,” “no advertisements,” “no solicitation,” “no handbills,” or any similar notice
indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to have any such handbills left
upon their premises. The letters on such signs shall be not less than two-thirds of an inch in height.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to employ, use or otherwise put into service a child who is 15 years of age
or less to engage in a commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution unless the child is soliciting
or distributing within 1,000 feet of the child's home or the child is actively supervised by an adult at least 18 years
of age who is within 100 feet of the child or who has written consent from a parent or legal guardian for a
charitable purpose.
(7) No person shall leave any unsolicited pamphlet, unsolicited brochure, unsolicited flyer, unsolicited package
or unsolicited printed advertisement at a residence at a place further than five feet from the front door of the
residence.
This section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or invitation made by the occupant, invitation of
the owner of the property or a person residing on the premises.
(b) Display of identification.
(1) The person(s) in charge of conducting commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution shall
ensure that each and every commercial home solicitors or commercial home distributors involved possess a valid
solicitor's permit on their person, photo identification, such as a valid driver license or other valid governmental or
city identification that correctly identifies whom the solicitor/distributor is and for whom the solicitor/distributor is
working.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any commercial home solicitors or commercial home distributors to fail or refuse to
show or display such identification upon the request of any person.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any commercial home solicitors or commercial home distributors to engage in
commercial home solicitation or commercial home distribution without having a copy of the permit in their
possession, except that where the person who will be peddling or soliciting is 15 years of age or less. Such
person shall be supervised by a person who is over the age of 18 years of age and who shall obtain a license on
behalf of the person to be supervised.
(4) The permit holder must ensure that the permit is properly displayed while conducting peddling, commercial
home solicitation or commercial home distribution activities. Properly displayed shall mean attached or hung so
that the permit is clearly visible to the public and law enforcement officials.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct themselves as a commercial home distributor without wearing
an orange traffic safety vest.
(c) Solicitation in selected public right-of-way.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or to distribute handbills on, in, upon, or around any city rights-ofway,
with or without a permit.
(2) Employees of the city are hereby exempt from the provisions of subsection (1) above provided approval is
first obtained from the city manager, chief of police or their designee.
(d) Solicitation for purposes not set out in the application. It shall be unlawful for any commercial home solicitor to solicit for
a purpose other than that set out in the application upon which the permit was issued.
Sec. 4.03.011 Refusal to leave premises
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/598
Any peddler, vendor, distributor who enters upon premises owned or leased by another and willfully refuses to leave said
premises after having been notified by the owner or possessor of said premises or his agent to leave the same shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
Sec. 4.03.012 Additional insurance, requirements safety provisions and additional permits required for itinerant
vendors and mobile food vendors
(a) General.
(1) It shall be unlawful to operate a mobile ice cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor, hot or cold food truck or
pushcart vendor or other itinerant street vendor vehicle in the city, and no person who owns or controls an ice
cream truck or itinerant street vendor vehicle shall permit it to be so operated at any time, unless the driver and
employee or worker on the truck of said vehicle shall have first obtained and shall then have in force an itinerant
street or solicitor's vendor permit issued under the provisions of this article. All persons operating as a mobile food
vendor must also have an applicable, valid city food permit.
(2) All permits shall be for specific time periods, dates and locations.
(3) Mobile frozen dairy vendors, mobile ice cream trucks, hot or cold food truck, pushcart vendor or other
itinerant vendor vehicles are permitted to vend in an area for a short period of time and move to multiple other
locations providing they do not remain at a location for more than 30 minutes without specific approval as
contained in the permit.
(4) Mobile food vendors may operate no earlier than 8:00 a.m. to dusk, Monday through Friday and no earlier
than noon to dusk on Saturday and Sunday. Sound equipment must be limited to music or human speech and can
only be used between 11:00 a.m. and dusk each day.
(5) Sound may not be broadcast within 100 yards of schools, hospitals, churches, courthouses, funeral homes,
or cemeteries and shall meet all noise nuisance provisions contained in this code. Music must be played at a
reasonably low volume while the unit is stopped for vending. If the unit is stopped for vending for more than ten
minutes, then music shall be turned off.
(6) A sign or decal that is visible at all times with the business address and telephone number of the business
permit holder printed on the side of the vehicle in letters of not less than two inches in height. A city annual mobile
food vendor permit sticker must be affixed to the windshield or back glass of the vehicle. Permit must be affixed to
the pushcart in an approved location on the cart. Each mobile vehicle must have a separately issued permit
approved and assigned for that individual food unit.
(7) Vehicles must be in good condition and have a current safety inspection sticker from the state department of
motor vehicles. All vehicle owners must have valid insurance.
(8) All itinerant vendors shall comply with all provisions of the city's planning and zoning department
(development services). Any itinerant vendor seeking to locate at a stationary point for more than 30 minutes must
also obtain a temporary use permit from the city.
(b) Safety equipment for ice cream trucks or other vehicles vending food products to children.
(1) Signs stating “watch for children” or “slow children crossing” must be posted on the front, back and both
sides of the vehicle in at least four-inch letters of contrasting colors in distinctive lettering which is visible at 300
feet to the front and rear in normal sunlight upon a straight, level roadway or highway. Swing arms stating “stop for
children” may be used as an option on the side of the vehicle in lieu of the signage with four-inch lettering.
(2) A serving window capable of being closed when not in use must be provided and located on the curbside
only.
(3) The vehicle must be provided with left and right outside rear view mirrors, as well as two additional outside
wide-angle mirrors on the front and back of the vehicle to enable the driver in his normal seated position to see
around the entire vehicle and see the area in front of the vehicle obscured by the hood. Rear mirrors shall not be
required if the vehicle is equipped with a no ride bumper.
(4) All vehicles must have operable four-way, yellow flashing hazard lights to warn approaching drivers of
children.
(5) A rear bumper cover or a no ride bumper must be installed to prevent children from standing or jumping on
the rear of the vehicle.
(6) A trash receptacle to dispose of all litter that is generated from products sold from the mobile ice cream
truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor, or other itinerant street vendor vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/598
(c) Annual solicitor's/food establishment permit. Mobile food vendors are required to maintain a valid annual solicitor's
permit and an annual food establishment permit to operate in the city.
(1) Every driver or person desiring a permit to conduct sales activity in the city as a mobile ice cream truck,
mobile frozen dairy vendor, pushcart vendor (whether being pushed or stationary), consumable goods or other
itinerant street vendor shall make a written application therefor to the chief of police.
(2) The application shall be made on a form approved by the chief of police, accompanied by a nonrefundable
$50.00 application fee.
(3) If the application is approved an additional $300.00 permit fee is required. Mobile food vendors and/or
pushcart vendors may apply for an annual solicitor's permit fee that is valid for up to 1 year and expires at
midnight on December 31st each year regardless of the date of issuance. The annual solicitor's permit fee is
$300.00 (plus permit fees applicable to the mobile unit as set forth in the health and sanitation ordinance and fees
established by council).
(4) Permit information includes:
(A) Name and business address and phone number of applicant;
(B) Name, address and phone number of the person, firm or corporation the applicant is representing; the
agent or service of process of a corporation and/or name and address of any owner of a business not
incorporated and the assumed name of said business filed in the index in the county of its home office, for
any business;
(C) Attached to the application shall be a certified original copy of the sales tax permit issued by the
comptroller of the state;
(D) Statement of the kind, type and character of solicitation and/or the goods that the applicant will offer
for sale, and state whether the purchaser of such wares or goods shall be required to make any deposit or
advance payment of purchase price before delivery and a complete and full statement of the delivery date;
(E) The period of time the applicant requests to sell or solicit in the city;
(F) Location or area of the city where sales activity will be conducted;
(G) List of all convictions of all felonies and misdemeanors and violations of this article of applicant and
representatives, stating the offense, city and state, the court of conviction and the punishment imposed;
(H) If sales are to be conducted from one or more stationary locations the applicant shall submit written
consent of the property owner or its authorized agent consenting to applicant's use of such private property
for sales activity indicated in the permit application; If sales are from a stationary location, appropriate
permits and approval and/or special use permit or certificate of occupancy may be required from the city's
development services and/or building inspections.
(d) Insurance requirements. Before a permit is issued by the chief of police or designee, the applicant will be required to
furnish a policy of liability insurance, in the amount of $250,000.00 per incident. This policy must include a provision that the
city will be notified within 30 days if this policy of insurance is to be cancelled for any reason.
(1) Cancellation of an insurance policy for a mobile ice cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor, frozen food, hot
or cold food truck, pushcart vendor or other itinerant street vendor shall be an automatic revocation of the permit
issued to that mobile ice cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor hot or cold food truck, or other itinerant street
vendor.
(2) Cancellation of an insurance policy for any company that operates any mobile ice cream truck, mobile
frozen dairy vendor, hot or cold food truck or pushcart vendor or other itinerant street vendor shall be an automatic
revocation of all city permits issued to all mobile ice cream trucks, hot or cold trucks or pushcart vendor, mobile
frozen dairy vendors, or other itinerant street vendors operated by that company.
(e) Vehicles must be in good condition and have a current safety inspection sticker and current license plates from the
Texas Department of Motor Vehicles.
(f) Any itinerant vendor handling or selling nonprepackaged food must also possess a current health department food
handler card or food protection manager card recognized and approved by the city's health/code/police department. Proof of
an annual health department inspection shall be provided at the time of permit application.
(g) Each driver will be given a mobile ice cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor, hot or cold food truck or other itinerant
street vendor permit number, which will be on such permit. Permit shall be posted in a prominent place in the mobile ice
cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor, or other itinerant street vendor vehicle and shall be shown to any customer, police
officer, or code enforcement officer or designee upon request.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/598
(h) A copy of the permit shall be posted in the mobile ice cream truck, mobile frozen dairy vendor, hot or cold mobile unit or
pushcart unit or other itinerant street vendor vehicle at all times.
(i) A mobile food vendor permit granted under this article shall be valid for one year - from between January 1st and
December 31 - regardless of the date of application. Permits are not transferable. Each application for renewal must verify
permit information as correct.
Sec. 4.03.013 Annual issuance; transferability
A mobile food vendor permit granted under this article shall be valid for one year - from between January 1st and December
31 - regardless of the date of application or issuance. Permits are not transferable. Each application for renewal must verify
permit information as correct. Permit renewal fees paid on or after January 1st of each year will be doubled.
Sec. 4.03.014 Exemption from permit fees and requirements
(a) The permit fees shall not be required of: charitable solicitations, religious organizations, holders of organizations that
hold a current, valid 501.c.3, service organizations or approved fundraisers, ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit
for sale goods, wares, or merchandise to persons selling and dealing in the same within the city, or individuals who file a
statement with the police department indicating their indigent status. Permit applications are still required; however, the chief
of police or designee may waive applicable fees.
(b) Exemptions to permitting requirements. The following shall be exempt from the permitting requirements of this article:
(1) Religious organizations exclusively for the distribution of literature and other items for the purpose of
proselytizing, provided that no fees are charged and no donations are solicited;
(2) Political speech;
(3) Nonprofit;
(4) The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to
persons, or their authorized representatives, who have previously established with the owners or occupants of
such private residences or property a regular business, trade, service or other contractual relationship;
(5) Any operation, which is exempted by state or federal statute from this article, is exempt only to the extent of
such applicable exemption;
(6) Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the provisions of this article, including the payment of the
permit or investigation fee shall make such a claim in writing to the chief of police citing the applicable statute or
authority, and providing proof of its applicability;
(7) During an emergency state (natural or otherwise) the permitting process may be suspended, revoked or
modified based on needs of the city. The modification to the process will be determined and authorized by the
chief of police;
(8) Mobile food vendors offering food at construction sites with applicable permits are allowed to begin service
at 6:00 a.m.
Sec. 4.03.015 Penalties
Any person violating any provision of this article or failing to observe any provisions of this article shall have their permit
revoked immediately and will not be entitled to reapply for a period of one year from the date of the revocation. In the event of
such forfeiture of permit, no part of such permit fee as may have been so paid shall be refunded to such person, and; any
person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine in a sum not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. In case of any willful violation of any of
the terms and provisions of this article, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties above provided, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding in any court having proper jurisdiction, to restrain, correct or abate such violations; and the
definition of any violation of the terms of this article as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil
remedies given it by the laws of the state, but same shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove
prescribed for such violations.
(Ordinance 2013-03 adopted 1/22/13)
ARTICLE 4.04 GARAGE SALES
Sec. 4.04.001 Definition
For the purpose of this article the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/598
Garage sale.
(1) Includes the terms “porch sale,” “yard sale,” “lawn sale,” “family sale,” “rummage sale,” “white elephant
sale,” “flea market sale,” “attic sale,” “patio sale,” “plant sale,” “sample sale,” “estate sale” or any other similar
terms, and shall mean the sale of household goods, furniture, equipment, utensils, appliances, tools, personal
clothing or effects, novelty items, glassware, farm products, or any similar personal property, by a person or
persons in the business of selling such tangible personal property.
(2) Shall not include accumulation of new merchandise or used merchandise acquired solely for the purpose of
resale.
Permit. Written approval by a code enforcement official or staff to allow garage sale.
Sec. 4.04.002 Number permitted yearly
The number of garage sales a person or household, firm, group, corporation or organization may have shall not exceed four
(4) per year, and may not be conducted more frequently than one (1) every three-month period. The duration of a garage
sale shall not exceed four (4) consecutive days for any single location or address. Sales will be tracked by address location.
A permit application shall be completed and permit fee of $5.00 will be charged prior to issuance of a permit. Garage sale
permits may be obtained at the city police department administration office located at 1150 N. Hwy 67, Midlothian Texas.
Sec. 4.04.003 Sale hours
Garage sales may begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and must conclude by 6:00 p.m.
Sec. 4.04.004 Obstruction of public rights-of-way
A garage sale shall not obstruct rights-of-way, sidewalks, walk areas, or driveways abutting on and/or in front of the property
where the sale is being conducted.
Sec. 4.04.005 General regulations
(a) Sales may only occur after permit is issued.
(b) Permits will only be issued to residents of the city.
(c) No garage sale will exceed 4 consecutive days.
(d) Bad weather, rainout or substitute dates. Once a permit has been issued it will be handled on a case-by-case basis by
the code enforcement officer.
(e) Multifamily properties (apartments complexes). In accordance with city ordinances, garage sales are limited to four per
year and the management for the complex must apply for the permit.
Sec. 4.04.006 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this article is declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person, firm, group corporation or
organization found to be guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2011-41 adopted 12/13/11)
ARTICLE 4.05 RESERVED*
ARTICLE 4.06 GAS AND OIL WELL DRILLING AND OTHER NATURAL RESOURCES*
Sec. 4.06.001 Purpose
(a) The exploration, development, and production of gas, oil/petroleum, and other natural resources in the city is an activity
which necessitates reasonable regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to
peaceably enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues.
(b) It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and
regulations for present and future operations related to the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing
of gas, oil, and other substances produced in association with gas and oil/petroleum within the city to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the public, minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, protect the
quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral resources.
Sec. 4.06.002 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/598
(a) All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of gas, oil/petroleum wells, and other
natural resources not specifically defined in this section shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent
and reasonable gas and oil industry operators.
(b) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandonment. As defined by the state railroad commission and includes the plugging of the well and the restoration of any
well site as required by this article.
Blowout preventer. A mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of
a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be closed around the drill
pipe, or other tubular goods which completely close the top of the casing and are designed for preventing blowouts.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term building shall be
construed as if followed by the words “or portions thereof.”
Cathodic protection. An electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current to the
structure that causes the structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential in the immunity
region. The required cathodic protection current is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an impressed current system.
City. The City of Midlothian, Texas.
City attorney. The city attorney of the City of Midlothian, Texas.
City code or ordinances. The codes, ordinances and regulations of the city.
Commission. The Texas Railroad Commission.
Completion of drilling, redrilling and reworking. The date the work is completed for the drilling, redrilling or reworking and the
crew is released by completing their work or contract or by their employer.
Derrick. Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure, which is required or used in connection with drilling or
reworking a well for the production of gas, oil, or other natural resources.
Drill site. The premises used during the drilling or reworking of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of a well or
wells or any associated operation.
Drilling. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing gas, oil or other hydrocarbons,
or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
Drilling equipment. The derrick, together with all parts of and appurtenances to such structure, every piece of apparatus,
machinery or equipment used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling.
Educational facility. Any public and private, primary, secondary, and collegiate educational facilities providing education and
any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the state or by the city that provides care, training, education,
custody, treatment or supervision of children under 14 years of age, and for less than 24-hours per day.
Exploration. Geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for gas and oil or other
subsurface hydrocarbons.
Fire department. The fire department of the City of Midlothian, Texas.
Gas. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which
maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or
vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas and may include other natural minerals that come out from
under the earth.
Gas and oil well drilling permit. A permit is required on all gas wells and every gas well must be located at least six hundred
(600) feet of an existing residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, educational [facility], or public park,
unless certain requirements within this article are met and the proposed well site shall be at least two (2) acres in area.
Gas well. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas.
Inspector. The gas or oil inspector designated by the city manager.
Lease. Any tract of land subject to an oil, gas, and mineral lease or other oil, gas, or other natural resource development
contract, or any unit composed of several tracts and leases but operated as one (1) lease, and any tract of land in which the
minerals are owned by an operator or someone holding under it or him, but which, due to the fee royalty ownership, is
developed and operated as a separate tract.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/598
Oil. Liquid petroleum as it comes out of the ground as distinguished from refined oils manufactured out of it. Also known as
crude petroleum oil and may include other natural minerals that come out from under the earth.
Oil well. Any well which produces one (1) barrel or more crude petroleum oil to each 100,000 cubic feet of natural gas.
Operation site. The area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with gas after drilling
activities are complete.
Operator. The person listed on the state railroad commission form W-1 or form P-4 for a gas or oil well that is, or will be,
actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without
limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under a gas or oil lease of any premises
affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is
no gas or oil lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall
be deemed an operator.
Person. A natural person, corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and
fiduciary or representative of any kind (can be singular or plural).
Public building. All buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons for such
purposes as education, deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not be
limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums,
gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, educational facilities, colleges/universities, restaurants, and
hospitals.
Public park. Any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional park-like recreational purposes, but shall
not include privately owned amusement parks or privately owned or privately managed golf courses.
Redrill. Recompletion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than one hundred fifty (150)
feet from the existing well bore.
Religious institution. Any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily
for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
Residence. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home or other building designed for dwelling
purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a gas and oil well permit
is filed with the development services department.
Reworking. Recompletion or reentry of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not extend more than
one hundred fifty (150) feet from the existing well bore.
Right-of-way. Public rights-of-way including streets, easements and other property within the city and which is dedicated to
the use and benefit of the public.
Street. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entire
right-of-way.
Tank. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of gas and oil or other
hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids.
Technical advisor. Person(s) familiar with and educated in the gas and oil industry or the law as it relates to gas matters who
may be retained from time to time by the city.
Well. A hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose of producing gas and oil, liquid
hydrocarbon, brine water or sulfur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or production of gas,
oil, and other natural resources, or other hydrocarbons from the earth.
Sec. 4.06.003 Gas and oil inspector and agent
(a) The city manager shall designate a gas and oil inspector who demonstrates a proven background in the drilling,
production, and operation of gas and oil wells.
(b) The inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and purpose of
this article and its particular provisions, including, but not limited to:
(1) The authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine
compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of
the state.
(2) Conducting periodic inspections at least once a year of all permitted wells in the city to determine that the
wells are operating in accordance within proper safety parameters as set out in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/598
(3) Requesting and receiving any records, including any records sent to the commission, logs, reports and the
like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to establish and determine compliance with
the applicable gas and oil well permit.
(c) Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive issued by the appointed inspector or permit access to
sites or provide requested material shall constitute a violation and is subject to the fines and penalties described in this
article.
(d) Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and notices
provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail.
Sec. 4.06.004 Location criteria
Per the use table located in section 4.4 of the city's zoning ordinance (Ordinance 89-13, as amended), a gas and oil well
specific use permit (SUP) is only allowed in the agricultural (A), single-family one (SF-1), residential two-and-a-half (R2.5),
residential three (R3), commercial (C), light industrial (LI), medium industrial (MI), and heavy industrial (HI) districts.
Sec. 4.06.005 Gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and associated gas and oil well drilling permit
(a) A person wanting to engage in and operate in gas or oil production activities shall first apply for a specific use permit
(SUP) and follow the procedures as stated in section 6.4 (specific use permits) of the zoning ordinance.
(1) An application for a gas and oil well drilling permit can be received and reviewed at the same time as the
required specific use permit (SUP).
(2) This permit will not be issued until the associated specific use permit (SUP) is approved by city council.
(3) This article shall provide the minimum standards by which the specific use permit (SUP) review will be
based upon; although, with the exception of maximum noise levels requirements, the associated specific use
permit (SUP) may deviate from secondary standards contained in this article (fencing, landscaping, etc.) if said
SUP standards are deemed by city council to be equivalent or superior to the standards contained in this article.
(4) One (1) specific use permit (SUP) application and approval may allow up to five (5) gas wells to be drilled on
a minimum two-acre pad site. Any additional gas wells above five (5) drilled from the same pad shall require an
additional specific use permit (SUP) application and approval.
(5) For the purposes of this article, compression stations shall only be allowed with an additional specific use
permit (SUP).
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or
servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, redrilling, fracturing or operation of any such
well or to conduct any activity related to the production of gas and oil without first obtaining a gas and oil well specific use
permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit issued by the city in accordance with this article. Such
activities include, but are not limited to redrilling, initial site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank
batteries, fracturing and pressurizing. A permit shall not be required for seismic surveys.
(c) Operator must apply for and obtain a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well
drilling permit prior to drilling, redrilling, deepening, reentering, activating or converting each well including any previously
abandoned well.
(d) The issued gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit shall constitute
sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production gathering or production maintenance, repair, reworking, testing, plugging
and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral exploration at the site of such well.
(e) Any person who intends to rework a permitted well to fracture stimulate the well after initial completion or to conduct
seismic surveys or other exploration activities shall give written notice by certified mail to the development services
department and the gas and oil inspector no less than ten (10) days before the activities begin.
(1) The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail,
including whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be
conducted and provide the address and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities.
(2) The person conducting the activities will post a sign no larger than four (4) feet by four (4) feet on the
property giving the public notice of the activities, including the name, address and 24-hour phone number of the
person conducting the activities.
(3) The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation operations performed on a well located
within six hundred (600) feet of an occupied residence:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/598
(A) At least 48 hours before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign at the entrance of
the well site advising the public of the date the operations will commence;
(B) Flowback operations to recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be performed during
daylight hours only unless the inspector approves such operations during nondaylight hours;
(C) A watchman shall be required at all times during such operations; and
(D) At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first directing the
flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank.
(f) The specific use permit (SUP) may designate up to five (5) gas wells on each approved drill pad and shall expire if no
drilling permit is issued by the city according to the timeframe listed below with the corresponding zoning district. This
timeframe begins from the approval date of the specific use permit (SUP):
(1) Heavy industrial (HI) and medium industrial (MI) districts: 30 months.
(2) Light industrial (LI), and commercial (C): 18 months.
(3) Agricultural (A): 15 months.
(4) Single-family one (SF-1), residential two-and-a-half (R2.5), residential three (R3): 12 months.
(5) Planned development: Time will vary depending approval of planned development ordinance.
(6) In all cases, however, the specific use permit (SUP) for all gas/oil wells shall expire five (5) years after the
first drilling permit is issued by the city.
(7) A specific use permit (SUP) for drilling can be extended by city council for any of the timeframes listed
above for a period not to exceed one-fourth (1/4) of the approved timeframe and must be enacted prior to the
expiration of the specific use permit (SUP).
(g) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, all operations for drilling or mining for the production of oil, gas or
other hydrocarbons or gold or other precious metals shall be expressly prohibited on any public parks within the city limits or
city-owned property, unless approved by the city council in the specific use permit (SUP) request.
(1) The city council shall review the insurance and security requirements on an individual basis and may
impose additional restrictions upon issuance of a gas and oil well permit.
(2) This provision shall not operate to prohibit the drilling of any water well that the city council shall deem
reasonable or appropriate.
(h) No gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit shall be issued for any
well to be drilled within any FEMA-designated floodplain without a flood study. If the study determines that the proposed well
site is in the floodplain, it must be reviewed and approved by the city engineer to ensure it meets the city's flood damage
prevention ordinance.
(i) The operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the conditions of approval by the specific
use permit (SUP) and the provisions of this article.
Sec. 4.06.006 Same–Application and filing fees
(a) Every application for a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit
issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by the operator, or some person duly authorized to sign on his behalf,
and filed with the development services department.
(b) The application fee for the specific use permit (SUP) shall be as determined by the most recent fee structure adopted
by city council. The associated gas and oil well drilling permit fee shall be seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00).
(c) Both applications and fees along with the requirements stated on the checklists must be submitted to the development
services department by the formal submittal deadline for the next available planning and zoning commission meeting. From
time to time, changes to the checklist may be allowed without updating this article.
(d) There shall be an annual registration fee of $1,000.00 per operating well beginning October 1, 2010 and a $700.00 well
abandonment fee at time production ceases and the well bore is properly capped after October 1, 2010.
Sec. 4.06.007 Same–Requirements
(a) Before a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit application will be
accepted, the proposed well location shall be located at least six hundred (600) feet from an existing residence, religious
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/598
institution, public building, hospital building, educational facility or public park and the proposed well site shall be at least two
(2) acres in area.
(1) Any building permit issued for the above uses will also constitute as existing if a permit is on file with the city
on the date the application for a permit is filed.
(2) For the purpose of a gas and oil well drilling permit, the measurement of the six hundred-foot distance shall
be from the well head site to the closest exterior point of the building or facility. This distance can be reduced to
three hundred (300) feet if all the property owners within this distance sign an official affidavit provided by the city
stating their approval for drilling operations and production at this distance along with unanimous approval from
city council at the specific use permit (SUP) approval stage.
(b) Application requirements.
(1) The applications for the gas and oil well drilling specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil
well drilling permit shall include all the requirements stated in sections 4.06.005 and 4.06.006 of this article; and
(2) A detailed site plan that includes all the information required in section 4.06.006(c); and:
(A) Specific details to the projected location of the major components of the drilling site;
(B) Impacted vegetation, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent building and other structures;
(C) The measured distance from the well site to these buildings and structures; and
(D) Temporary and permanent fencing and landscaping.
(c) Permitting procedure.
(1) Any specific use permit (SUP) request for gas and oil well drilling must be received by the formal submittal
deadline for placement on the next available planning and zoning commission meeting for a public hearing. A
presubmittal meeting must be held prior to any formal submittal.
(2) At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the planning and zoning commission
and city council meeting, the city shall notify each property owner, as shown by the current tax roll, within six
hundred (600) feet of the proposed well head site and all registered neighborhood associations within one-half
mile not owned by or under lease to the operator of the hearing date and time. Such notice, as outlined below,
shall be by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, by the United States Postal Service.
(3) At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the planning and zoning commission
and city council meeting, the city shall submit a newspaper advertisement of the public hearing date, time,
location, and purpose to the city's official newspaper.
(4) At least twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the planning and zoning commission
and city council meeting, the operator shall, at his expense, erect at least one (1) sign, no less than four feet by
four feet (4 x 4), upon the premises upon [which] a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) has been requested.
(A) Where possible, the sign or signs shall be located in a conspicuous place or places upon the property
at a point or points nearest any right-of-way, street, roadway or public thoroughfare adjacent to such
property.
(B) The sign(s) shall substantially indicate that a gas and oil well permit to drill for gas or oil has been
requested and state the date, time and place of the public hearing, and shall further set forth that additional
information can be acquired by telephoning the applicant/operator at the number indicated on the sign.
(C) Any sign(s) shall be removed subsequent to final action by the city council.
(D) All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance with this
section.
(d) Fencing for gas and oil well drilling permit site.
(1) A chain link fence with three-and-one-half-inch mesh interwoven with opaque slats, a minimum of eight (8)
feet but not to exceed ten (10) feet in height, shall enclose all completed wells and tanks located within the gas
and oil well drilling permit area.
(2) Other fencing requirements, temporary or permanent, will be stated by the conditions of approval as stated
in the gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP).
(e) Landscaping for gas and oil well drilling permit site.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/598
(1) Landscaping shall be required along all street frontages and perimeter of the drill site with accent trees and
suitable screening shrubs that complement the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) Screening shrubs shall be installed completely around the well site and all fences and be sufficient to screen
from view the structures sought to be screened. Screening shrubs shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in height at
planting, have the potential to grow to a mature height equal to or greater than the required fencing.
(3) All plant materials shall be drought tolerant.
(4) The vegetation or berms shall be kept in an attractive state and in good condition at all times by the
applicant or operator.
(5) Landscaping plans shall be submitted at the same time as the specific use permit (SUP) and be approved
by the planning and zoning commission and city council.
(f) Vehicle routes for gas and oil well drilling permit site.
(1) Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three (3) tons shall be restricted to such
streets designated as either truck routes or commercial delivery routes by the city code wherever capable of being
used.
(2) The vehicles shall be operated on a truck route wherever capable of being used; they shall be operated on a
commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such
vehicle is then being operated.
(3) Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use by any
commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, or any combination thereof.
(g) Work hours for gas and oil well drilling permit site.
(1) Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m.
(2) Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site
preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to between the hours of 6 a.m. to 7
p.m. except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions and any other emergencies where the delivery of equipment is
necessary to protect the public welfare.
(h) Noise restrictions for gas and oil well drilling permit site.
(1) No drilling, producing, related drilling operations or formation fracturing level shall produce a sound level that
exceeds 80 dB(a) when measured at a distance of three hundred (300) feet.
(2) No person shall operate or permit to be operated in connection with the operation of a producing well any
engine, compressor or motor-driven machinery of any type which exceeds 72 dB(a) when measured at a distance
of three hundred (300) feet.
(3) Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming as a minimum, to the
requirements of the American National Standards Institute and installed at operator's expense in specified
locations.
(4) The noise level shall be the average of sound level meter readings taken consecutively at any given time
from four (4) or more diametrically opposite positions, four (4) feet above ground level, when measured at a
distances mentioned above.
(5) If sound levels exceed the dB(a) levels cited in this section, the inspector shall require sound reducing
mufflers.
(i) Tank specifications for high impact gas and oil well permit.
(1) All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications
unless other specifications are approved by the fire marshal.
(2) The top of the tanks shall be no higher than eight (8) feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks.
(3) All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire Protection
Association, but in all cases, shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet from any public right-of-way or property line.
Sec. 4.06.008 Issuance of gas and oil well permits
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/598
(a) The development services department, within 10 days after the filing of a completed application and remittance of all
fees, insurance and security, per the requirements of this article for a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the
associated gas and oil well drilling permit, shall determine whether or not the application complies in all respects with the
provisions of this article and determine if the proposed well to be drilled or the facility to be installed is in compliance with the
distance requirements for the requested gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling
permit on the date the completed application is received by the development services department.
(b) If the operator elects not to accept the conditions of approval for the gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the
associated gas and oil well drilling permit imposed by the city council and wishes to withdraw his application, the operator
must notify the development services department in writing of his decision and the city shall retain all applicable processing
and filing fees.
(c) All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance with this section.
Sec. 4.06.009 Amended gas and oil well permits
(a) If the location of the well site is moved no more than 30 feet from its originally approved location, staff may approve
such a location change as long as a well has not been previously drilled and the new location does not encroach on any
setbacks during the drilling and abandoned stages and it does not trigger a change in property owner notification.
(b) An operator may submit an application to the development services department to amend an existing gas and oil well
permit via a specific use permit (SUP) amendment to commence drilling on a new drill site that is not shown on (or
incorporated by reference as part of), relocate a drill site or operation site or to otherwise amend the existing gas and oil well
specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit.
(c) Applications for an amended gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling
permit must be filled out and signed by the operator, and shall include the following:
(1) The application fee for the specific use permit (SUP) amendment shall be as determined by the fee structure
adopted by city council. The associated gas and oil well drilling amended permit fee shall be two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00);
(2) A description of the proposed amendments;
(3) Any changes to the information submitted with the application for the existing gas and oil well specific use
permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit, if such information has not previously been
provided to the city;
(4) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the development services department to
demonstrate compliance with the applicable gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas
and oil well drilling permit; and
(5) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the inspector to prevent imminent destruction of
property or injury to persons.
(d) All gas and oil well specific use permits (SUPs) shall be reviewed as stated in sections 4.06.005, 4.06.006(c), and
4.06.007 of this article.
Sec. 4.06.010 Suspension or revocation of gas and oil well permit
(a) If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement
of a gas and oil specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit (including any requirement
incorporated by reference as part of thegas and oil well permit), the inspector shall give written notice to the operator
specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and
extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of
the community. The cure period shall be ten (10) days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or
injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article.
(b) If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within ten (10) days from the date of the notice, the inspector may
suspend or revoke the gas and oil well permit and city council may suspend or revoke the gas and oil well specific use permit
(SUP) pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(c) No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of the gas and oil well drilling permit issued under
this article during any period of any gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) suspension or revocation or pending a review
of the decision or order of the city in suspending or revoking the gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP). Nothing
contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or
violation for which the suspension or revocation of the gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) was ordered for the safety
of persons or as required by the commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/598
(d) If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the development services
department, upon written notice to the operator, may notify the commission and request that the commission take any
appropriate action.
(e) If an application for a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) is denied by the city council, nothing herein contained
shall prevent a new permit application from being submitted to the development services department for the same well.
Sec. 4.06.011 Periodic reports
(a) The operator shall notify the development services department of any changes to the following information within five
(5) business days after the change occurs:
(1) The name, address, and phone number of the operator;
(2) The name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the city (which
person must be a resident of the state that can be served in person or by registered or certified mail); and
(3) The operator's emergency action response plan (including drive-to-maps from public rights-of-way to each
drill site).
(b) The operator shall notify the development services department of any change to the name, address, and 24-hour
phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one business day.
(c) The operator shall provide a copy of any incident reports or written complaints submitted to the commission within ten
(10) days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints.
(d) Every January 1st, until the operator notifies the inspector that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the
operator shall submit a written report to the inspector if there are any changes to the information that was included in the
application for the applicable gas and oil well drilling permit that have not been previously reported to the city.
Sec. 4.06.012 Bond, letters of credit, indemnity, insurance
(a) General requirements. The operator shall be required to:
(1) Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the conditions of approval set forth in the gas and oil
well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit.
(2) Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed, or
occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the
same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations.
(3) Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all
claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits and liability of every kind, including all expenses of litigation,
court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person or for damage to any property arising out of or
in connection with the work done by operator under a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the
associated gas and oil well drilling permit.
(A) Where such injuries, death or damages are caused by the operator's sole negligence or the joint
negligence of operator and any other person or entity; and
(B) Regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused in whole or in part by the
negligence of the operator.
(4) Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any terms of the gas and
oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit.
(5) Promptly restore to its former condition any public property or infrastructure damaged by the gas or oil
operation.
(b) Bond, irrevocable letter of credit.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well
drilling permit, the operator shall provide the development services department with a security instrument in the
form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city attorney as follows:
(A) Bond.
(i) A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business
in the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/598
(ii) The bond shall become effective on or before the date the gas and oil well specific use permit
(SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit are issued and shall remain in force and effect
for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the gas and oil well specific use permit
(SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit or until the well is plugged and abandoned
and the site is restored.
(iii) The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as obligee, and
shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the
city.
(iv) An original bond shall be submitted to the development services department.
(B) Letter of credit.
(i) A letter of credit shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in the state in a form
acceptable to the city attorney and shall become effective on or before the date the gas and oil well
permit is issued.
(ii) The letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the
expiration of the gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling
permit or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored.
(iii) The city shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines or penalties
assessed under this article.
(iv) Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the development services
department by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the banking institution.
(2) The principal amount of any security instrument shall be eighty thousand dollars ($80,000) for any single
well and shall be maintained at that amount during the reworking operations.
(A) If the city council deems any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, it may require the
operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter of credit up to a maximum of two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000) per well.
(B) An operator who permits numerous wells within the city may elect to provide a blanket bond or letter of
credit in the principal amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000). The blanket bond shall be
deemed to be sufficient for all operations, including drilling, completion, reworking, and production.
(3) Whenever the inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any requirement or condition
imposed by this article or the conditions of approval set forth by the gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and
the associated gas and oil well drilling permit, a written notice shall be given to the operator.
(A) Such notice shall specify the work to be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by
the inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.
(B) After receipt of such notice, the operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require
the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city one hundred twenty-five percent
(125%) of the estimated cost of doing the work as set forth in the notice.
(C) In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than ten (10) days unless the failure presents a risk
of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to
provide periodic reports as required by this article.
(D) The city shall be authorized to draw against any irrevocable letter of credit or bond to recover such
amount due from the operator.
(E) Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the
required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure
of said sum in hand.
(F) In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission,
such additional money may be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon
the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(4) In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over to the city
the estimated cost of the work to be done as set forth in the notice, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses
to honor any draft by the city against the applicable irrevocable letter of credit or bond the city may proceed to
obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against
the operator, or by both such methods.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/598
(5) When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been properly abandoned
in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice
to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of
credit or bond issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled.
(c) Insurance.
(1) In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or
policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state.
(2) In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP)
and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the
operator's right to operate under such gas and oil well permit shall immediately cease until the operator files
additional insurance as provided herein.
(3) General requirements applicable to all policies.
(A) The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an additional insured to all
policies except employers' liability coverage under the operator's workers compensation policy.
(B) All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution liability (seepage
and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a claims-made basis.
(C) All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most current version of
the A.M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the
city.
(D) Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a per occurrence basis
unless otherwise stipulated herein.
(E) Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the city planning department, 104 W. Avenue E,
Midlothian, Texas 76065, evidencing all the required coverages, including endorsements, prior to the
issuance of a gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit.
(F) All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the
city.
(G) Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a
waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein.
(H) Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum thirty-day notice of cancellation,
nonrenewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten-day notice shall be acceptable in the
event of nonpayment of premium.
(I) During the term of the gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well
drilling permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the inspector any known loss occurrence
which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss.
(J) Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city.
(4) Standard commercial general liability policy.
(A) This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed
operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground resources damage,
broad form property damage, independent contractor's protective liability and personal injury.
(B) This coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury
and property damage.
(5) Excess or umbrella liability.
(A) Five million dollars ($5,000,000) excess, if the operator has a stand-alone environmental pollution
liability (EPL) policy.
(B) Ten million dollars ($10,000,000) excess, if the operator does not have a stand-alone EPL policy.
(C) Coverage must include an endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution.
(D) If seepage and pollution coverage is written on a claims-made basis, the operator must maintain
continuous coverage and purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/598
(6) Environmental pollution liability coverage.
(A) Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the gas and oil well specific use
permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit, insurance for environmental pollution liability
applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property that
has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses
incurred in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the
insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least $1,000,000 per loss, with an annual
aggregate of at least $10,000,000.
(B) Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or
release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other
irritants, contaminants or pollutants.
(C) The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period
insurance when necessary.
(D) The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to
coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the city.
(7) Control of well.
(A) The policy should cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, redrilling or restoration
expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses,
including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of residents.
(B) $5,000,000 per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of ten (10) million
dollars.
(C) $500,000 sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the operator has
care, custody and control.
(8) Certificates of insurance.
(A) The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the state.
(B) The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been
approved by the state board of insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with the
exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage.
(C) Sets forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions
contained herein.
(D) Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to
the city.
(E) All policies shall be endorsed to read, “This policy will not be cancelled or nonrenewed without 30
days' advanced written notice to the owner and the city of Midlothian, Texas except with [when] this policy is
being cancelled for nonpayment of premium, in which case ten (10) days' advanced written notice is
required.”
(F) Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the
certificates of insurance.
(d) Indemnification and express negligence provisions. Each gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated
gas and oil well drilling permit issued shall include the following language:
(1) Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and
executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have, against the city,
and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees,
created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in
any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a gas
and oil well permit.
(2) The operator shall fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the city, its departments, agents,
officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against each and every
claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations, judgments, losses, fines,
penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in defense of the city, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or
employees, including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made
or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/598
incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a gas and oil well
permit.
(3) The operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its departments, its officers, agents, servants,
employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from any liabilities or damages suffered as a result of
claims, demands, costs, or judgments against the city, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, or
employees, created by, or arising out of the acts or omissions of the city occurring on the drill site or operation site
in the course and scope of inspecting and permitting the gas or oil wells including, but not limited to, claims and
damages arising in whole or in part from the negligence of the city occurring on the drill site or operation site in the
course and scope of inspecting and permitting the gas or oil wells. It is understood and agreed that the indemnity
provided for this section is an indemnity extended by the operator to indemnify and protect the city and/or its
departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees from the consequence of the negligence of the city and/or
its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees whether that negligence is the sole or contributing cause
of the resultant injury, death and/or damage.
(e) Notice.
(1) The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of the state upon whom all orders and notices
provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail.
(2) Every operator shall within ten (10) days notify the development services department in writing of any
change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the city are discontinued and abandonment is
complete.
(f) Acceptance and indemnity agreement.
(1) The operator who has a net worth of not less than twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000), as shown in
such owner's or operator's most recent audited financial statements, may substitute an acceptance and indemnity
agreement in lieu of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit and insurance requirements set forth in this article,
provided that such acceptance and indemnity agreement shall be in a form acceptable to, and approved by, the
city attorney.
(2) The development services department may request an annual review of the operator's most recent audited
financial statements to assure compliance with this section.
Sec. 4.06.013 On-site and technical regulations
(a) On-site requirements.
(1) Abandoned wells.
(A) All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the commission; however, all well casings
shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least three (3) feet below the surface unless the surface owner
submits a written agreement otherwise.
(B) No structures shall be built over an abandoned well.
(2) Blowout prevention.
(A) In all cases, blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over or in
which tubing is being changed.
(B) Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during gas and oil operations as required by and in
conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum
Institute.
(C) The operator must equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves
commensurate with the working pressures involved as required by the commission.
(D) Prior to the commencement of drilling, a gas leak detector system shall be installed to the satisfaction
of the fire chief and maintained for the life of well operation.
(3) Compliance. Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements.
(4) Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or
discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater
or brine from any gas or oil operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any gas or oil
operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alley, street, lot, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain, any
body of water or any private property in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/598
(5) Drill stem testing.
(A) All open hole formation or drill stem testing shall be done during daylight hours.
(B) Drill stem tests may be conducted only if the well effluent during the test is produced through an
adequate gas separator to storage tanks and the effluent remaining in the drill pipe at the time the tool is
closed is flushed to the surface by circulating drilling fluid down the annulus and up the drill pipe.
(6) Dust, vibration, odors.
(A) All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as
practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices
incident to drilling for the production of gas, oil and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas.
(B) All equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that, vibrations, dust, odor or other
harmful or annoying substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or
production site or from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity;
nor shall the site or structures thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe.
(C) Proven technological improvements in industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall
be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor.
(7) Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those
already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision.
(8) Electric motors.
(A) Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells.
(B) No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall
conform to the city ordinances and the appropriate national codes.
(9) Emergency response and evacuation plan.
(A) Prior to the commencement of any gas, oil or other hydrocarbons production activities, operator shall
submit to the fire department an emergency response and evacuation plan establishing written procedures
to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of gas and oil wells.
(B) Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission, state natural resource
conservation commission, department of transportation and/or the Environmental Protection Agency.
(10) Equipment painted. All production equipment on the site shall be painted and maintained at all times,
including pumping units, storage tanks, buildings and structures.
(11) Fire prevention/sources of ignition.
(A) Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department and required by any applicable
federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained
on the drilling site at all times during drilling and completion operations.
(B) The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall
be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating
pressure. All wellheads shall contain an emergency shutoff valve to the well distribution line.
(12) Fresh water wells.
(A) It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located within
two hundred (200) feet to any fresh water well.
(B) The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore.
(C) The operator of a gas or oil well shall provide the inspector with a pre-drilling and post-drilling water
analysis from any fresh water well within five hundred (500) feet of the gas or oil well.
(D) Within 180 days of its completion date, each gas or oil well shall be equipped with a cathodic
protection system to protect the production casing from external corrosion.
(E) The inspector may approve an alternative method of protecting the production casing from external
corrosion.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/598
(13) Gas emission or burning restricted. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the
atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission or the
state council on environmental quality.
(14) Grass, weeds, trash. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and combustible
trash within a radius of two hundred (200) feet around any gas or oil tank or tanks or producing wells.
(15) Hazardous plan. Hazardous materials management plan shall be on file with the fire marshal and the
inspector.
(16) Lights.
(A) No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a manner
so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the
operation site.
(B) To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed
downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within
five hundred (500) feet.
(17) Muffling exhaust.
(A) Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection
with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air
unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers or an exhaust muffler box constructed of
noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of obnoxious gases, fumes or
ignited carbon or soot.
(B) All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the operator has
notified the inspector that fracing will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements.
(18) Closed-loop/open-loop systems. A closed-loop system shall be required on all oil/gas wells. If an open-loop
system is desired by the operator, the specific use permit (SUP) for that specific well site must approve such
request. At the drilling permit phase, the operator shall pay a separate environmental mitigation permit fee to the
city in an amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). This fee shall be deposited into the kiosk/streetscape
fund (account 110). The city council may earmark a portion of these monies towards other projects such as
downtown/historical projects, as deemed necessary.
(19) Private roads and drill sites.
(A) Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site
and the operation site itself shall be at least twelve (12) feet wide, have an overhead clearance of fourteen
(14) feet and shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or ore and maintained to prevent dust and mud.
(B) In particular cases, these requirements governing surfacing of private roads may be altered at the
discretion of the development services department and the city engineer after consideration of all
circumstances including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways;
distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation;
the purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the
soil; and exposure to wind.
(20) Salt water wells. No disposal wells, including but not limited to salt water disposal wells, shall be located
within the city.
(21) Signs.
(A) A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and permanent
site fencing erected.
(B) Permanent weatherproof signs reading “Danger No Smoking Allowed” shall be posted immediately
upon completion of the well site fencing at the entrance of each well site and tank battery or in any other
location approved or designated by the fire chief of the city.
(22) Storage of equipment.
(A) On-site storage is prohibited on the operation site.
(B) No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the
everyday operation of the well.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/598
(C) Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well
servicing operations are being conducted on the site.
(D) No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any
driveway, alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference
with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment which is necessary for drilling or production operations
on the site.
(E) The fire department shall be the entity that determines whether any equipment on the site shall
constitute a fire hazard.
(F) No refinery, processing, treating, dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed,
established or maintained on the premises.
(23) Storage tanks.
(A) All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.)
specifications unless other specifications are approved by the fire chief.
(B) All storage tanks shall be equipped with a secondary containment system including lining with an
impervious material.
(C) The secondary containment system shall be a minimum of three feet (3') in height and one and onehalf
(1-1/2) times the contents of the largest tank in accordance with the fire code, and buried at least one
foot (1') below the surface.
(D) Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to contain the liquids from the storage tank.
(E) All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire
Protection Association, but in all cases, shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet from any property line.
(F) Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve
to close the well in the event of excess liquid accumulation in the tank.
(24) Tank battery facilities.
(A) Tank battery facilities shall be equipped with a remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system.
(B) Tanks must be at least two hundred fifty (250) feet from any residence, religious institution, public
building, hospital building, educational facility or public park.
(25) Surface casing. Surface casing must be new and shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable
rules and regulations of the commission.
(26) Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall
have access to the well site to enable it to close the shutoff the valve in an emergency.
(27) Waste disposal.
(A) Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the following:
(i) Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons.
(ii) Tanks must meet the American Petroleum Institute standards. All tanks must have a vent line,
flame arrester and pressure relief valve.
(iii) All tanks must be enclosed by a fence applicable to the issued permit classification.
(iv) Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or
connected with the drilling, reworking or deepening of any well shall be discharged into an earthen pit.
(v) All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate
local, state or federal agency.
(B) Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the site and
transported to an off-site disposal facility by the company contracted by the city.
(C) Water stored in on-site tanks shall be removed as necessary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/598
(D) All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control
regulations of the state, this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city.
(28) Watchman. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on site during the drilling or
reworking of a well when other workmen are not on the premises.
(b) Well setbacks.
(1) It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the surface of the ground, is located:
(A) Within thirty-five (35) feet from any outer boundary line;
(B) Within fifty (50) feet from any storage tank, or source of ignition;
(C) Within ninety (90) feet of any public street, road, highway or future street, right-of-way or property line;
(D) Within four hundred (400) feet from any building used, or designed and intended to be used, for
human occupancy after the drilling has been completed;
(E) Within two hundred (200) feet of any building accessory to, but not necessary to the operation of the
well; or
(F) Within two hundred (200) feet to any fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from
the closest well bore to the fresh water well bore.
(2) The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures
or objects, to the closest exterior point of any object listed in subsections (A)–(F) above.
(3) For protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the city council may impose additional requirements
for a reduction of such distance.
(c) Installation of pipelines on, under or across public property. The operator shall apply to the city for a franchise
agreement on, over, under, along or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city property for the purpose of
constructing, laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines so long as production or operations
may be continued under any gas and oil well drilling permit issued pursuant to this article. Operator shall:
(1) Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities located on,
under or across the course of such rights-of way.
(2) Furnish to the planning director/city engineer a plat showing the location of such pipelines.
(3) Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations properly cased and
vented if under a street.
(4) Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable, as existed
when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced.
(d) No gas and oil well specific use permit (SUP) and the associated gas and oil well drilling permit shall be issued for any
well to be drilled within any of the streets or alleys of the city and/or projected streets or alleys shown by the current
comprehensive plan of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed due to any exploration,
drilling or production operations unless approved by the city council with certain conditions.
Sec. 4.06.014 Gate specifications
All chain link fences and masonry walls shall be equipped with at least one (1) gate. The gate shall meet the following
specifications:
(1) The gates shall be of chain link construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of other approved
material that, for safety reasons, shall be at least as secure as a chain link fence;
(2) The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a padlock, and shall
be kept locked except when being used for access to the site; and
(3) Operator must provide the city fire chief with a knox padlock or knox box with a key to access the well site to
be used only in case of an emergency.
Sec. 4.06.015 Cleanup and maintenance
(a) Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the
drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/598
within forty-five (45) days.
(b) Cleanup after spills, leaks and malfunctions.
(1) After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of
the city fire chief and the inspector all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill,
leak or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin immediately.
(2) If the owner fails to begin site cleanup within forty-eight (48) hours, the city shall have the right to contact the
commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or
malfunction.
(c) Free from debris. The property on which a well site is located shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of water or
other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material within a radius of two hundred (200) feet around
any separators, tanks and producing wells.
(d) Painting.
(1) All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping units,
tanks, and buildings or structures.
(2) When requiring painting of such facilities, the inspector shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the
material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance.
(3) Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray
and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the inspector.
(e) Blowouts.
(1) In the event of the loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to
regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the inspector as soon as practicable.
(2) The inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same, to the development services department
and the city manager. If the inspector, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and property exists because
of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary
steps to regain control of such well, the inspector may then employ any well control expert or experts or other
contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the
inspector deems necessary to regain control of such well.
(3) The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure
payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the inspector in gaining control of said
well.
Sec. 4.06.016 Plugged and abandoned wells
(a) Once a well has been plugged, any new residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, educational
[facility], or public park may locate at least two hundred (200) feet from the outer perimeter of the enclosed wellhead.
(b) Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements
of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the well site to its original condition
as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(c) Abandonment shall be approved by the inspector after restoration of the drill site has been accomplished in conformity
with the following requirements at the discretion of the inspector:
(1) The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from drill site;
(2) All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site;
(3) All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except
surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the commission;
(4) All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil;
(5) All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site; and
(6) During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article.
(d) Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following at the discretion of the inspector:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/598
(1) A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment proceedings under
the state law; and
(2) A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be
commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated.
(e) Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most
current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the
property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
Sec. 4.06.017 Technical advisor
(a) The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the gas
and oil industry or the law as it pertains to gas and oil matters.
(b) The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the city on such matters relating to gas and oil
operations within the city as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health,
welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the city.
(c) In the event such technical advisor(s) is employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing the city
relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article, then the cost for
such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed against and paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or
charges assessed pursuant to this article.
(d) Prior to the employment of a technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the
estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by the city council.
Sec. 4.06.018 Penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following:
(1) Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a gas and oil well permit issued under this article;
(2) Fail to comply with any condition set forth in a gas and oil well permit issued under this article; or
(3) Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article.
(b) Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per day per
each offense, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2010-12 adopted 6/8/10)
ARTICLE 4.07 SALE AND SERVICE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.07.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Alcoholic beverage. Alcohol or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume which is
capable of use for beverage purposes both alone or when diluted and may include all distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage,
wine or fortified wine as defined in this section or the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended.
Beer. A malt beverage containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and not more than four percent of
alcohol by weight, and does not include a beverage designated by label or otherwise by a name other than beer.
Beer or malt beverage. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt,
hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than fourteen percent (14%)
alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. Also included are
beverages known as “nonalcoholic beer” which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or
other products, and containing less than three percent (3%), but more than zero point one percent (0.1%) alcohol by volume.
The term “malt beverage” does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine.
Distilled spirits. Alcohol, spirits of wine, whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any liquor produced in whole or in part by the process of
distillation, including all dilutions or mixtures of them, and includes spirit coolers that may have an alcoholic content as low as
four percent alcohol by volume and that contain plain, sparkling, or carbonated water and may also contain one or more
natural or artificial blending or flavoring ingredients.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/598
Mixed beverage. One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or part of an alcoholic beverage in a sealed or
unsealed container of any legal size for consumption on the premises where served or sold by the holder of a mixed
beverage permit, the holder of a daily temporary mixed beverage permit, the holder of a caterer's permit, the holder of a
mixed beverage late hours permit, the holder of a private club registration permit, or the holder of a private club late hours
permit.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company,
corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit,
body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi public.
Wine and vinous liquor. The product obtained from the alcoholic fermentation of juice of sound ripe grapes, fruits, berries, or
honey, and includes wine coolers.
(Ordinance 2008-01, sec. 1, adopted 1/8/08)
Sec. 4.07.002 State permit required
No person shall manufacture, distribute, sell, or serve alcoholic beverages within the city without first having obtained a
permit or license for the specific location from the state alcoholic beverage commission.
Sec. 4.07.003 Fees established
There is hereby levied an annual permit fee and annual license fee in the amount equal to one-half (1/2) of the fee charged
by the state for each particular permit or license (or the maximum fee that the city is authorized by law to charge) issued by
the state alcoholic beverage commission, except when said fee is waived according to the provisions of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code. The fee shall be paid at the time of application and on the date such state permit or license is renewed with
the state thereafter.
(Ordinance 2008-01, sec. 2, adopted 1/8/08)
Sec. 4.07.004 Penalty
That any person, firm, or corporation violating any provisions or terms of this article shall be subject to the same penalty as
provided for in the city, as heretofore amended and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00,
except that a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 shall be imposed for violation of provisions of this article that govern fire safety,
zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse. The penalty imposed for a violation of this article shall
not exceed or be less than the penalty prescribed by state law, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be
deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 2008-01, sec. 9, adopted 1/8/08)
Secs. 4.07.005–4.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Sale of Alcohol
Sec. 4.07.031 Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited in residential areas
The sale of beer and wine is prohibited at any location that is within a residential zoning district or an identified portion of a
planned development (PD) district exclusively restricted to residential uses, except as allowed by this division and the zoning
ordinance.
Sec. 4.07.032 Provisions of this section controlling
No alcoholic beverage shall be sold, served, stored, manufactured or distributed within the city, and no license or permit shall
be issued for the same, except in areas authorized under this division and the zoning ordinance of the city.
Sec. 4.07.033 Sale of alcoholic prohibited near churches, schools and hospitals
(a) No person may sell alcoholic beverages if the place of business is within:
(1) Three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital.
(2) One thousand (1,000) feet of a public school, if the city council by resolution, approves a request from the
board of trustees of a school district under V.T.C.A., Education Code section 38.007
(3) One thousand (1,000) feet of a private school, if the city council by resolution, approves a request from the
governing body of the private school.
(b) Subsection (a)(1) does not apply to the holder of:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/598
(1) A license or permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code who also holds a food and beverage
certificate by the state alcoholic beverage commission covering the premises that is located within 300 feet of a
private school; or
(2) A license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic
Beverage Code section 109.53 (unaccompanied minor in package liquor store) and that is located 300 feet of a
private school.
(c) Subsection (a)(2) and (3) do not apply to the holder of:
(1) A retail on-premises consumption permit or license issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission if
less than 50% of the gross receipts for the premises is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages;
(2) A retail off-premises consumption permit or license issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission if
less than 50% of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuel tax, is
from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; or
(3) A wholesaler's distribution's, brewer's, distiller's, and rectifier's, winery, wine bottler's or manufacturer's
permit or license, or any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are used
and understood in V.C.T.A, Alcoholic Beverage Code, Chapter 102.
(d) Subsection (a)(3) does not apply to the holder of:
(1) A license or permit issued under V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code Chapter 27 (temporary and special wine
and beer retailer's permit), V.T.C.A. Alcoholic Beverage Code Chapter 31 (caterer's permit), or V.T.C.A. Alcoholic
Beverage Code Chapter 72 (temporary licenses) who is operating on the premises of a private school; or
(2) A license or permit covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A. Alcoholic
Beverage Code section 109.53, and that is located within 1,000 feet of a private school.
(e) For the purposes of this section, “private school” means a private school, including a parochial school that offers a
course or instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade 12 and has more than 100 students
enrolled and attending course at a single location.
(f) The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or
public hospital shall be along the property lines of street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across
intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold, and
public or private schools shall be:
(1) In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to property line of the place of business,
and in a direct line across the intersection; or
(2) If the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line
from the property line of the public or private school to the place of business, in a direct line across intersections
and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is
located.
(g) For any dealer who held a license or permit from the state alcoholic beverage commission September 1, 1983, the
measurement of the distance between the place of business of the dealer and a public school shall be along the property
lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections.
(h) Applications of distance requirements.
(1) If at the time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the state alcoholic beverage
commission for a premises, the premises satisfies the requirements regarding distance from schools, churches,
and other types of premises set forth in this section, the premises shall be deemed to satisfy the distance
requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit.
(2) On the sale or transfer of the premises or the business on the premises in which a new original license or
permit is required for the premises, the premises shall be deemed to satisfy any distance requirements as if the
issuance of the new original permit or license were a renewal of a previously held permit or license. This
subsection does not apply to the satisfaction of the distance requirements prescribed by subsection (a)(2) for a
public school, except that on the death of a permit or license holder or a person having an interest in a permit or
license, this section does apply to the holder's surviving spouse or child of the holder or person if the spouse or
child qualifies as a successor in interest to the permit or license, subsection (1) does not apply to the satisfaction
of the distance requirement prescribed by subsection (a)(2) for a public school if the holder's permit or license has
been suspended for a violation occurring after September 1, 1995, of any of the following provisions of the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code: sections 11.61(b)(1), (6)–(11), (13), (14), or (20); or section 61.71(a)(5)–(8), (11), (12),
(14), (17), (18), (22), or (24).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/598
Sec. 4.07.034 Sale near day-care centers or child-care facility
(a) This section applies only to a permit or license holder under V.C.T.A Alcoholic Beverage Code chapters. 25, 28, 32, 69,
or 74, who does not have a food and beverage certificate.
(b) Except as provided by this subsection the provisions of section 4.07.033 relating to a public school also apply to the
day-care center and a child-development facility as those terms are defined by V.C.T.A Human Resources Code chapter
42.002. Sections 4.07.033(a)(2) and (c) do not apply to a day-care center or child-care facility.
(c) This section does not apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if:
(1) The permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located on different stories of a
multistory building; or
(2) The permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located in separate buildings
and either the permit or license holder or the day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second story or
higher of a multistory building.
(d) This section does not apply to a foster group home, foster family home, family home, agency group home, or agency
home as those terms are defined by section 42.002, Human Resources Code.
(Ordinance 2008-01, sec. 3, adopted 1/8/08)
Secs. 4.07.035–4.07.060 Reserved
Division 3. Minors
Sec. 4.07.061 Employment
(a) Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, no person may employ a person under 18 years of
age to sell, prepare, serve, or otherwise handle liquor, or to assist in doing so.
(b) A holder of a wine only package store permit may employ a person 16 years old or older to work in any capacity.
(c) A holder of a permit or license providing for the on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages may employ a person
under 18 years of age to work in any capacity other than the actual selling, preparing, or serving of alcoholic beverages.
(d) The holder of a permit or license providing for the on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages who also holds a
food and beverage certificate may employ a person under 18 years of age to work as a cashier for transactions involving the
sale of alcoholic beverages if the alcoholic beverages are served by a person 18 years of age or older.
(e) It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to work as an entertainer in any establishment
licensed or permitted by the state alcoholic beverage commission without written consent from such person's parents or
guardian.
(f) A person commits an offense if such person employs, authorizes, permits, or induces a person younger than 18 years
of age to dance with another person in exchange for a benefit, as defined by section 1.07, Penal Code, on the premises
covered by the permit or license issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission.
(Ordinance 2008-01, sec. 4, adopted 1/8/08)
Sec. 4.07.062 Failure to check identification
(a) It shall be an offense for any person who maintains, operates, or owns any establishment where alcoholic beverages
are sold or served, or offered for sale or for service, or for a person employed by such establishment to fail to properly check
the identification of a patron to ensure that a minor or an underage person is not sold, served, or has in such person's
possession, alcoholic beverages.
(b) For purposes of this section “identification” shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a
description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, but not limited
to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state department of public safety identification card.
(Ordinance 2008-01, sec. 5, adopted 1/8/08)
CHAPTER 5
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/598
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE CODE*
Sec. 5.02.001 Adopted
In accordance with the International Fire Code (“IFC”), the provisions of the 2015 edition of the International Fire Code, save
and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by section 5.02.002 of this article, as well as
amendments recommended by the North Texas Council of Governments are hereby adopted as the fire code of the city, and
declared to be effective within the city limits of said city immediately upon receipt by the city and filing with the city secretary
of one copy of said code and amendments.
Sec. 5.02.002 Specific amendments
The 2015 International Fire Code adopted by this article is amended and changed as follows for Chapter 1, sections 101.1
through 111.4, and chapter 61, are amended as set forth in this section. The remaining “Amendments to the 2015
International Fire Code” are made a part of this article by reference. The city adopts all of the amendments, all of which are
on file in the office of the city secretary.
Chapter 1, section 101.1 is changed to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the City of Midlothian, hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”
Chapter 1, section 101.2.1 is changed to read as follows:
101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted. Appendices B, C,
D, E, F and G are adopted with this code.
Chapter 1, section 102.1 #3 is changed to read as follows:
Section 102.1, Construction and design provisions.
3. Existing structures, facilities, and conditions when required in Chapter 11 or in specific sections of this
code.
Chapter 1, section 102.7 add to read as follows:
Section 102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those
that are listed in chapter 80, and such codes and standards shall be considered to be part of the requirements of
this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in sections 102.7.1 and
102.7.2. If a more current version of the codes and standards listed in chapter 80 is available than when this code
was adopted, the most current version shall be used.
Chapter 1, section 102.13 add to read as follows:
Section 102.13 NFPA 101 Takes Precedence. The entire text of NFPA 101, Code for Safety to Life from Fire in
Buildings and Structures, 2015 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association, shall take
precedence over the other provisions of this code whenever NFPA 101 mandates a higher level of protection than
required elsewhere in this code, except where it may conflict with state laws.
Chapter 1, section 103.1 is changed to read as follows:
Section 103.1 General. The office of fire marshal is established within the fire department under the direction of
the fire code official. The function of the office of fire marshal shall be the implementation, administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this code.
Chapter 1, section 103.2 is changed to read as follows:
Section 103.2 Appointment. The fire marshal shall be appointed by the fire chief and shall be identified in this
code as the “fire code official.”
Chapter 1, section 103.3 is changed to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/598
Section 103.3 Deputies. Employees appointed by the fire chief as fire inspectors or fire investigators shall report to
the fire marshal and be charged with the enforcement of this code under the direction of the fire marshal. All
sworn firefighters of the Midlothian Fire Department are authorized to request compliance with any provision of
this code as adopted. Only those employees of the department who have completed formal training and have
current certification as a fire inspector or peace officer may issue a citation or take enforcement action.
Chapter 1, section 105.3.3 is changed to read as follows:
Section 105.3.3 Occupancy Prohibited before Approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the
fire code official issuing a permit when required and conducting associated inspections indicating the applicable
provisions of this code have been met.
Chapter 1, section 105.7.19, add to read as follows:
Section 105.7.19 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation or
modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in chapter 10. A separate construction permit is
required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to the access control
system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not
require a permit.
Chapter 1, section 108 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Chapter 1, section 109.4 is changed to read as follows:
Section 109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any
of the requirements thereof, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00 dollars. Each day a violation continues after due
notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
Chapter 1, section 109.5 add to read as follows:
Section 109.5 Appeals. Whenever the fire chief or fire code official disapproves an application or refuses to grant
a permit applied for, or when it is claimed the provisions of the code do not apply or the true intent and meaning of
the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire
chief or fire code official to the city council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
Chapter 1, section 111.4 is changed to read as follows:
Section 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be liable to a fine of not more than $2,000.00.
Chapter 61, titled Liquefied Petroleum Gases, section 6101.1 to add section numbers 6101.4 through 6101.9, to read as
follows:
6101.4 Adoption of Liquefied Petroleum Gas Safety Rules. The city hereby adopts the Liquefied Petroleum
Gas Safety Rules previously adopted by the Texas Railroad Commission, including any and all future
amendments thereto.
6101.5 Exclusive Regulation. The Liquefied Petroleum Gas Safety Rules adopted under section 6101.4 and the
rules and standards, if any, promulgated with the permission of the Texas Railroad Commission's executive
director shall be the city's exclusive regulations for liquefied petroleum gas.
6101.6 Construction of City Codes. All ordinances, orders, rules, or codes adopted by the city shall be
construed in a manner consistent with section 6101.4 on all matters relating to liquefied petroleum gas.
6101.7 Conflict with City Codes. In the event of conflict between any ordinance, order, rule, or code adopted by
the city and section 6101.4, section 6101.4 shall control.
6101.8 Adoption of Rules, Regulations, Policies, Practices, Procedures, or Standards. City staff shall not
adopt or enforce any rule, regulation, practice, policy, procedure, or standard that conflicts with section 6101.4.
6101.9 Construction Consistent with Texas Railroad Commission. Chapter 61 shall not be construed so as to
conflict with the Texas Railroad Commission's interpretation of the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Safety Rules,
including any and all future amendments thereto.
Sec. 5.02.003 Establishment of limits of districts in which the storage of certain hazardous materials is restricted
or prohibited
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/598
(a) The limits referred to in sections 5704.2.9.6.1 and 5706.2.4.4 of the International Fire Code, in which the storage of
class I (flammable) and class II (combustible) liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited, shall include the area inside the city
limits with the following exceptions:
(1) Nonresidential zoning districts when in compliance with in compliance with city zoning requirements and the
International Fire Code as amended.
(2) Within a planned development district which specifically authorizes such use, and when in compliance with
the International Fire Code as amended.
(3) Temporary storage of diesel fuel in an above-ground tank, for a definite time limit, for fueling off-road
vehicles and equipment at construction or similar work sites when approved by the fire code official and when in
compliance with the International Fire Code as amended.
(4) Facilities owned or under the direct control of a governmental entity where fuel is necessary for the
operation of vehicles, emergency generators or other equipment critical to the infrastructure, and when in
compliance with the International Fire Code as amended.
(5) Agriculture or farm property, in excess of ten acres, where fuel is necessary for the operation of farm
equipment, and when in compliance with the International Fire Code as amended.
(6) Above-ground storage tanks shall be prohibited for retail sale of motor fuels.
(b) The limits referred to in section 5806.2 of the International Fire Code, in which the storage of flammable cryogenic
fluids in stationary containers is prohibited, shall include the area inside the city limits with the following exceptions:
(1) Medium industrial (MI) and heavy industrial (HI) zoning districts when approved by the fire code official, and
in compliance with city zoning requirements and the International Fire Code as amended.
(2) Within a planned development district which specifically authorizes such use, when permitted and approved
by the fire code official and when in compliance with the International Fire Code as amended.
(3) Nonresidential zoning districts when quantities do not exceed the amounts listed in IFC table 105.6.11
Permit Amounts for Cryogenic Fluids, when in compliance with city zoning requirements and the International Fire
Code as amended.
Table 105.3.11
Permit Amounts for Cryogenic Fluids
Type of Cryogenic Fluid Inside Building
(gallons)
Outside Building
(gallons)
Flammable More than 1 60
Inert 60 500
Oxidizing (includes oxygen) 10 50
Physical or health hazard not indicated above Any amount Any amount
For SI: 1 gallon = 3.785 L.
(c) The limits referred to in section 6104.2 of the International Fire Code, in which the storage of liquefied petroleum gas
(LP gas) is prohibited for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, shall include the area inside the city limits
with the following exceptions:
(1) LP gas storage and use shall be in compliance with the International Fire Code as amended, NFPA 58 and
Railroad Commission of Texas requirements and regulations. Where a conflict exists between these requirements
and regulations, the Liquefied Petroleum Gas Safety rules previously adopted by the Texas Railroad Commission,
including any and all future amendments thereto shall apply.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/598
(2) Nonresidential zoning districts when in compliance with city zoning requirements, the International Fire
Code as amended, NFPA 58 and Railroad Commission of Texas requirements and regulations. Tanks with an
aggregate capacity of 2,000 gallons or more shall require approval of the fire code official.
(3) Residential zoning districts when in compliance with the International Fire Code as amended, NFPA 58 and
Railroad Commission of Texas requirements and regulations.
(4) Within a planned development district which specifically authorizes such use, and when in compliance with
the International Fire Code as amended, NFPA 58 and Railroad Commission of Texas requirements and
regulations.
(5) Existing, nonconforming LP gas installations will be allowed to continue until replaced or modified. Any
replacement and/or modification shall meet current applicable codes, requirements and regulations.
(6) The limits and districts above shall also apply to the storage of compressed natural gas (CNG) and other
alternative fuels.
(d) The limits referred to in section 5601 of the International Fire Code, in which the storage of explosives and blasting
agents is prohibited for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, shall include the area inside the city limits
with the following exceptions:
(1) Nonresidential zoning districts when permitted and approved by the fire code official, and when in
compliance with city zoning requirements, the International Fire Code as amended, state and federal
requirements.
(2) Within a planned development district which specifically authorizes such use, when permitted and approved
by the fire code official and when in compliance with the International Fire Code as amended, state and federal
requirements.
(e) The limits on storage of hazardous materials in excess of the exempt amounts as defined in the International Fire Code
is prohibited for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, shall include the area inside the city limits with the
following exceptions:
(1) Nonresidential zoning districts when approved by the fire code official and in compliance with city zoning
requirements and the International Fire Code as amended.
(2) Within a planned development district which specifically authorizes such use, and when in compliance with
the International Fire Code as amended.
(3) Where a conflict exists between local, state or federal requirements and regulations, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
(Ordinance 2017-40 adopted 5/23/17)
Sec. 5.02.004 Appeals
Whenever the fire chief disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly
interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire chief to the city council within 30 days from the date of the
decision appealed. (Ordinance 2012-17 adopted 6/26/12)
Sec. 5.02.005 Penalty
(a) Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person
found guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00. Each day that the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue.
(b) The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ordinance 2017-40 adopted 5/23/17)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.03.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/598
Fireworks. Any firecrackers, cannon crackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, Roman candles, sparklers, squibs, fire balloons, star
shells, gerbs or any other substance in whatever combination by any designated name intended for use in obtaining visible or
audible pyrotechnic display and shall include all articles or substances within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks
whether herein specially designated and defined or not.
Person. Includes any natural person, association of persons, partnerships, corporations, agent or officer of a corporation, and
shall also include all warehousemen, common and private carriers, bailees, trustees, receivers, executors and administrators.
Sec. 5.03.002 General prohibition
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, assemble, store,
transport, receive, keep, sell, offer for sale, use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate, fire or have in their
possession any fireworks of any description. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of any minor child to permit or
allow such minor child to be in violation of this section.
Sec. 5.03.003 Declaration of public nuisance
(a) The presence of any fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a
common and public nuisance. The fire chief is directed and required to seize and cause to be safely destroyed any fireworks
found within the jurisdiction in violation of this article, and any member of the city fire department or any city police officer or
any other duly constituted peace officer is empowered to stop the transportation of and detain any fireworks found being
transported illegally or to close any building where any fireworks are found stored illegally until the fire chief can be notified in
order that such fireworks may be seized and destroyed in accordance with the terms of this section.
(b) Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the city or the
fire chief or both for injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent the unlawful sale, storage, transportation, keeping or use
of fireworks within the jurisdiction of the city and to aid the fire chief in the discharge of his duties and to particularly prevent
any person from interfering with the seizure and destruction of such fireworks, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any
such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such seizure and destruction.
Sec. 5.03.004 Exceptions
This article shall not apply to:
(1) Signal flares and torpedoes of the type and kind commonly used by any railroad and which signal flares and
torpedoes are received by and stored or transported by any such railroad for use in railroad operation.
(2) Any marine signal flare or rocket of the type and kind commonly carried by a vessel at sea for its own use
and which signal flares or rockets are transported or received and stored for use only as ship's stores.
(3) Signal flares or rockets for military or police use.
(4) Firework displays where the city has issued a permit for such activity to a licensed pyrotechnic.
Sec. 5.03.005 Packaged, unopened fireworks
If fireworks are packaged, unopened fireworks, such fireworks shall not be seized by a peace officer or member of the city
fire department, or anyone else with authority to enforce this article.
Sec. 5.03.006 Affirmative defenses
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article for the possession of fireworks if:
(1) The defendant was operating or was a passenger in a motor vehicle that was being operated in a public
place; and
(2) The fireworks were not in the passenger area of the vehicle.
(b) For purposes of subsection (a), the “passenger area” of a motor vehicle means the area of the vehicle designed for the
seating of the operator and the passengers of the vehicle. The term does not include:
(1) A locked glove compartment or similar locked storage area;
(2) The trunk of a vehicle; or
(3) The area behind the last upright seat of a vehicle that does not have a trunk.
(Ordinance 2016-03 adopted 2/23/16)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/598
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS†
Sec. 6.02.001 Adoption of state food establishment rules
The provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the state board of health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code,
chapter 229, sections 161 through 171 and 173 through 175, regarding the regulation of food establishment [are adopted] in
this jurisdiction. (Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 1, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.002 Purpose
The purpose of these rules is to safeguard public health and provide to consumers food that is safe, unadulterated, and
honestly presented. (Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 2, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.003 Definitions
Food establishment. A food service establishment, a retail food store, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food vendor.
Regulatory authority. An authorized agent or employee of the city.
Smoking or to smoke. The act of smoking or carrying a lighted or smoldering cigar, cigarette, or pipe of any kind or lighting a
cigar, cigarette or pipe of any kind.
State rules. The state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229, 161 through 171 and 173 through 175.
These rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 3, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.004 Permit–Required; exceptions
(a) A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not
transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this
article. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this article. Each inventory in a food
establishment must have its own permit. (i.e. grocery stores are required to have a permit for bakery, meat market, deli and
grocery store as applicable). (Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 4, adopted 11/28/00; Ordinance 2011-40 adopted 12/13/11)
(b) A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permitting fee requirements of this
article, but is not exempt from obtaining a permit. The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to
determine whether an organization is nonprofit for the purpose of this exemption. (Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 4, adopted
11/28/00)
(c) Temporary food permits may be obtained for $30.00 for food events held from one to five days. The same permit and
fee shall apply to each food vendor registered to participate in a downtown farmers market for the duration of the annual
market season. (Ordinance 2009-31 adopted 7/14/09)
Sec. 6.02.005 Same–Application and fees
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by
the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the
proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all
required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit.
(b) Renewals for permits are required on an annual basis. All permits will expire on December 31 of each year. Renewal
fees must be received prior to December 31st. Renewal fees received after December 31st will be double the permit fee. The
same application information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit.
(c) Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the
proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply
with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/598
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 4, adopted 11/28/00)
(d) The fee schedule that applies to permits/inspections issued under this article is on file in the city secretary's office.
(e) Posting of scores: Current food inspection scores will be posted at or near the front door of food establishment for
public view; current detailed inspection report shall be made available upon request.
(Ordinance 2011-40 adopted 12/13/11)
Sec. 6.02.006 Same–Suspension
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if
the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Whenever a permit is suspended,
written notice will be given to the permit holder/manager, at which time all food operations shall immediately cease.
Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing as described in
subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended, the permit holder or the manager shall be notified in writing that the permit is
immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within 10 days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the
suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer
exist.
(c) A permit will be automatically suspended if there exist violations totaling more than 30 demerits during any one
inspection. Food operations will immediately cease until corrective actions are taken to decrease the demerits, and a
reinspection has been performed by the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 8, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.007 Same–Revocation
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated
violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its
duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of
the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days
following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the
permit within such ten-day period.
(b) If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 9, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.008 Administrative process
(a) A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in
charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of
the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
(b) The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated
by it. Based upon the recorded evidence submitted at such hearing the regulatory authority shall make final finding, and shall
sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be
furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 10, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.009 Review of plans
Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to
use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion
shall be submitted to the city for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20% or greater of the area of
the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment
arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed
equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the city if they meet the requirements of the rules
adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling, or conversion.
Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation. (Ordinance
2000-53, sec. 6, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.010 Food protection manager and food handler certification
(a) A food protection manager and food handler certificate will be required as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/598
(1) Food establishments. At least one manager or person in charge must hold a certificate for food protection
management and be present during hours of operation.
(2) Food handling training required–food handler permit. In order to receive a food handler permit, every person
owning, employed by, or otherwise connected with a food establishment whose work brings him into contact with
food, utensils or food service equipment shall be required to satisfactorily complete a food handling training
course and hold a food handler permit through a state-accredited food training course. Food handler permits must
be held for all employees and are subject to inspection and confirmation at any time. Food handler certification is
valid for a period of up to three years from the date of issuance as determined by the health authority unless
revoked for cause.
(3) Revocation. Repeated violations of the state food rules, closure of the food establishment by the health
department or suspension of a health permit may constitute cause for immediate revocation of food manager and
food handler certification.
(4) Change of food managers or food handlers. Termination or transfer of certified food managers or food
handlers does not change the requirements as stated above. New food managers or food handlers shall obtain
certification prior to employment or transfer or within thirty days of employment.
(5) Change of ownership. Upon change of ownership of a food establishment there will be a 60-day grace
period for the owner or operator to obtain food manager certification and a 30-day grace period to obtain food
handler certification the grace period shall commence on the date of actual change of ownership.
(6) New establishments. New food establishments must be in compliance with food manager and food handler
certification requirements prior to issuance of the first health permit.
(Ordinance 2007-66 adopted 12/11/07; Ordinance 2011-40 adopted 12/13/11)
(b) The certificate that shows proof of passing the written exam must be maintained on the premises with a copy sent to
the regulatory authority for file. The certified manager is responsible for training the employees of the establishment in proper
food handling procedures. Temporary food service establishments and food service establishments that handle only
prepackaged foods and nonpotentially hazardous foods, which require only limited preparation, are exempt from the
provisions of this section. (Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 7, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.011 Grease traps
(a) All food establishments must be equipped with a grease trap. A plumbing permit must be obtained by a licensed
plumber from the city building department prior to installation of the grease trap. Grease traps will be installed and sized in
accordance with the currently adopted plumbing code. The standard size grease trap for most food establishments will be a
1000-gallon/750-pound trap. However, the minimum grease trap allowed for smaller operations will be a 200 gallons/100 lb.
trap.
(b) Grease traps installed in food establishments shall be located outside the establishment unless approved in writing by
the building official, director of public works, utility director or his authorized representative. A grease trap may not be
installed in any part of a building where food is handled. Grease traps shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning.
(c) All grease trap waste shall be pumped and removed, and its tanks thoroughly cleaned at least once every three months
(90 days). Any deviation from this schedule must be granted in writing from the regulatory authority. The regulatory authority
may require additional pumping, increase the frequency of cleanings, or require immediate pumping of a grease trap if it
deems it necessary in order to prevent grease from entering the city sanitary sewer system. Any establishment that utilizes
microorganisms in any grease trap within the city will still be required to comply with the aforementioned pumping schedule.
(d) All grease waste must be transported by a grease waste hauler licensed by the state commission on environmental
quality (TCEQ). The grease hauler is responsible for proper disposal of grease waste in an approved permitted site. It is the
responsibility of the grease hauler to forward a copy of each waste trip ticket to the regulatory authority.
(e) Exceptions. Mobile food vendors, roadside vendors, temporary food establishments, day care centers, churches, and
concession stands are exempt from the requirement of grease traps. The regulatory authority may grant other exceptions
based upon food operations.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 11, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.012 Vent-a-hood systems
(a) Equipment. All food establishments whose cooking equipment used in processes producing smoke or grease-laden
vapors shall be equipped with an exhaust system that complies with all the equipment and performance requirements of the
NFPA 96 Code (National Fire Protection Association Code), and all such equipment and performance shall be maintained
per the NFPA 96 Code during all periods of operation of the cooking equipment. Specifically, the following equipment shall be
kept in good working condition:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/598
(1) Cooking equipment;
(2) Hoods;
(3) Ducts;
(4) Fans;
(5) Fire suppression systems; and
(6) Special effluent or energy control equipment.
All airflows shall be maintained. Maintenance and repairs shall be performed on all components at intervals necessary to
maintain these conditions. At least one manual fire extinguisher shall be mounted on a wall within the kitchen area for
secondary protection.
(b) Cleaning. The entire exhaust system shall be inspected and cleaned by a properly trained, qualified, and certified
company or person(s) acceptable to the fire marshal. Hoods, grease removal devices, fans, horizontal and vertical ducts to
the roof, and other appurtenances shall be cleaned to bare metal, prior to surfaces becoming heavily contaminated with
grease or oily sludge. The chart below indicates the required cleaning schedule.
Type of Volume of Cooking Frequency
Establishments serving solid fuel cooking operations Monthly
Systems serving high-volume cooking operations such
as a 24-hour cooking, charbroiling or work cooking
Quarterly
Systems serving moderate-volume cooking operations Semiannually
Systems serving low-volume cooking operations, such
as churches, day camps, seasonal businesses, or
senior centers
Annually
The fire marshal may require additional cleaning or increase the frequency of cleaning if he deems necessary in order to
prevent a fire hazard. After the exhaust system is cleaned to bare metals, it shall not be coated with powder or other
substance. Care shall be taken not to apply cleaning chemicals on fusible links or other detection devices of the automatic
extinguishing system. After cleaning is completed, the vent cleaning contractor shall place a label on the vent-a-hood
indicating the date cleaned and the name of the servicing company. A certificate showing the cleaning date shall be
maintained on the premises, and a copy forwarded to the fire marshal's office.
(c) Inspection. An inspection and servicing of the fire extinguishing system and listed exhaust hoods shall be made at least
once every six months by properly trained and qualified persons. Certification tags indicating date inspected should be
posted at the pull station and on the vent-a-hood unit. A certificate showing the inspection and servicing date shall be
maintained on the premises, and a copy forwarded to the fire marshal's office.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 12, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.013 Backflow prevention and cross connection control
All food establishments must comply with the state food establishment rules and the currently adopted plumbing code.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 13, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.014 Smoking
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/598
(a) Designated smoking areas. The owner or person in charge of any food service establishment shall designate a policy
for the establishment which:
(1) Designates separate rooms or areas in which smoking is permitted;
(2) Prohibits smoking; or
(3) Allows smoking throughout the establishment.
However, no area shall be designated as a smoking area in which smoking is prohibited by the fire chief or by other law,
ordinance or regulation. In designated smoking areas, existing physical barriers and ventilation systems shall be used where
possible to minimize the toxic effect on adjacent nonsmoking areas.
(b) Posting signs. Signs prohibiting smoking or informing patrons that smoking is allowed in designated areas only, as the
case may be, shall be displayed conspicuously at the front entrance by the owner or person having control of the food
service establishment covered by this section.
(1) In food service establishments in which smoking is prohibited, the sign displayed shall read as follows: “No
Smoking Permitted in the Food Establishment. City Ordinance No. 2000-53.”
(2) In food service establishments in which smoking is permitted in all areas, the sign displayed shall read: “This
Establishment Does Not Provide a Nonsmoking Area. City Ordinance No. 2000-53.”
(3) In food service establishments in which smoking and nonsmoking areas are provided, the sign displayed
shall read: “Smoking Permitted in Designated Areas Only. City Ordinance No. 2000-53.”
Facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials shall be provided near such sign and located so as to be readily
accessible for extinguishment of smoking materials.
(c) Unlawful for owners, operators and others to allow smoking in certain areas.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, director, manager, or person otherwise in control of a food
service establishment to allow smoking in areas so located where contamination of food, equipment, linens, and
single-service and single-use articles could occur.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, director, manager or person otherwise in control of a food
establishment to provide seating to any person who violates the provisions of this section by smoking in an area in
which smoking is prohibited or to permit such person to remain on the premises if he or she continues to violate
the provisions of this section after a warning to refrain from smoking.
(d) Unlawful for persons to smoke in areas designated as smokefree. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the
provisions of the establishment's smoking policy by smoking in an area in which smoking is prohibited if, after a warning to
refrain from smoking, he or she continues to violate the policy.
(e) Defenses.
(1) It shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection (d) of this section that the food service establishment
does not have a prominently displayed, reasonably sized sign as described in subsection (b) of this section.
(2) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that facilities for the extinguishment of smoking
materials, where required, were not located near such sign so as to be readily accessible.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 14, adopted 11/28/00)
(f) Regulation of restaurants and private clubs.
(1) Option 1: Grandfather all existing restaurants and then require SUP for new restaurants/private clubs to
allow smoking in perpetuity.
(2) Smoking in all restaurants and designated private clubs, existing on May 8, 2007, shall be permitted by this
subsection if said business registers with the city as an existing smoking establishment within 120 days of May 8,
2007. The city shall make all good faith efforts to notify said existing establishment of this registration opportunity.
(3) Any future restaurants or designated private clubs from May 8, 2007, requesting to allow smoking in their
facility shall require a specific use permit (SUP), which will only be granted upon satisfaction of room and air
system separation as provided elsewhere herein.
(Ordinance 2007-17, art. IV, adopted 5/8/07)
Sec. 6.02.015 Heimlich Maneuver poster
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/598
(a) All food establishments must have a poster posted depicting the Heimlich Maneuver for dislodging an obstruction from
a choking person. The prescribed sign shall be in a place conspicuous to employees or customers.
(b) Specifications. The Heimlich Maneuver sign shall meet the following poster requirements:
(1) The poster shall be printed on white 70 pound gloss coated cover stock and shall be no smaller than 15
inches wide by 18 inches long;
(2) The poster shall be printed in English and Spanish and in at least two conspicuous contrasting colors. Major
title and figure blocks shall be in contrasting color to remaining copy blocks;
(3) Major poster headings shall be a minimum Bengeat Bold 72 point or equivalent;
(4) Subheadings shall be a minimum Bengeat Bold Italic 60 point or equivalent;
(5) Remaining subheadings shall be a minimum Bengeat Bold 24 point or equivalent; and
(6) Body copy shall be Helios Bold 14 point or equivalent.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 15, adopted 11/28/00)
Sec. 6.02.016 Penalties
(a) Any person who violates or fails to comply with sections 6.02.001 through 6.02.010 or the provisions of the state food
establishments rules, and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that
does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 each day any violation or noncompliance
continues. Each day any violation or noncompliance continues shall constitute a separate offense. The regulatory authority
may seek to enjoin violation of these rules.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation, violating any provisions of section 6.02.012 shall be fined as provided in section
1.01.009 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Ordinance 2000-53, sec. 16, adopted 11/28/00)
ARTICLE 6.03 TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.03.001–6.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Smoking in Public Places*
Sec. 6.03.031 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Bar/designated private club. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by
guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including
but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs and cocktail lounges, and cabarets. A restaurant can also be classified as a private club
and requires a specific use permit (SUP) approval prior to being allowed to sale alcoholic beverages and gross quarterly
receipts of alcohol usually cannot exceed certain percentage, as stated within the conditions of approval for that use.
Business. A sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, trust or other business entity, either for-profit or notfor-
profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where
legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; governmental entities; and
private clubs.
(Ordinance 2007-17 adopted 5/8/07)
Electronic vaping device. Any electronically powered or battery powered device that uses an atomizer or similar device
allowing users to inhale nicotine vapor or any other vapor to simulate the smoking of tobacco, cigarettes, pipes or cigars. An
electronic vaping device includes personal vaporizers, electronic cigarettes (“e-cigarettes”), electronic pipes (“e-pipes”),
electronic cigars (“e-cigars”) and any other type of electronic nicotine delivery system or any part thereof. (Ordinance 2014-
32 adopted 8/12/14)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/598
Employee. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a
person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
Employer. A person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or trust, that employs
the services of one or more individual persons.
Enclosed area. All space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of
doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling.
Health-care facility. An office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or
other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or
other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of
surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition
shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health-care facilities.
Place of employment. An area under the control of a public or private employer that employees access during the course of
employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, private offices,
meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a “place of employment”
unless it is used as a child-care, adult day-care, or health-care facility.
Private organization. A nonprofit association of persons that:
(1) Is organized for the promotion of some common object;
(2) Is comprised of members who are passed on and elected by a committee or board made up of members of
the club;
(3) Is composed of members of which at least 50 percent reside in the county in which the premises of the club
is located;
(4) Grants membership to an applicant only after a written application has been filed with the chairman of the
membership committee or board and approved by the chairman;
(5) Owns, leases, or rents a building, or space in a building of such extent and character as is suitable and
adequate for the club's members and their guests;
(6) Provides regular food service adequate for its members and their guests;
(7) Collects annual membership fees, dues, or other income, excluding proceeds from the disposition of
alcoholic beverages but including service charges, which income must be sufficient to defray the annual rental of
its leased or rented premises or, if the premises are owned by the club, sufficient to meet the taxes, insurance,
and repairs and the interest on any mortgage on the premises;
(8) Is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their
annual meeting; and
(9) Does not compensate, directly or indirectly, any member or any officer, agent, or employee of the club, from
the disposition of alcoholic beverages to members of the club and their guests, other than charges for the service
of the beverages.
Private social clubs. Facilities or establishments that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the
general public is invited
Public place. An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to,
banks, bars, educational facilities, health-care facilities, hotel and motel lobbies, laundromats, public transportation facilities,
reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores,
shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private club is a “public place” when being used for a function
to which the general public is invited. A private residence is not a “public place” unless it is used as a child-care, adult daycare,
or health-care facility. A private vehicle is not a “public place.”
Restaurant. An eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and
public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and
catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term “restaurant” shall include a bar
area within the restaurant.
Retail tobacco store. A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of
other products is merely incidental. A store shall be deemed as utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and
accessories if at least 75% of the gross revenue of the store derives from tobacco products and tobacco accessories.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/598
Service line. A line in an enclosed area in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind,
whether or not the service involves the exchange of money.
Shopping mall. An enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments.
(Ordinance 2007-17 adopted 5/8/07)
Smoking. Lighting, burning, inhaling, exhaling, holding or carrying of a lighted tobacco product including, but not limited to,
cigarettes, pipes and any other lighted smoking equipment or device or the use of an electronic vaping device as such term is
defined in this division. (Ordinance 2014-32 adopted 8/12/14)
Sports arena. Sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks,
bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise,
participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. (Ordinance 2007-17 adopted 5/8/07)
Vaping store, vape shop, and/or vapor store. A retailer whose primary use is for the sale of electronic vaping devices and
other products associated with vaping, whose sale of other products is incidental, and whose gross revenues are over 80%
from the sale of electronic vaping devices and products associated with vaping. (Ordinance 2014-32 adopted 8/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.032 Application of article to city-owned facilities
No smoking shall be allowed within the enclosed areas of all city-owned facilities and shall be subject to the provisions of this
article. This will include but not limited to the following uses:
(1) Buildings owned, leased, operated or maintained by the city.
(2) Vehicles owned, leased, operated, shared, or maintained by the city when such vehicles are “pool” vehicles.
(3) Areas designated as park(s) or open space(s) and maintained by the city.
Sec. 6.03.033 Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas in all places that have public access and used by the general public within
the city, including but not limited to, the following places:
(1) Educational facilities, both public and private.
(2) Licensed child-care and adult day-care facilities.
(3) Health-care facilities.
(4) Lobbies/reception or waiting areas.
(5) Elevators or staircases.
(6) Restrooms, hallways, meeting rooms and other common-use areas.
(7) Cafeterias.
(8) Service line or standing in line or queue in a public area.
(9) Retail stores.
(10) Convenience stores and/or gas stations.
(11) Airport and other public transit facilities and/or depots.
(12) All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities
including but not limited to, attorneys' office and other professional offices, banks or other financial institutions,
laundromats, and country clubs.
(13) All sports arenas, stadiums, venues and amphitheaters.
(14) Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums.
(15) Bingo facilities.
(16) Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other
similar performance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/598
(17) Designated polling places.
(18) Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of
an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent
the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city.
(19) Shopping malls.
(20) Any other area with markings or signs which gives reasonable notice that the area is a no smoking area,
regardless of whether the means of designating said area complies with this chapter or state law.
(21) A distance of twenty-five (25) feet outside an enclosed area measured from the front door of the facility
where smoking is prohibited. (see section 6.03.035(6))
(22) Restaurants/designated private clubs that do not meet the requirements of section 6.03.034.
(23) Gas wells.
Sec. 6.03.034 Regulation of restaurants and private clubs
(a) Option 1: Grandfather all existing restaurants and then require SUP for new restaurants/private clubs to allow smoking
in perpetuity.
(b) Smoking in all restaurants and designated private clubs, existing at the time of this article adoption, shall be permitted
by this article if said business registers with the city as an existing smoking establishment within 120 days of the adoption of
this article. The city shall make all good faith efforts to notify said existing establishment of this registration opportunity.
(c) Any future restaurant or designated private clubs from the adoption date of this article requesting to allow smoking in
their facility shall require a specific use permit (SUP), which will only be granted upon satisfaction of room and air system
separation as provided elsewhere herein.
Sec. 6.03.035 Where smoking is not regulated
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the smoking
restrictions in this article:
(1) Private residences, except when used as a licensed child-care, adult day-care, or health-care facility.
(2) Private vehicles and nonshared or nonpool municipally owned vehicles.
(3) At least eighty percent (80%) of all hotel and motel rooms within that facility that are rented to guests shall
be designated as nonsmoking rooms. Smoke which is permitted from these smoking rooms must not infiltrate into
areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 2007-17 adopted 5/8/07)
(4) Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is
prohibited under the provisions of this division.
(5) Stand alone vaping store, vape shop and/or vapor shop.
(6) Private social clubs that have no employees, except when being used for a function to which the general
public is invited.
(Ordinance 2014-32 adopted 8/12/14)
Sec. 6.03.036 Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking and smoking establishment
(a) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an
establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that the entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking
area.
(b) Smoking shall still be prohibited in any place designated in section 6.03.033 and in which a sign conforming to the
requirements of section 6.03.037 is posted.
(c) Should the owner, operator, manager or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area declare
that there will be designated smoking area within the establishment, facility, or outdoor area, it shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Approval via a specific use permit (SUP) designating which area will be designated as a smoking area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/598
(2) A separate ventilation or air filtration system will be required and must meet the following requirements:
(A) Before installing a ventilation or filtration system in a designated smoking area, the owner or contractor
must first contact the building inspections department to obtain a mechanical permit. An engineered
stamped drawing must be submitted that shows the heating and air-conditioning installation including the
ventilation or filtration system, a complete floor plan of the facility including square footages, and the square
footage calculations of the desired smoking area. Work should not begin until these plans have been
reviewed.
(B) The ventilation system shall provide an air change every fifteen (15) minutes and shall exhaust the air
to the exterior of the building and shall not cause air from the smoking area to be drawn across the
nonsmoking area.
(C) The system must be inspected and pass a test performed by an approved third-party inspector to
verify that the system removes all visible smoke within fifteen (15) minutes and that air from the designated
smoking area is not drawn across nonsmoking areas.
(D) Smoking areas that fail the prescribed test shall be deemed to be nonsmoking until successfully
retested. The owner shall be required to pass additional tests at any time the system appears not to meet
the requirements.
(E) The approval of a smoking area is granted to the owner of the facility. Should the facility change
owners, the facility will be nonsmoking until the system has successfully passed the smoke test.
(3) Upon approval, the facility shall post the appropriate signs conforming to the requirements of section
6.03.037 and be posted at all public entrances stating: “smoking in designated areas only.” Approved smoking
area must have signage indicating that it is a smoking area.
(4) An alternative system that does not exhaust to the outside may be approved under the following conditions:
(A) The smoking area must be substantially separated from the nonsmoking area by physical means,
such as a partition (minimum 2 inches by 4 inches) and/or glazing fitted within the allowed 2x4 wall.
(B) The smoking area must be provided with separate heating and cooling system from the system
serving the nonsmoking areas.
Sec. 6.03.037 Posting of smoking/no-smoking signs
(a) Signs containing the words “no smoking” and/or the international “no smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously
posted in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator,
manager, or other person in control of that place.
(b) All restaurants and private clubs that lawfully allow smoking shall post a sign stating “smoking allowed” or “this is a
smoking establishment” on the primary entrance door.
(c) Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at every
entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited inside and within five (5) feet of the primary entrance.
(d) All signs required under this section must be at least ten (10) inches by fourteen (14) inches and shall include the
information required in this section and must be written in contrasting colors with block bolded letters at least one inch in
height.
Sec. 6.03.038 Nonretaliation/nonwaiver of rights
(a) No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for
employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this article or
reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article.
(b) An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any
legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party.
Sec. 6.03.039 Enforcement
(a) This article shall be enforced by the community service officer (CSO) or an authorized designee.
(b) Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the community service
officer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/598
(c) The community service officer, fire department, or their designees may, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise
mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article, or they may inspect at such other times as they may
determine at their discretion.
(d) It is the duty of the owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article to:
(1) Post all necessary signage as stated in section 6.03.037.
(2) Remove all ashtrays, matches, lighters, or other smoking-related paraphernalia from any area where
smoking is prohibited by this article
(3) Advise a person who violates this article that smoking is not allowed in that part of the facility
(4) Request a person to remove themselves from this location after that person has been advised that smoking
is not allowed and that person willfully continues to smoke.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to require the
city to enforce this article.
(f) In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the city manager or the community service officer
may apply for injunctive relief to enforce these provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 6.03.040 Violations and penalties
(a) A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an
infraction, punishable by a fine as provided herein.
(b) A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to
comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by:
(1) A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation.
(2) A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within a any twelve (12) month
period.
(3) A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within any twelve (12)
month period.
(c) Violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by the community service
officer by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the city may take
action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement.
Sec. 6.03.041 Public education
The community service officer shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of
this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance with it. The program
may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this article.
Sec. 6.03.042 Other applicable laws
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
Sec. 6.03.043 Liberal construction
This article shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes.
(Ordinance 2007-17 adopted 5/8/07)
Secs. 6.03.044–6.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Electronic Vaping Devices
Sec. 6.03.061 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Electronic vaping device. Any electronically powered or battery powered device that uses an atomizer or similar device
allowing users to inhale nicotine vapor or any other vapor to simulate the smoking of tobacco, cigarettes, pipes or cigars. An
electronic vaping device includes personal vaporizers, electronic cigarettes (“e-cigarettes”), electronic pipes (“e-pipes”),
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/598
electronic cigars (“e-cigars”) and any other type of electronic nicotine delivery system or any part thereof, including any liquid
nicotine products that are manufactured for use with electronic vaping devices.
Liquid nicotine. Any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol and/or any other
substance and manufactured for use with electronic vaping devices.
Minor. A person under 18 years of age.
Open display unit. In the context of the retail sale of electronic vaping devices, any device, furniture or furnishing within or
upon which electronic vaping devices are displayed to customers and includes, but is not limited to, any case, rack, shelf,
counter, table, desk, kiosk, booth, stand, and vending machine.
Retailer. A person or retail store who/which engages in the practice of selling electronic vaping devices to consumers and
includes, but is not limited to, the owner of an open display unit.
Self-service merchandising. In the context of retail sale of electronic vaping devices, the open display for direct retail
customer access and handling prior to purchase, without the intervention or assistant of the retailer or the retailer's owner,
employee or agent, including, but not limited to, the use of an open display unit of electronic vaping devices, whether
packaged or otherwise.
Vaping store, vape shop, and/or vapor store. A retailer whose primary use is for the sale of electronic vaping devices and
other products associated with vaping, whose sale of other products is incidental, and whose gross revenues are over 80%
from the sale of electronic vaping devices and products associated with vaping.
Sec. 6.03.062 Purchase or possession by minors prohibited
(a) A minor commits an offense if the minor possesses, purchases or attempts to purchase an electronic vaping device.
(b) A minor commits an offense if the minor falsely represents himself or herself to be 18 years of age or older for the
purpose of purchasing or receiving an electronic vaping device.
(c) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if at the time of the purchase, the minor:
(1) Was in the presence of an adult parent or legal guardian of the minor;
(2) Was in the course and scope of the minor's employment and the purchase of the electronic vaping device
was a part of the duties of such employment; or
(3) Was participating in an inspection or test of compliance in conjunction with local law enforcement.
Sec. 6.03.063 Sale or distribution to minors prohibited
(a) A person or retailer commits an offense if the person or retailer sells, gives or causes to be sold or given an electronic
vaping device to a minor or to a person who intends to deliver it to a minor.
(b) If the offense under this section occurs in connection with a sale of an electronic vaping device at a business by an
employee of the business, the employee who committed the offense is subject to prosecution.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that at the time of the sale, the minor presented the person with an
apparently valid proof of identification showing the minor was at least 18 years of age.
(d) A proof of identification satisfies the requirements of subsection (c) if it contains the name of the minor, a photograph
resembling the appearance of the minor and was issued by a state or federal government agency.
Sec. 6.03.064 Vendor assist sales required; self-service merchandise prohibited
(a) A person or retailer may not:
(1) Offer electronic vaping devices for sale in a manner that permits a customer direct access to the electronic
vaping devices;
(2) Offer electronic vaping devices by means of self-service merchandising; or
(3) Install or maintain an open display unit containing electronic vaping devices.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) if:
(1) A facility or business is not open to minors at any time;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/598
(2) A facility or business is a premises for which a person holds a package store permit issued under the Texas
Alcoholic Beverage Code; or
(3) An open display unit is located in an area that is inaccessible to customers.
Sec. 6.03.065 Enforcement
Violations of this division shall each constitute a separate offense and shall each be punishable as a class C misdemeanor
and shall each be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each day the violation exists. A culpable mental state is not
required for a violation of this division and need not be proved.
(Ordinance 2014-32 adopted 8/12/14)
ARTICLE 6.04 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE*
Division 1. Weeds, Grass, Brush†
Sec. 6.04.001 Height restrictions
(a) All weeds not regularly cultivated and which exceed 12 inches in height shall be presumed to be objectionable,
unsightly, and unsanitary, and are hereby declared a public nuisance. For purposes of this article, weeds shall mean
vegetation, including grass, that because of its height is objectionably unsightly or unsanitary, but excluding (1) shrubs,
bushes, and trees; (2) cultivated flowers; and, (3) cultivated crops.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of
any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city to permit weeds to grow to a greater height
than twelve inches (12") upon any such real property; including along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the premises
between the property line and the curb or, if there is no curb, between the property line and the driving surface.
(c) Cultivated agricultural properties. For cultivated agricultural properties that have been granted a property tax exemption
by the county appraisal district in which the property is located, on which the distance between the growing crop and abutting
property under different ownership or street right-of-way is less than fifty feet (50'), the person, firm or corporation owning,
claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, commits an offense if said
person permits weeds to grow to a height greater than twelve inches (12") between such growing crop and such property or
street right-of-way, provided such permitted height does not create a traffic visibility obstruction or traffic hazard. Upon written
notice to the property owner, this minimum distance may be increased or decreased on a case-by-case basis when deemed
necessary by the fire department or code official to insure adequate fire safety of adjacent property containing structures or
equipment.
(d) Uncultivated agricultural properties. For uncultivated agricultural properties that have been granted an agricultural
property tax exemption by the county appraisal district in which the property is located, the person, firm or corporation
owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any real property, occupied or unoccupied, commits an
offense if said person permits weeds to grow to a greater height than twelve inches (12") within fifty feet (50') from any
adjacent property under different ownership or any street right-of-way. Upon written notice to the property owner, this
minimum may be increased or decreased on a case-by-case basis when deemed necessary by the fire department or code
official to insure adequate fire safety of adjacent property containing structures or equipment.
(e) It shall be unlawful for the person, firm or corporation owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of
any real property, occupied or unoccupied, to permit the growth weeds, shrubs, trees, cultivated crops or other vegetation to
be maintained so as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing visibility or protruding into the right-of-way.
(Ordinance 2018-23 adopted 4/24/18)
Sec. 6.04.002 Notice of failure to comply; abatement of nuisance
In the event that any person, firm or corporation, owning, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real
property, occupied or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city fails to comply with the provisions of this article, it
shall be the duty of the community services department code enforcement officer or duly authorized city representative, to
give ten (10) days notice in writing to such person, firm or corporation violating the terms of this article. Said notice shall be in
writing and may be served on said person, firm or corporation by handing it to said person or to the agent of said firm or
corporation, or by letter sent by certified mail addressed to such person, firm or corporation at its post office address, or by
posting property with notice, placard or by stake. If the notice is returned undelivered/unclaimed by the U.S. Post Office, the
validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. Official action to correct the violation shall be
continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of the notice. The said person, firm or corporation will be
notified once per premises violation during a twelve-month period, beginning with the date of the first violation. Subsequent
violations of the same kind or nature committed within the same twelve-month period shall not require additional notice prior
to the start of appropriate corrective action as required by this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/598
Sec. 6.04.003 Abatement expenses
The expenses of abatement of said nuisance and associated administrative fees incurred pursuant to the above section shall
be paid by the city and charged to the owner of such property. An administrative fee of $125.00 shall be assessed for each
nuisance abated each time the said nuisance is abated. In the event the owner fails or refuses to pay such expense within
thirty (30) days after the first day of the month following the one in which the work was done, the city shall file with the county
clerk a statement of the expenses incurred in correcting the condition on the property. When such statement is filed, the city
shall have a privileged lien on such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to secure the
payment of the amount so expended. Such amount shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the
date the city incurs the expense. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure
had by the city. The statement of expenses filed with the county clerk, or a certified copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of
the amount expended in such work, improvement, or correction of the property, all as more particularly specified in chapter
342 Health and Safety Code, Vernon's Annotated Texas Civil Statutes, which is hereby adopted.
Sec. 6.04.004 Unlawful acts enumerated
(a) It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or organization to keep or deposit on or the scattering over such
premises of junk, trash, debris, abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment or any item which is not customarily
used or stored outside on property used for residential purposes. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any
trash or debris upon any vacant lot or private property within the city. It shall also be unlawful for the owner or occupant to fail
to remove trash or debris from any vacant lot or private property in the city after being requested in person or by certified
mail. The said person, firm or corporation shall be notified once per premises violation within a twelve-month period,
beginning with the first violation. Subsequent violation of the same kind or nature committed within the same twelve-month
period shall not require additional notice prior to the start of corrective action as required by this division. For the purpose of
this section, a nuisance is defined as, but not limited to whatever is dangerous to human life or health, whatever renders the
ground, water, air or food a hazard or injury to human life or health, or that is offensive to the senses that it is or tends to
become detrimental to the public health. Nuisance includes an object, place or condition which constitutes a possible and
probable medium of transmission of disease to or between human beings or object, place or condition which may be
specifically declared by this section to be a nuisance.
(b) Unlawful activities include but are not limited to:
(1) Broken, inoperable, or discarded household furnishings, appliances, machines, tools, cans, containers,
boxes and cartons, lawn maintenance equipment, play equipment, toys, and similar items;
(2) Used or discarded building materials;
(3) Materials or items stored on rooftops or porches of buildings when visible from the public right-of-way or
neighboring property;
(4) Damaged merchandise;
(5) Used, discarded, or broken automotive parts or equipment;
(6) Any other materials that tend by decay to become putrid or to provide harborage for rodents and other
vectors;
(7) Any and all of the following conditions, acts, commissions, omissions or deeds by any person shall be and
are hereby declared to be a nuisance;
(8) The act of allowing to exist any filth, refuse or manure which attracts insects, rodents, snakes or other
vermin, or tends to attract insects, rodents, snakes or other vermin on the premises, in the possession or control
by any person as agent, tenant or otherwise;
(9) The act of allowing to exist any full or overflowing privy, vault, cesspool or other receptacle for filth, night soil
and human excrement upon any premises owned or controlled by any person;
(10) The act of allowing the contents of a cesspool to be pumped so as to flow over any premises for fertilizing
or other purposes;
(11) The act of allowing any imperfect trap, sink or water closet or any other drainage appliance or fixture to
exist in any house or building within the city from which there shall rise any foul or offensive gas or odor;
(12) The act of casting, draining, throwing or causing to be cast, drained or thrown or distributed in any public
street or highway, gutter, alley or any public or private ground within the city any kitchen water, water from exhaust
pipes, laundry water, water from service stations and garages, air conditioners or other wastewater, slop, swill or
liquid filth;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/598
(13) The keeping of any lot or piece of ground within the limits of the city on which there is located a pool or
pond of unwholesome, impure, stagnant or offensive water;
(14) The allowing of paper, lumber, rocks or junk or other trash or debris to accumulate or remain on any piece
of property in such manner as to create a harborage or breeding place for rats, vermin or insects, or in such a
manner as to be offensive, injurious to public health or unpleasant and disagreeable in sight or odor to persons
residing or occupying any adjacent premises or to persons who may be in a public place or public right-of-way;
(15) The failure of any owner, tenant or lessee to sweep or cause to be swept the sidewalks in front of his or her
place of business, or the failure to place or cause to be placed all such paper, trash or debris therefrom in an
approved trash receptacle;
(16) To place, permit or abandon an icebox, refrigerator, deepfreeze or other airtight container, or container
which might trap a child therein without all the locks of all doors having been removed therefrom, outside of a
building or other structure or upon any publicly or privately owned premises;
(17) Any condition or place allowed to exist which constitutes a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes, bees and
other offensive insects;
(18) All sewage, human excreta, wastewater, garbage or other organic waste deposited, stored, discharged or
exposed in such a way as to be a potential instrument or medium in the transmission of disease to or between any
person or persons;
(19) Any collection of water in which mosquitoes are breeding within the limits of the city;
(20) Any place or condition harboring rats in the city;
(21) Overflowing dumpster;
(22) Blowing of grass clippings into the street;
(23) Open and unsecured structure or dangerous building or condition that may prove detrimental to children
whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned
wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound
fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation; or
(24) Attractive nuisance. Any condition that could prove detrimental for an inquisitive minor.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner, agent, occupant or any other person having supervision or control,
of any lot, tract or parcel of land, or a portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to allow, suffer or permit a
nuisance as defined herein to exist.
Sec. 6.04.005 Nuisance abatement order
(a) The director is hereby authorized to give notice to the owner of any property upon which a nuisance under this article
exists to abate the nuisance.
(b) If the owner of the property does not comply with an abatement notice issued by the director within ten (10) days after
the date the notice is received, the director may:
(1) Enter the property and do or cause to be done any work or improvements required to abate the nuisance;
and
(2) Pay for the work or improvements done and charge the expenses to the owner of the property.
(c) The notice must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or
(3) (A) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
(B) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which
the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(d) Notice will be deemed to have been received:
(1) For personal service, as of the date the notice was given personally to the owner;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/598
(2) For mailed notice, three (3) days after it was mailed;
(3) For notice by posting, ten (10) days after notice was posted.
(e) The director or his designee in the notice of a violation may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on
or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's
expense and assess the expense against the property.
(f) If a violation covered by a notice under subsection (e) occurs within the one-year period, and the director has not been
informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the city without notice may take any action permitted by
subsections (b)(1) and (2).
(g) If a nuisance presents an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person or to the environment, the
director may, without complying with the notice provisions of this section or without waiting the ten-day period, enter the
subject property and:
(1) Do or cause to be done any work or improvements necessary to abate the nuisance and remediate and
restore the environment; and
(2) Pay for the work or improvements done and charge the expenses to the owner of the property.
Sec. 6.04.006 Hearing after abatement without notice
Not later than the tenth day after the date the director or his designee abates a nuisance without prior notice under section
6.04.005; the director or his designee shall give notice to the property owner in the manner required by section 6.04.005.
Sec. 6.04.007 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this article is declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person, firm, group corporation or
organization found to be guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2011-42 adopted 12/13/11)
ARTICLE 6.05 POLLUTION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 6.05.001–6.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Clean Fleet Vehicles
Sec. 6.05.031 Acquisition
(a) Vehicle acquisitions for fleet expansion or replacement of model year 2004 or newer, shall be newest model year or
engine standard only.
(b) Vehicle acquisitions to replace model year 2003 or older vehicles must show at least a 25% reduction in nitrogen
oxides (NOx) emissions rate compared to the vehicle being replaced. (Waivers are possible when new technologies or
achievements of the required emission reduction are not possible.)
(c) Aftermarket technologies and conversions are acceptable for fleet expansion and fleet replacements.
(d) Aftermarket technologies and conversions must be Environment Protection Agency (EPA) and/or CARB verified or
certified or technology equivalent or better, as determined by the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG)
staff.
(e) Conversions must comply with the provisions of EPA Memorandum 1A and Addendum Revision (June 25, 1974 and
June 1, 1998).
(Ordinance 2005-66, sec. 1, adopted 11/22/05)
Sec. 6.05.002 Operations
(a) Vehicle idling is allowed only for safety, emergency response, vehicle maintenance, equipment activity, warmup/
operations in cold temperature, and manufacturer recommended minimum idle/warmup times.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/598
(b) Vehicles with the lowest NOx emissions that are capable of performing the required operational demands shall drive
the most miles.
(c) Fleet manager shall abide by latest refueling time/season guidance published by NCTCOG air quality planning.
(c) Nonemergency vehicles shall drive no more than the posted speed limit and avoid rapid acceleration.
(d) All drivers shall be trained on air quality appropriate operational requirements.
(Ordinance 2005-66, sec. 2, adopted 11/22/05)
Sec. 6.05.033 Maintenance
(a) Perform annual emission and safety inspections for all vehicles, even for vehicles with no state-mandated inspection
requirement.
(b) All vehicles with over 100,000 miles must have emission inspections every 25,000 miles thereafter.
(c) Perform manufacturer's recommended maintenance.
(d) Mandatory participation in any diesel or other Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or NCTCOG
inspection/maintenance program, including applicable test or pilot programs.
(Ordinance 2005-66, sec. 3, adopted 11/22/05)
Sec. 6.05.034 Compliance verification
(a) Public sector entity shall provide NCTCOG with an annual electronic update of fleet size and activity in a format
established by NCTCOG.
(b) The city acknowledges that entities not adopting and complying with the clean fleet vehicle policy and/or reporting
requirements will not be eligible for future clean vehicle funding and RTC may assess the city's compliance when considering
other RTC funding actions.
(Ordinance 2005-66, sec. 4, adopted 11/22/05)
ARTICLE 6.06 ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES
Sec. 6.06.001 General provisions
(a) All on-site sewage facilities (“OSSF”) within the corporate limits of the city must comply with the provisions of title 30
Texas Administrative Code (TAC), chapter 285, and all future amendments and revisions thereto are hereby incorporated by
reference and thus made a part of this article.
(b) A certificate of occupancy will not be issued for any single or multifamily dwelling unit or building until the OSSF has
passed final inspection by the appropriate regulating authority and the city has received notice of such inspection.
Sec. 6.06.002 Definitions
Unless otherwise stated herein, the definitions contained within title 30 TAC, chapter 285 shall be incorporated by reference
into and made a part of this article. Within the context of this article, the terms listed below shall have the following meanings:
Maintenance. Required or routine performance checks, examinations, testing, upkeep, cleaning, pumping, addition of
chemical(s) or mechanical adjustments to an OSSF, including replacement of pumps, filters, aerator lines, valves, or
electrical components. Maintenance does not include alterations.
Nuisance. A nuisance is:
(1) Sewage, human excreta, or other organic waste discharged or exposed in a manner that makes it a
potential instrument or medium in the transmission of disease to or between persons;
(2) An overflow from a septic tank or similar device, including surface discharge from or groundwater
contamination by a component of an OSSF;
(3) A blatant discharge from an OSSF;
(4) Any odor or smell that is attributed to an OSSF; or
(5) Any audible or visual alarm associated with an OSSF.
Sec. 6.06.003 Maintenance requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/598
(a) All OSSFs shall be operated and maintained by the property owner in accordance with all applicable federal, state and
local requirements and regulations, including this article, so as not to create a nuisance or health hazard.
(b) For aerobic OSSFs, disinfection is required prior to land application. The property owner is responsible for ensuring
that chlorine is present within the facility at all times and that the proper type of chlorine is utilized.
Sec. 6.06.004 Violation declared nuisance
Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be subject to
abatement by all methods provided by law.
Sec. 6.06.005 Penalty
Any violation of the terms of this article and of said code is further declared to be a misdemeanor, and any person found to be
guilty thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2018-15 adopted 3/27/18)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Creation of municipal court of record
(a) There is hereby created a municipal court of record in and for the city, to be designated as the city's municipal court no.
1. Any reference hereinafter to the “court” or “municipal court” shall be understood to mean the municipal court of record of
the city. The court shall possess all such powers and duties as now or hereafter may be prescribed by the laws of the state or
of this code relative to municipal courts.
(b) The court shall commence operating as a court of record on January 1, 2014. Cases disposed of before that date shall
be governed by the existing court rules and procedures. A case shall be deemed “disposed of” if a judge has entered a
finding of guilty or the defendant has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere.
(c) All cases filed in the court prior to January 1, 2014, but not disposed of by January 1, 2014, shall be tried in the court of
record.
Sec. 7.01.002 Jurisdiction
(a) Jurisdiction of the court shall be to the fullest extent provided by law for municipal courts including those provided for in
chapters 29 and 30 of the Texas Government Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, city charter and
ordinances of the city, and the laws of this state.
(b) The court shall have jurisdiction for all appeals as provided by state law or by ordinance.
(c) The court has concurrent jurisdiction with any justice court in criminal cases that arise within the territorial limits of the
city and are punishable by fine only.
(d) The court has civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under subchapter A, chapter
214, Local Government Code, or subchapter E, chapter 683, Transportation Code, as the same may be amended.
(e) The court has concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law for the purpose of enforcing health and
safety and nuisance abatement ordinances within the city's territorial limits and property owned by the city located in the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction under subchapter B, chapter 54, Local Government Code.
(f) The court has authority to issue:
(1) Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance abatement ordinance
violation; and
(2) Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending property and removing
the debris from the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/598
Sec. 7.01.003 Qualifications of judge, compensation
A person appointed as the presiding and associate judge of the municipal court shall be a citizen of the United States and a
resident of this state and county, a licensed attorney in good standing and shall have two or more years of experience in the
practice of law in the state. The compensation of such judge of the municipal court shall be set from time to time by the city
council.
Sec. 7.01.004 Rules of procedure
All prosecutions, practices and procedures in the municipal court shall be governed by and conducted in the manner
provided by the Code of Criminal Procedure and other applicable statutes of the state which govern prosecutions, practice
and procedure in justice courts of the state, insofar as same are applicable.
Sec. 7.01.005 Court fees authorized
Court costs or fees are hereby authorized to be imposed and collected in accordance with the provisions of applicable law.
Sec. 7.01.006 Fee for preparation of clerk's record
The fee for preparation of the clerk's record is set at $25.00 and the defendant shall pay the $25.00 fee for the preparation of
the clerk's record. If the case is reversed upon appeal, the fee shall be refunded to the defendant. The preparation fee does
not include the fee for an actual transcription of the proceedings. Except where indigence of appellant is established pursuant
to the laws of this state, the appellant shall pay the fees for an actual transcription of the proceeding and for the appellate
record.
(Ordinance 2013-52 adopted 12/10/13)
ARTICLE 7.02 BUILDING SECURITY FUND*
Sec. 7.02.00l Fee established
A $3.00 fee for municipal court building security shall be collected on all misdemeanor convictions. (Ordinance 97-30, sec. 1,
adopted 9/9/97)
Sec. 7.02.002 Uses of money collected
The qualified uses of the money collected shall be in accordance with Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017, including metal
detectors, identification systems, security personnel, security hardware, safety training, and continuing education on security
issues for the court and security personnel. (Ordinance 97-30, sec. 2, adopted 9/9/97)
Sec. 7.02.003 Application to convictions of offenses
This article shall apply to convictions of offenses committed on or after September 1, 1997. (Ordinance 97-30, sec. 3,
adopted 9/9/97)
Sec. 7.02.004 City council to approve expenditure of funds
The city council shall approve expenditure of the funds collected from the building security fee. (Ordinance 97-30, sec. 4,
adopted 9/9/97)
ARTICLE 7.03 TECHNOLOGY FUND*
Sec. 7.03.001 Established
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, known as the fund, pursuant to article
102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account.
(Ordinance 99-41, sec. 1, adopted 8/31/99)
Sec. 7.03.002 Establishment of amount of fee and assessment and collection
(a) The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars.
(b) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the
municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/598
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999.
(d) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer of the city, who shall deposit the
fee into the municipal court technology fund.
(Ordinance 99-41, sec. 2, adopted 8/31/99)
Sec. 7.03.003 Designated use of fund and administration
(a) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city,
including:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; or
(8) Docket management systems.
(b) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(Ordinance 99-41, sec. 3, adopted 8/31/99)
ARTICLE 7.04 JUVENILE CASE MANAGER FUND*
Sec. 7.04.001 Establishment
(a) There is hereby created and established a municipal court juvenile case manager fund, here-in-now known as the fund,
pursuant to article 102.0174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing general revenue account.
Sec. 7.04.002 Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection
(a) The fee shall be in the amount of five dollars.
(b) The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the
municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The defendant receives deferred disposition, including deferred proceedings under article 45.052 or 45.053
[of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure];
(3) The defendant receives deferred adjudication.
(c) The fee may be waived by the municipal court judge in case of financial hardship.
(d) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer of the city, who shall deposit the
fee into the municipal court juvenile case manager fund.
Sec. 7.04.003 Designated use of the fund and administration
(a) The fund shall be used only to finance the salary and benefits of a juvenile case manager employed under article
45.056 [of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure].
(b) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/598
(Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/12/11)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 8.02 ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLES†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.02.001–8.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Junked and Abandoned Vehicles
Sec. 8.02.031 Definitions
Junked and, or inoperable motor vehicle.
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it:
(A) An unexpired license plate; or
(B) A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate;
(2) Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(3) Has remained inoperable for more than 45 consecutive days.
Abandoned motor vehicle. A motor vehicle is abandoned if the motor vehicle:
(1) Is inoperable, or has been left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours;
(2) Has remained illegally on public property for more than 48 hours;
(3) Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in charge of the property for
more than 48 hours;
(4) Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway for more than
48 hours.
(Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/06)
Junked, inoperative, or abandoned vehicle. Any self-propelled motor vehicle which is inoperative, or does not have lawfully
attached to it an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, or that is wrecked, dismantled,
partially dismantled, or discarded, or that remains inoperable for 48 consecutive hours if the vehicle is on public property; or
for 48 hours if the vehicle is on private property. An abandoned motor vehicle is a motor vehicle that is inoperable and is left
unattended on public property for more than 48 hours or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the
consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more that 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on any
right-of-way of the city for more than 48 hours. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 2, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.032 Declared a public nuisance
In accordance with V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, junked, inoperable, abandoned vehicles which are located in any place
where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way, are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general
public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an unattractive
nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the state and
the city, and such vehicles are therefore declared to be a public nuisance. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 3, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.033 Unlawful to maintain
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/598
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent, occupant, or anyone
having supervision or control, of any lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or
unimproved, within the corporate limits of the city, to suffer or permit any junked, inoperative or abandoned vehicle to remain
upon said property. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 4, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.034 Duty to remove and abate
It shall be the duty of any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent, occupant, or anyone
having supervision or control, of any lot, tract or parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or
unimproved, within the corporate limits of the city to remove or cause to be removed from said property any and all such
junked, inoperative, abandoned vehicles so as to comply with the provisions of this division. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 5,
adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.035 Notice to remove and abate
In the event that the last registered owner of any lot, tract, or parcel of land, or portion thereof, situated within the corporate
limits of the city shall fail to comply with section 8.02.033 hereof, the city may notify such owner by giving not less that ten
(10) days notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance and that it be removed, and advising that a request for hearing
must be made prior to the expiration of said ten (10) day period; such notice must be personally delivered or sent by certified
mail with a five (5) day return requested by the city to the last known owner of said vehicle and to all lien holders of record,
and to the owner or occupant of the premises whereupon said public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by
the U.S. Post Office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than eleven (11) days from the
date of such return. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 6, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.036 Public hearing afforded on request
A public hearing shall be afforded prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof deemed a public nuisance, to be held
before the corporation court of the city, when a hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the premises on which said
vehicle is located, within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate said nuisance. Any order requiring the removal of a
vehicle or part thereof shall include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of
the vehicle if available at the site. After a vehicle has been removed from its location, the state department of highways and
public transportation shall be notified not later than five days after said removal. The department of highways and public
transportation shall immediately cancel the certificate of title to said vehicle pursuant to the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code.
Any vehicle removed from its location shall not be reconstructed or made operable. A junked vehicle or vehicle part shall be
disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or
salvage. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 7, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.037 Exceptions
This division shall not apply to:
(1) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and where same
is not visible from the street or other public or private property;
(2) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with
the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard; or
(3) A bona fide racing vehicle or antique automobile which is stored on a duly licensed trailer or otherwise kept
in such manner as not to allow undergrowth of weeds and brush, infestation by animals, or to create an attractive
nuisance to infants or minors.
(Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 8, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.038 Proceeds from sale
Proceeds from the sale of the junked, inoperative, abandoned vehicle, or a part thereof, shall be used to pay the costs of
removal of said junked, inoperative, abandoned vehicle or part thereof, with the surplus funds, if any, to be deposited into the
city general fund. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 9, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.039 Authority to enforce
Any regularly salaried, full-time employee authorized by the city to administer the provisions of this division may enter upon
private property for the purposes specified in this division, to examine vehicles or parts thereof, to obtain information as to the
identity of vehicles and the owners thereof, and to remove, or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a
nuisance pursuant to this division. Removal of a vehicle or vehicle part may be by any person duly authorized by the city. The
corporation court of the city shall have the authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this division. (Ordinance 2006-
12, sec. 10, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.040 Criminal complaint
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/598
Whenever a junked vehicle is found to exist within the city in violation of chapter 683, subchapter E of the Texas
Transportation Code, the city may, without notice, pursue the filing of an immediate complaint against the owner of the
vehicle or the person responsible for such violation. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 10A, adopted 4/11/06)
Sec. 8.02.041 Summary removal
Nothing in this division shall affect statutes of the state or ordinances of the city that permit immediate and summary removal
of a vehicle left on public property and which constitutes an obstruction to traffic. (Ordinance 2006-12, sec. 11, adopted
4/11/06)
ARTICLE 8.03 NOISE
Sec. 8.03.001 General prohibition
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others
within the city. (1990 Code, sec. 9-91)
Sec. 8.03.002 Operation of radios, instruments, etc.
Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, television set, musical instrument,
phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing
for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary
listeners thereto, shall be deemed a violation of this article. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine
or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50)
feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(1990 Code, sec. 9-92)
Sec. 8.03.003 Motor vehicles
The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or operated in such a manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1990 Code, sec. 9-93)
Sec. 8.03.004 Loading or unloading vehicles; destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers
The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and
destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1990 Code, sec. 9-94)
Sec. 8.03.005 Horns, warning devices
The sounding of any horn or other warning device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public
place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any such warning device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; and the use of such
warning device when traffic for any reason is held up shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1990 Code, sec. 9-95)
Sec. 8.03.006 Spinning tires of motor vehicle
The operation of any motor vehicle in such a way as to cause the tires thereof to screech except where the same is
necessarily caused in an emergency in an attempt by the operator to avoid an accident or the causing of damage or injury
shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1990 Code, sec. 9-96)
Sec. 8.03.007 Construction, heavy equipment
The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick,
steam or electric hoist or other tool, the use of which makes loud or unusual noise, shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(1990 Code, sec. 9-97)
Sec. 8.03.008 Unmuffled machinery
The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes
noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine
is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise, shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1990 Code, sec.
9-98)
Sec. 8.03.009 Yelling, shouting, etc.
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing in the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel
or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1990 Code, sec. 9-99)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/598
Sec. 8.03.010 Animals, fowl
The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long, continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of
any person in the vicinity shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1990 Code, sec. 9-100)
ARTICLE 8.04 GRAFFITI
Sec. 8.04.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Graffiti. Any unauthorized inscription, word, letter, figure, symbol or design visible from a public place, public right-of-way or
another person's property that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted or made in any manner on any surface of
tangible property regardless of its content or nature and regardless of the nature of the material of the structural component
or property. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that the inscription, word, letter, figure, symbol or design was unauthorized if:
(1) The graffiti is inconsistent with the design and use of the subject property;
(2) There is no specific authorization by the owner for the graffiti; or
(3) The person causing the graffiti was unknown to the owner.
Police chief. The chief of the police department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article or the
authorized representative of the chief of police.
Property owner. Shall include, but not be limited to, any equitable owner, any person having a possessory right to the land or
building or the person occupying it, any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety, or any person, individual, corporation, association or partnership in apparent or actual control of the
property or any agent or employee of any of the foregoing.
Unauthorized. Without the specific consent of the owner or without authority of law, regulation or ordinance.
Sec. 8.04.002 Failure to remove graffiti
(a) It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fail to abate or cause the abatement of graffiti from his or her property
after receiving notice of the nuisance and being given an opportunity to effect the abatement within the time allowed by this
article.
(b) The time period in which an owner shall abate or cause to be abated a graffiti nuisance shall be thirty (30) days, but
may be extended at the sole discretion of the chief of police, or the authorized representative of the chief of police.
Sec. 8.04.003 Notice
(a) Method of notice. Notice under this section shall be given:
(1) Personally in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner's post office address;
(3) By posting the notice on or near the front door of the main building on the property to which the violation
relates; or
(4) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the
graffiti relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(b) Contents of notice. Notice under this section shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the location of the graffiti on the property;
(3) The time period in which the owner must abate the nuisance;
(4) A statement that the owner must abate the graffiti nuisance within such time period;
(5) A statement that the owner may request a hearing within 30 days;
(6) A statement that should the owner fail to abate the situation within the stated time period, the city may cause
the correction and abatement work to be done on its own and shall charge the owner for the expenses involved,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/598
and upon failure of the owner to pay the city for such expense, fix a lien on the lot or parcel for the expense
involved.
(c) Time of notice. Notice under this section shall be deemed to have been received:
(1) For personal service, as of the date the notice was given personally to the owner;
(2) For mailed notice, the date the notice is mailed; or
(3) For notice by posting, thirty (30) days after notice was posted on the property or structure.
Sec. 8.04.004 Hearing
The owner of a lot or parcel subject to abatement under this article may request a hearing before the city municipal judge by
notifying the chief of police within thirty days following the date the city serves the required notice. The hearing shall be for
the purpose of determining whether the conditions constitute a public nuisance under the provisions of this article. Unless
notice is waived by the owner, the owner shall be provided written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least thirty
days prior thereto. At the hearing, the owner and the chief of police may present any evidence relevant to the proceedings. If
the hearing official finds that conditions constituting a nuisance hereunder exist, the hearing official shall issue an order so
stating.
Sec. 8.04.005 Hardships
(a) Each notice given under this article shall advise of the availability of the relief under this section. Applications for relief
under this section shall be submitted to the chief of police in such form and with such proofs of ownership, repeat
occurrences and related factors as may be required to determine whether the applicant is entitled to assistance within thirty
days following the date the city mails, posts or delivers the notices under this article.
(b) The chief of police may cause the graffiti to be abated without cost to the owner if an owner demonstrates that the
property for which notice of graffiti has been issued has been the subject of at least two prior graffiti incidents (evidenced by
either notices provided pursuant to this article or bona fide police reports) during the preceding 180 days, that the owner
complied with the requirements of this article by abating the prior graffiti within thirty business days of the date of the
applicable notice or police report and that the city has abated the property no more than twice in a calendar year.
Sec. 8.04.006 Abatement by city; payment of costs by owner
(a) If an owner fails to abate a graffiti nuisance during the time allowed for abatement and/or fails to respond to the notice
of the nuisance, the chief of police may order abatement of the nuisance to be done at the owner's expense. This remedy
shall be in addition to any other remedy available to the city.
(b) Persons authorized by the chief of police to abate the nuisance may enter private property to examine a public
nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance.
(c) Whenever the city shall abate a graffiti nuisance as provided by this article, the chief of police shall have the option of
selecting a private contractor to abate the nuisance.
(d) The city shall assess to the owner a charge for all work done to abate the graffiti nuisance, including an administrative
expense of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and cause the expense thereof to be assessed on the property upon which
such expense is incurred.
Sec. 8.04.007 Statement of expenses; lien
(a) A statement of the costs incurred by the city to abate the nuisance shall be mailed to the owner, if the owner and
mailing address is known, and, if not known, may be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The
statement shall demand payment within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt or publication.
(b) If such statement has not been paid within such period, the city manager or other official designated by the city
manager may file a statement of expenses incurred with the county clerk of the county stating the owner's name, if known,
and the legal description of the lot or parcel. The statement of expenses or a certified copy of the statement shall be prima
facie proof of the expenses incurred. Such statement shall be and the city shall have a privileged lien for expenditures made
and interest accruing at the rate of ten (10) percent on the amount due from the date incurred by the city. Such liens shall be
inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The city may foreclose such liens in a proceeding brought in
accordance with applicable law. The remedy allowed in this subsection shall not be the city's sole remedy.
(Ordinance 2009-25 adopted 5/26/09)
ARTICLE 8.05 CURFEW FOR MINORS
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/598
In this article:
Curfew hours.
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 5:00 a.m. of the following day;
and
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 5:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term
includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to
prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not
limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under 17 years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment.
The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to
streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and
shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in
control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Sec. 8.05.002 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if such person remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within
the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if such parent or guardian knowingly permits, or by insufficient
control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
hours.
(c) The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if such owner, operator or employee
knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
Sec. 8.05.003 Defenses
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.05.002 that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/598
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any
detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the
neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending a recreational or social activity supervised by adults who take responsibility for the minors; and,
sponsored by a school, the city, or a nonprofit organization that sponsors or provides recreational or social
activities for minors; or, going to and returning home therefrom without any detour or stop;
(8) Attending a religious service, activity, or a recreational or social activity sponsored or provided by a religious
organization, or going to and returning therefrom without any detour or stop;
(9) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of
religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or
(10) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with chapter 31 of the
Texas Family Code.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.05.002(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment
promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours
and refused to leave.
Sec. 8.05.004 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
section 8.05.003 is present.
Sec. 8.05.005 Penalties
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which
the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.00.
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original
jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 8.05.002(a) of this article and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
(Ordinance 2018-11 adopted 2/27/18)
ARTICLE 8.06 ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS
Sec. 8.06.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Restricted smoking material. Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes
whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or
a comparable chemical:
(1) Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum,
whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts;
(2) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and
homologues;
(3) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]
chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(4) 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
(5) 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or
(6) 1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/598
Products containing some of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial
names:
“K-2,” “K-2 Summit,” “K-2 Sex,” “Genie,” “Dascents,” “Zohai,” “Sage,” “Spice,” “KO Knock-out 2,” “Spice
Gold,” “Spice Diamond,” “Yucatan Fire,” “Solar Flare,” “Pep Spice,” “Fire n' Ice,” and “Salvia Divinorum.”
It is anticipated by the council that new products will be marketed under different names but will be subject to this
definition if they contain any of the chemical components set forth above.
Sec. 8.06.002 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the sale or delivery of restricted smoking materials as defined herein to any individual
within the city limits and to prohibit the possession of restricted smoking materials by any individual of age within the city
limits. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this article.
Sec. 8.06.003 Sale, delivery, offer, or gift
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any restricted smoking material to anyone.
Sec. 8.06.004 Use or possession of restricted smoking material
It shall be unlawful for any person of age to have in their possession or to use restricted smoking materials within the
corporate limits of the city.
Sec. 8.06.005 Defenses to prosecution
(a) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if the use of the restricted smoking material is at the
direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substances
within the state.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this section if an individual charged with a violation can provide
proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious undertaking or activity of
a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership supported by documentation from clergy or
spiritual leader recognized by the state.
(Ordinance 2010-27 adopted 9/28/10)
ARTICLE 8.07 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY*
Sec. 8.07.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Minor. A person younger than 17 years of age.
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
Premises where children commonly gather. A public park, private or public school, or day-care center or any public or
nonprofit recreational facility (including public swimming pools). For purposes of this article, landscaped street medians are
not public parks.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate
during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides,
resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent residence.
Sec. 8.07.002 Offenses
For each person required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the “database”)
because of a violation involving a victim who was a minor, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or
temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather.
Sec. 8.07.003 Evidentiary matters; measurements
(a) It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if that person's record appears on the
database and the database indicates that the victim was a minor as defined herein.
(b) For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a
straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/598
where children commonly gather, as defined herein, or, in the case of multiple residences, on one property, measuring from
the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather.
(c) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained and annually updated by the police department which shall be
available to the public for inspection at the police department.
Sec. 8.07.004 Culpable mental state not required
Neither the allegation of nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this article.
Sec. 8.07.005 Affirmative defenses
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply:
(1) The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence and has
complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date of the adoption of this article.
(2) The person required to register on the database was a minor when such person committed the offense
requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person required to register on the database is a minor.
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, within 1,000 feet of the permanent or temporary residence
of the person required to register on the database, was opened after the person established the permanent or
temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state.
(5) The person was at the time of the violation subject to community services supervision pursuant to section
13B of article 42.12 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended, and the court reduced or waived the
1,000-foot restriction for a child free zone under section 13B(a)(1)(B) of article 42.12 of the Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure, as amended, as it applies to the person's residence.
(6) The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this article would not apply to the person who
was erroneously listed on the database.
Sec. 8.07.006 Penalty
An offense under the article is deemed to be a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.00 for each offense.
(Ordinance 2015-13 adopted 5/12/15)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 9.01.001 Adoption of personnel manual
The revised personnel manual presented to the council at their regular meeting on August 13, 1996 is hereby adopted, and
the previous personnel manual is repealed. (Ordinance 96-13 adopted 8/13/96)
Sec. 9.01.002 Controlled substance and alcohol abuse policy
The controlled substance and alcohol abuse policy, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, be and it
hereby is adopted by the city. (1990 Code, sec. 2-106)
ARTICLE 9.02 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 9.02.001 Purpose and intent
The purpose and intent of this article is to secure the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city by:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/598
(1) Explicitly creating a police department and outlining both its authority and jurisdiction;
(2) Explicitly creating the position of chief of police to oversee and manage the police department; and
(3) Outlining the duties and responsibilities of both the chief of police and officers.
Sec. 9.02.002 Creation of department; jurisdiction
There is hereby created a police department of the city, at the head of which shall be the chief of police. The police
department shall be composed of the chief of the police and other officers and employees as the city council may provide.
The jurisdiction of the department shall be the corporate limits of the city and that property lying outside the city limits which is
owned by the city, except as otherwise provided by state law.
Sec. 9.02.003 Certification; compliance with state requirements
No person will be certified as a police officer who has not complied with the basic requirements established by the state for
police officers and by the city acting through the chief of police.
Sec. 9.02.004 Chief of police
(a) The police department of the city shall consist of the chief of police and such members as the city council may provide.
(b) The chief of police shall carry out the functions of the police department relating to public safety and enforcement of
ordinances, state and federal laws; organize the police department in conformity with the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the city; and shall promulgate policies, procedures, rules, directives and orders for the administration of the
department, including but not limited to discipline within the police department.
Sec. 9.02.005 Authority and duties of police officers
(a) Individual officers constituting the city police department are invested with all the power and authority given to them as
peace officers under the laws of the state. Inherent with this power and authority is the obligation to preserve the peace, to
enforce the ordinances and regulations of the city, the laws of the state and of the United States, to take legal custody of
offenders and to secure the citizens from violence.
(b) All personnel of the police department shall be bound by the most current directives, orders, rules, regulations and
procedures for the operation of the police department as may be promulgated or as hereinafter amended by the chief of
police, and failure to abide thereby shall subject the violating personnel to such disciplinary action as may be determined by
the chief of police within the limits of state law and city ordinances.
Secs. 9.02.006–9.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Reserve Force
Sec. 9.02.031 Established
There is hereby established a reserve police force to be known as the city police reserve, such force to be separate and
distinct from the police department.
Sec. 9.02.032 Regulation by chief of police
(a) The chief of police shall be the head of the city police reserve, and the members of the reserve shall be under the
authority, control and command of the chief of police, subject to all of the provisions of the city charter, ordinances of the city,
and laws of the state.
(b) The chief of police, may, by order, establish rules and regulations governing the city police reserve, to fix specific duties
of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline.
Sec. 9.02.033 Composition
The city police reserve shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization, and whose
applications have been accepted by the chief of police. The total strength of the City police reserve shall not exceed thirty
(30) members.
Sec. 9.02.034 Appointment
The chief of police shall appoint the members of the city police reserve. Members serve at the chief's discretion. Application
for membership in the city police reserve shall be filed with the city police department on a form prescribed by the chief of
police. Members of the city police reserve shall be appointed by the chief of police. Selection of eligible applicants to serve as
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/598
reserve police officers is subject to an interview, background investigation, physical ability test, polygraph examination,
psychological test, physical examination and drug screening.
Sec. 9.02.035 Duties
The duties of the city police reserve, subject at all times to the direction and supervision of the chief of police, shall be to
assist the regular members of the city police department in the enforcement of law and maintenance of peace and order,
when assigned duty by the chief of police. The chief of police may call the city police reserve into service at any time the chief
considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. Reserve police officers shall act
only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force. When assigned duty, members of the city police reserve will be
under the control and supervision of regular police officers when carrying out their duties. The chain of command established
for the city police department shall be strictly adhered to by members of the city police reserve.
Sec. 9.02.036 Powers and authority
(a) Members of the city police reserve serve as peace officers during actual discharge of official duties.
(b) No person appointed to the city police reserve may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until such
person has been approved by the chief of police.
(c) When duly committed to active duty upon the order of the chief of police, a reserve police officer shall have the same
powers of arrest and authority as a regular police officer as prescribed by the laws of the state and ordinances of the city.
This power and authority will be exercised under the supervision and control of the chief of police or designated members of
the city police department.
Sec. 9.02.037 Identification and uniforms
The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for members of the police reserve force and direct the manner in
which the same shall be worn. The badge and identification card issued to members of the police reserve force by the police
department shall be carried at all times by members of the police reserve force.
Sec. 9.02.038 Compensation and benefits
Members of the city police reserve shall serve without compensation. The city may provide hospital and medical assistance
to a member of the city police reserve who sustains injury in the course of performing official duties in the same manner as
provided for fulltime police officers.
Sec. 9.02.039 Termination of membership
(a) Membership of any person in the city police reserve may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for any cause,
and any member may resign from the city police reserve at any time, but it shall be the duty of the city reserve officer to notify
the chief of such resignation.
(b) In addition to the penalties provided by law, any violation of law under color of the performance of duty as a member of
the city police reserve, and any breach of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police, shall subject any
member of the city police reserve to summary expulsion and such fact may be published at the order of the chief of police.
(Ordinance 2008-50 adopted 10/28/08)
Sec. 9.02.040 City council approval
Upon completion of each potential police reserve officer's background investigation, the chief of police will submit the
candidate to the city council for their approval prior to the reserve candidate's appointment to duty. (Ordinance 2011-10
adopted 4/12/11)
ARTICLE 9.03 RETIREMENT
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.03.001–9.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Medicare Supplement for Retirees
Sec. 9.03.031 Findings of fact
(a) The city desires to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees.
(b) Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool is a health risk pool established pursuant to Texas Local
Government Code chapter 172, Texas Government Code chapter 791 and the Texas Trust Code to provide health benefits
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/598
coverage for employees and retirees and dependents of employees and retirees of political subdivisions of this state under
an interlocal agreement.
(c) The city is currently offering health benefits coverage through the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool
pursuant to interlocal agreement and chapter 172 of the Texas Local Government Code, both of which would allow the
extension of benefits to retirees of the city.
(d) The city desires to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits
Risk Pool and that the cost for such coverage be paid for by the individual retiree.
(e) The city desires to select a plan of benefits for its retirees to be provided by the Texas Municipal League Group
Benefits Risk Pool.
(f) Providing retiree coverage under the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool Interlocal Agreement is in the
best interest of the city, its retirees, and the public generally.
(Ordinance 98-61, sec. 1, adopted 9/8/98)
Sec. 9.03.032 City's election to provide coverage
The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through Texas Municipal League Group Benefits
Risk Pool under the pool's interlocal agreement. (Ordinance 98-61, sec. 2, adopted 9/8/98)
Sec. 9.03.033 Definition
The city hereby adopts the following definition of “retiree” for purposes of this division:
Retiree. Those individuals who left service with the city and have attained age 65.
(Ordinance 98-61, sec. 3, adopted 9/8/98)
Sec. 9.03.034 Adoption of benefits plan
The city hereby adopts the following benefits plans to be provided to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League Group
Benefits Risk Pool: Medicare supplement. (Ordinance 98-61, sec. 4, adopted 9/8/98)
Sec. 9.03.035 Applicability
This division will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date (September 8, 1998) or to employees which retired
under a previous ordinance. For individuals retiring after the effective date of this division, to qualify they must enroll for this
coverage within thirty (30) days of their retirement. (Ordinance 98-61, sec. 5, adopted 9/8/98)
Sec. 9.03.036 Effect
This division may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring while it is in effect.
(Ordinance 98-61, sec. 6, adopted 9/8/98)
Secs. 9.03.037–9.03.050 Reserved
Division 3. Medical Plans for Retirees
Sec. 9.03.051 Findings of fact
(a) The city desires to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees.
(b) Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool is a health risk pool established pursuant to Texas
Local Government Code chapter 172, Texas Government Code chapter 791, and the Texas Trust Code to provide health
benefits coverage for employees and retirees and dependents of employees and retirees of political subdivisions of this state
under an interlocal agreement.
(c) The city is currently offering health benefits coverage through the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee
Benefits Pool pursuant to interlocal agreement and chapter 172 of the Texas Local Government Code, both of which would
allow the extension of benefits to retirees of the city.
(d) The city desires to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League
Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool and that the cost for such coverage be paid for by the individual retiree.
(e) The city desires to select a plan of benefits for its retirees to be provided by the Texas Municipal League
Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/598
(f) Providing retiree coverage under the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool Interlocal
Agreement is in the best interest of the city, its retirees, and the public generally.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 9.03.052 City's election to provide coverage
The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental
Employee Benefits Pool under the pool's interlocal agreement. (Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 2, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 9.03.053 Definition
The city hereby adopts the following definition of “retiree” for purposes of this division:
Retiree. Any employee contributing to the Texas Municipal Retirement System who is age 60 and has 5 years' creditable
service, or any age and has 20 years' creditable service.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 3, adopted 2/13/01; Ordinance 2002-35, sec. 3, adopted 9/10/02)
Sec. 9.03.054 Adoption of benefits plan
The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League
Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool: the same medical plan(s) offered to active employees. (Ordinance 2001-08, sec.
4, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 9.03.055 Retiree contribution
The city elects to have the retiree medical contribution be the regular rate of the active employee contribution for as long as
the current medical insurance provider offers this rate structure for retiree medical coverage. The city elects to have the
retiree dental contribution be the regular rate of the active employee contribution for as long as the current dental insurance
provider offers this rate structure for retiree dental coverage. Subject to federal legislation describing the city's and the
retiree's compliance and rights regarding the retiree's continuation of healthcare coverage upon separation of employment,
retirees will pay 100% of the applicable medical and dental premiums until he/she reaches age 60. The city will pay the
applicable premiums for the medical and dental insurance or a portion thereof for the retiree from age 60 to age 65 as
follows:
(1) Retirees who have 20 years of service with the city, the city will pay 100% of the premium;
(2) Retirees who have 15 years of service with the city, the city will pay 75% of the premium;
(3) Retirees who have 10 years of service with the city, the city will pay 50% of the premium; and
(4) Retirees who have 5 years of service with the city, the city will pay 25% of the premium.
(Ordinance 2006-67 adopted 12/22/06)
Sec. 9.03.056 Applicability
This division will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date (February 1, 2001) or to employees who retired under
a previous ordinance. For individuals retiring after the effective date of this division, to qualify they must enroll for this
coverage within thirty (30) days of their retirement. (Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 6, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 9.03.057 Effect
This division may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring while it is in effect.
(Ordinance 2001-08, sec. 7, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 9.03.058–9.03.080 Reserved
Division 4. Texas Municipal Retirement System
Sec. 9.03.081 Additional rights granted
Pursuant to the provisions of section 854.202(g) of subtitle G of title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended, which subtitle
shall herein be referred to as the “TMRS Act,” the city adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees
in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the “system”):
(1) Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement
annuity if the member has at least 20 years of credited service in the system performed for one or more
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/598
municipalities that have adopted a like provision under section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act.
(2) Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the city has:
(A) Prepared an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at 20 years of service; and
(B) Held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, chapter 551,
Texas Government Code.
(3) The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force
at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(Ordinance 2001-36, sec. 1, adopted 8/36/01)
Sec. 9.03.082 Ordinances saved from repeal
The specific provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted and participated in by the city and its
employees, are hereby saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
Sec. 10.02.001 Established
The city council hereby establishes the standard construction details for the city attached to Ordinance 2013-51, including
text and detail amendments, additions, and changes to the standard construction details previously adopted in Ordinance
2004-19. (Ordinance 2013-51 adopted 11/12/13)
Sec. 10.02.002 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which an offense occurs or continues. (Ordinance 2013-51 adopted 11/12/13)
ARTICLE 10.03 IMPACT FEES†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.03.001 Short title
This article shall be known and cited as the “Midlothian Impact Fees Article.” (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.01, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.002 Purpose
This article is intended to assure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in the city by requiring
each development to pay its share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new
development. (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.02, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.003 Authority
This article is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code chapter 395 and the city charter. The provisions of this
article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized under state law or pursuant to
other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this article.
Guidelines may be developed by ordinance, resolution, or otherwise to implement and administer this article. (Ordinance 99-
12, sec. 1.03, adopted 3/8/99)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/598
Sec. 10.03.004 Definitions
Assessment. The determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed on new
development pursuant to this article.
Capital improvement. Either a water facility, a sanitary sewer facility or a roadway facility, with a life expectancy of three or
more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the city.
Capital improvements advisory committee. The city's planning and zoning commission, together with ad hoc representatives
as may be appointed from time to time, to fulfill the composition mandated by Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code sec. 395.058.
Credit. The amount of the reduction of an impact fee for fees, payments or charges for the same type of capital
improvements for which the fee has been assessed.
Facilities expansion. Either a roadway facility expansion, a water facility expansion or a sanitary sewer facility expansion.
Final plat approval or approval of a final plat. The point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval
and the plat has been released for filing with the county.
Final plat recordation or recordation of a final plat. The point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions precedent
to recording an approved final plat in the county, including any infrastructure or other improvements required by the
subdivision ordinance or any other ordinance.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.04, adopted 3/8/99)
Impact fee. Either a fee for roadway facilities, a fee for water facilities or a fee for sanitary sewer facilities imposed on new
development by the city pursuant to this article in order to generate revenue to fund or recoup all or part of the costs of
capital improvements or facility expansion necessitated by and attributable to such new development. Impact fees do not
include the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for such facilities, or the construction of such improvements, imposed
pursuant to the city's zoning or subdivision regulations, nor do impact fees include fees placed in trust funds for the purpose
of reimbursing developers for oversizing or constructing water or sanitary sewer mains or lines, or pro rata fees for
reimbursement of water or sanitary sewer mains or lines extended by the city. Impact fees also do not include charges for
water or sanitary sewer services to a wholesale customer such as a water district, political subdivision of the state, or other
wholesale utility customer. Impact fees also do not include road escrow payments imposed under facility agreements in
existence on the effective date of Ordinance No. 99-12 (March 18, 1999). (Ordinance 2001-63, sec. 1(A), adopted 10/23/01)
Impact fee capital improvements plan. Either a roadway improvements plan, a water improvements plan or a sanitary sewer
improvements plan adopted or revised pursuant to these impact fee regulations. (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.04, adopted
3/8/99)
Impact fee study. The report and update prepared by Freese & Nichols, Inc. dated:
(1) October 2016 titled Roadway, Water, and Wastewater Impact Fee Update: 2016 Impact Fee Study Update,
City of Midlothian, Texas, a true and correct copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary and is
incorporated herein by reference; and
(2) April 2018 titled 2018 Roadway Impact Fee Update: 2018 Impact Fee Study, City of Midlothian, Texas, a
true and correct copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary and is incorporated herein by reference.
(Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 5/8/18)
Land use assumptions. The projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses,
densities and intensities adopted by the city, as set forth in chapter 2 of the impact fee study, as amended from time to time,
upon which the impact fee capital improvements plans are based.
Land use equivalency table. A table converting the demands for capital improvements generated by various land uses to
numbers of service units, as may be amended from time to time. With respect to roadway facilities, the land use equivalency
table is table 3-3 set forth in the impact fee study. With respect to water and wastewater facilities, the land use equivalency
table is table 4-7 set forth in the impact fee study.
(Ordinance 2016-52, secs. A–B, adopted 12/13/16)
New development. A project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of land, which has the effect of increasing the
requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by
such activity, and which requires either the approval and filing with the county of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision
regulations, the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the city's water or sanitary sewer system, and which has not
been exempted from these regulations by provisions herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/598
Offset. The amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to fairly reflect the value of system facilities pursuant to rules
herein established or council-approved administrative guidelines, provided by a developer pursuant to the city's subdivision
regulations or requirements.
Plat. Has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. “Plat” includes replat.
Property owner. Any person, corporation, legal entity or agent thereof having a legal or equitable interest in the land for which
an impact fee becomes due. “Property owner” includes the developer for the new development.
Recoupment. The imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the city for capital improvements which the city has previously
oversized to serve new development.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.04, adopted 3/8/99)
Roadway. Any freeway, expressway, principal or minor arterial or collector roadways designated in the city's adopted
thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time. (Ordinance 2001-63, sec. 1(B), adopted 10/23/01)
Roadway facility. An improvement or appurtenance to a roadway which includes, but is not limited to, rights-of-way, whether
conveyed by deed or easement; intersection improvements; traffic signals; turn lanes; drainage facilities associated with the
roadway; street lighting or curbs. “Roadway facility” also includes the city's share of the costs for any improvement or
appurtenance to a roadway officially enumerated in the federal or state highway system. “Roadway facility” excludes those
improvements or appurtenances to a roadway which are site-related facilities. (Ordinance 2001-63, sec. 1(C), adopted
10/23/01)
Roadway facility expansion. The expansion of the capacity of an existing roadway in the city, but does not include the repair,
maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing roadway to better serve existing development.
Roadway improvements plan. The adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the roadway
facilities or roadway expansions and their costs for each road service area, which are necessitated by and which are
attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed 10 years, which are to be financed in whole or in part through the
imposition of road facilities fees pursuant to this article.
Sanitary sewer facility. A sanitary sewer interceptor or main, lift station, treatment facility or other facility included within and
comprising an integral component of the city's collection and transmission system for sanitary sewer. “Sanitary sewer facility”
includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. “Sanitary sewer facility” excludes a site-related facility.
Sanitary sewer facility expansion. The expansion of the capacity of any existing sanitary sewer improvement for the purpose
of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing sewer
facility to serve existing development.
Sanitary sewer improvements plan. The adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the sanitary
sewer facilities or sanitary sewer expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable
to new development, for a period not to exceed 10 years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the
imposition of sanitary sewer facilities fees pursuant to this article.
Service area. Either a roadway service area, a water service area or sanitary sewer service area within the city and, except
for roadway facilities, within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, within which impact fees for capital improvements or facility
expansion may be collected for new development occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will be
expended for those types of improvements or expansions identified in the type of capital improvements plan applicable to the
service area.
Service unit. For roadway facilities, a vehicle mile in p.m. peak hour, or, for water and for sanitary sewer facilities, a water
meter equivalent, which serves as the standardized measure of consumption, use or generation attributable to the new unit
of development, and as set forth in the land use equivalency tables.
Site-related facility. An improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is
for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of roadway facilities to serve the new development, and which is not
included in the impact fees capital improvements plan and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible
under subdivision and other applicable regulations.
System facility. A capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan
and which is not a site-related facility. “System facility” may include a capital improvement which is located off site, or within
or on the perimeter of the development site.
Water facility. A water transmission line or main, pump station, storage tank, water supply facility, treatment facility or other
facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's water storage or distribution system. “Water facility”
includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. “Water facility” excludes site-related facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/598
Water facility expansion. The expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of serving new
development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water improvement to
serve existing development.
Water improvements plan. The adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or
water expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a
period not to exceed 10 years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water facilities
impact fees pursuant to this article.
Water meter. A device for measuring the flow of water to a development, whether for domestic or for irrigation purposes.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.04, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.005 Applicability
The provisions of this article concerning water and sanitary sewer impact fees apply to all new, nonexempt development
within the corporate boundaries of the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The provisions of this article concerning
roadway impact fees apply only within the corporate boundaries of the city. The provisions of this article apply uniformly
within each service area. (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.05, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.006 Conditions of development approval
No application for new development shall be approved within the city without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this
article, and no building permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated
hereunder, unless a different time and/or method of payment has been authorized by agreement between the city and the
property owner. (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.06, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.007 Computation per service unit
(a) The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area shall be computed by dividing the total costs of capital
improvements necessitated by and attributable to new development in the service area identified in the impact fee capital
improvements plan for that category of capital improvements, discounted by a credit equal to fifty percent (50%) of such
projected costs, by the total number of service units anticipated within the service area, based upon the land use
assumptions for that service area. Maximum impact fees per service unit for each service area shall be established by
category of capital improvements and shall be as set forth in schedule 1. As an alternative to the fifty-percent (50%) discount
referenced above, the city may incorporate within the capital improvements plan for any category of capital improvements a
discount against the total costs of capital improvements, in the amount of that portion of ad valorem tax and utility service
revenues, if any, including the payment of debt to be generated by new service units during the period the capital
improvements plan is in effect, including the payment of debt, associated with the capital improvements in the plan.
(Ordinance 2016-52, sec. C, adopted 12/13/16)
(b) The impact fee per service unit which is to be paid by each new development within a service area shall be that
established by ordinance by the city council, as such may be amended from time to time, and shall be an amount less than or
equal to the maximum impact fee per service unit established in section 10.03.008(a). Impact fees which are to be paid shall
be as set forth in schedule 2, as amended, and made a part of this article by reference.
(c) Impact fee schedules 1 and 2 may be amended from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in section
10.03.016.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.07, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.008 Assessment
(a) Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as follows:
(1) For land which is unplatted at the time of application for a building permit or utility connection, or for a new
development which received final plat approval prior to or on the effective date of this article (March 18, 1999),
and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations prior to development,
assessment of impact fees shall occur at the time application is made for the building permit or utility connection,
and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit as set forth in schedule 1 then in effect.
(2) For a new development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations after
the effective date of this article (March 18, 1999), or for which replatting results in an increase in the number of
service units after such date, assessment of impact fees shall be at the time of final plat recordation, and shall be
the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit as set forth in schedule 1 then in effect.
(b) Following assessment of the impact fee pursuant to subsection (a), the amount of the impact fee assessment per
service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/598
the submission of a new application for final plat approval that results in approval of additional service units, in which case a
new assessment shall occur at the schedule 1 rate then in effect for such additional service units.
(c) Following the vacating of any plat or submittal of any replat, a new assessment must be made in accordance with
subsection (a)(2).
(d) Approval of an amended plat pursuant to V.T.C.S., Local Government Code, section 212.016 and the city's subdivision
regulations is not subject to reassessment for an impact fee.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.08, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.009 Payment and collection of impact fees
(a) Except as provided in subsection (c), impact fees shall be collected at the time the city issues a building permit for land
within the corporate limits, or at the time an application for an individual water meter connection to the city's water or
wastewater system is filed, for land located outside the corporate limits of the city. The impact fees to be paid and collected
are listed in schedule 2, as amended. The city may enter into an agreement with a developer for a different time and manner
of payment of impact fees, in which case the agreement shall determine the time and manner of payment. (Ordinance 2001-
63, sec. 1(E), adopted 10/23/01)
(b) The city shall compute the impact fees for the new development in the following manner:
(1) The amount of each impact fee shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units generated by
the new development by the impact fee per service unit for the service area using schedule 2, as amended. The
number of service units shall be determined by using the land equivalency table.
(2) The amount of each impact fee shall be reduced by any allowable offsets or credits for that category of
capital improvements, in the manner provided in section 10.03.010.
(3) The total amount of the impact fees for the new development shall be calculated and attached to the
development application or request for connection as a condition of approval.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.09, adopted 3/8/99)
(c) For sanity sewer facilities only, an applicant for subdivision approval seeking to reserve capacity for the proposed
subdivision in one or more sanitary sewer lines shall execute an agreement providing for payment of impact fees at the time
of final plat approval and shall make payment prior to such approval.
(d) The amount of each impact fee for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by multiplying the fee
assessed per service unit pursuant to section 10.03.007 by the number of service units generated by the development.
(e) If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the
impact fees shall be computed using schedule 2 then in effect, with credits for previous payment of fees being applied
against the new fees due.
(f) Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional impact
fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using schedule 2 then in effect, and such additional fee shall
be collected at the times prescribed by this section.
(g) Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, no impact fee may be collected for a new development which was
platted prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 99-12 (March 18, 1999), and for which a building permit is issued within
one year of such effective date, provided that a building permit that expires or is withdrawn for such development shall be
subject to collection of impact fees.
(h) No sanitary sewer impact fee shall be charged for a water meter used solely for purposes of irrigation.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.09, adopted 3/8/99; Ordinance 2001-63, sec. 1(F)–(I), adopted 10/23/01)
Sec. 10.03.010 Offsets and credits against impact fees
(a) The city shall offset or credit the present value of any system facility, pursuant to rules established in this section or
pursuant to administrative guidelines promulgated by the city, which has been dedicated or contributed to and received by
the city, or for which funds have been advanced by the property owner, after January 1, 1994, including the value of rights-ofway
or capital improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city, against the amount of the impact fee due
for that category of capital improvement. The offset or credit shall be associated with the plat of the property that is to be
served by the capital improvement constructed.
(b) All offsets or credits against impact fees shall be based upon standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted
as administrative guidelines, including the following standards:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/598
(1) No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities.
(2) No offset shall exceed an amount equal to the eligible costs of the improvement multiplied by a fraction, the
numerator of which is the impact fee per service unit due for the new development as computed using schedule 2,
as amended, and the denominator of which is the maximum impact fee per service unit for the new development
as computed using schedule 1.
(3) The unit costs used to calculate offsets and credits shall not exceed those assumed for the capital
improvements included in the impact fees capital improvements plan for the category of facility for which the
impact fee is imposed.
(4) No offset or credit shall be given for an oversized facility which is not identified within the applicable impact
fees capital improvements plan, unless the city agrees that such improvement supplies capacity to new
developments other than the development paying the impact fee and provisions for offsets or credits are
incorporated in an agreement for capital improvements pursuant to section 10.03.018.
(5) In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer for an offset or credit when no impact
fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to these impact fee regulations or for any amount
exceeding the total impact fees due for the development for that category of capital improvements, unless
expressly agreed to by the city in writing.
(6) Offsets or credits for system facilities dedicated to and accepted by the city for a development prior to the
effective date of this article (March 18, 1999) shall be prorated among the total number of service units within such
development and reduced by an amount equivalent to the number of existing service units within such
development and shall be further reduced by the amount of any participation funds received from the city and by
any payments received from other developments who utilize the system facility.
(7) The city may participate in the costs of a system improvement to be dedicated to the city, including costs
that exceed the amount of the impact fees due for the development under schedule 1 for that category of capital
improvements, in accordance with policies and rules established under the city's subdivision regulations. The
amount of any offset shall not include the amount of the city's participation.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.10, adopted 3/8/99)
(c) Offsets or credits created after the effective date of Ordinance No. 99-12 (March 18, 1999) shall expire within 10 years
from the date the offset or credit was created. Offsets or credits arising prior to such effective date shall expire ten years
therefrom.
(d) The provisions for offsetting or crediting contributions of land or improvements as provided in this section shall be
incorporated in an agreement for capital improvements in accordance with section 10.03.018.
(e) A property owner who wishes to provide for offsets or credits to roadway impact fees at the time of approval of a
preliminary plat may propose an agreement for capital improvements identifying offsets or credits for all rights-of-way to be
dedicated or improvements to be constructed for system roadway facilities to serve the preliminary plat as specified in
section 10.03.018. Upon approval thereof, as long as such preliminary plat remains in effect, impact fees for all new
development within such plat shall be offset or credited at the time of building permit in accordance with the agreement.
(f) Unless an agreement for capital improvements is executed providing for a different manner of offsetting or crediting
impact fees due, an offset or credit associated with a plat shall be prorated over the number of lots and applied to reduce an
impact fee at the time of final plat approval, for single-family residential developments. For all other developments, the offset
or credit shall be applied to reduce an impact fee at the time the first impact fee for the property is collected and, thereafter, to
reduce impact fees subsequently to be collected until the offset or credit is exhausted.
(Ordinance 2001-63, sec. 1(J), adopted 10/23/01)
Sec. 10.03.011 Establishment of accounts
(a) The city's finance department shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for each service area for each
category of capital facility for which an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this article. Each impact fee collected within the
service area shall be deposited in such account.
(b) Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the account and
shall be used solely for the purposes authorized in section 10.03.012.
(c) The city's finance department shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees
disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in section 10.03.012. Disbursement of funds shall
be authorized by the city at such times are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this article; provided,
however, that any fee paid shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten (10) years from the
date the fee is deposited into the account.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/598
(d) The city's finance department shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source
and disbursement of all fees collected in or expended from each service area. The records of the account into which impact
fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The city may establish a
fee for copying services.
(e) The finance department shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for said account which shall show the
source and disbursement of all funds placed in or expended by such account.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.11, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.012 Use of proceeds of accounts
(a) The impact fees collected for each service area pursuant to these regulations may be used to finance or to recoup the
costs of any capital improvements or facility expansion identified in the applicable capital improvements plan for the service
area, including but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs
(including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees). Impact fees may also be used
to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of
the city to finance such capital improvements or facility expansion. Impact fees also may be used to pay fees actually
contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant for preparation of or updating the impact
fee capital improvements plan.
(b) Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses:
(1) Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified in the
applicable capital improvements plan;
(2) Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansion;
(3) Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order
to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards;
(4) Upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing
development; provided, however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or
replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital improvements generated by new
development; or
(5) Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.12, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.013 Appeals
(a) The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following administrative decisions to the city
council:
(1) The applicability of an impact fee to the development;
(2) The amount of the impact fee due;
(3) The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of an offset or credit;
(4) The application of an offset or credit against an impact fee due;
(5) The amount of the impact fee in proportion to the benefit received by the new development; or
(6) The amount of a refund due, if any.
(b) The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the offset or
credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for determining
offsets or credits.
(c) The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the city within thirty (30) days following the decision. If the notice
of appeal is accompanied by a payment or other security satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original
determination of the impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is pending.
(d) Solely for purposes of appealing the amount of or the application of an offset or credit for roadway facilities against
roadway impact fees due, the following provisions apply:
(1) Upon written request by the property owner or applicant, the city council may reduce or waive the amount of
the impact fees imposed by this article, following a public hearing, only upon finding that the imposition of such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/598
fees, together with any dedication or construction of capital improvements required as a condition of development
approval, is disproportionate to the nature and extent of the new development proposed.
(2) The notice of appeal shall allege that the requirement(s) is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent
of the development being proposed. Thereafter, the appellant shall provide a study, including the following
information, to support his claim:
(A) Total number of service units attributable to the development, utilizing average trip length and
equivalency tables provided by the city. Service units also shall be estimated for each proposed or planned
use in the original or revised preliminary plat of which the development is a part.
(B) Appraised value of the land required to be dedicated, if any, for non-site-related facilities.
(C) Value of construction, if any, for non-site-related facilities, less any proposed participation or
contribution by the city.
(D) Total estimated impact fees due for the development, utilizing schedule 2 of the impact fees article
then in effect, together with impact fees due for each proposed or planned use in the original or revised
preliminary plat of which the development is a part. Estimated impact fees shall be discounted by any
available offsets or credits.
(3) The city council shall hear the appeal and determine whether requirements imposed by the subdivision
regulations, or under the city impact fees regulations, or the combination of requirements, is roughly proportional
to the nature and extent of the development proposed. In reaching such determination, the council shall take into
account the information in the study supplied by the appellant, the total costs to the city for supplying roadway
capacity to the proposed development and all development associated with the original or revised preliminary plat
of which the proposed development is a part, and the extent to which requirements imposed by the city benefit the
proposed development.
(4) Following such determination, the city council shall affirm or modify the requirement(s) imposed. The council
may take any of the following actions if it finds that the requirement(s) is not roughly proportional to the
development being proposed:
(A) Waive in whole or in part any roadway dedication or construction requirement of a non-site-related
facility; or
(B) Direct that the city participate in the costs of acquiring or constructing such facility pursuant to
standard participation policies; or
(C) Waive in whole or in part the imposition of roadway impact fees on the development.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.13, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.014 Refunds
(a) Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to these regulations, which has not been
expended within the service area within ten (10) years from the date of payment, shall be refunded to the record owner of the
property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such
governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as
set forth in article 1.03, title 79, Revised Statutes (article 5069-1.03, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), or its successor statute.
The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be submitted within sixty (60) days after the expiration of the ten-year
period for expenditure of the fee. An impact fee shall be considered expended on a first-in, first-out basis.
(b) An impact fee collected pursuant to these regulations shall also be considered expended if the total expenditures for
capital improvements or facility expansion authorized in section 10.03.012 within the service area within ten (10) years
following the date of payment exceeds the total fees collected within the service area for such improvements or expansions
during such period.
(c) Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to these regulations shall be refunded if:
(1) Existing service is available and service is denied;
(2) Service was not available when the fee was collected and the city has failed to commence construction of
facilities to provide service within two (2) years of fee payment; or
(3) Service was not available when the fee was collected and has not subsequently been made available within
a reasonable period of time considering the type of capital improvement or facility expansion to be constructed,
but in any event later than five (5) years from the date of fee payment.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/598
(d) If a refund is due pursuant to subsection (a), (b) or (c), the city shall divide the difference between the amount of
expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the service area for
the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the
refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due
shall be calculated upon that amount.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.14, adopted 3/8/99; Ordinance 2001-63, sec. 1(K), adopted 10/23/01)
Sec. 10.03.015 Rebates
(a) If a tract of land for which an impact fee has been paid is replatted, resulting in a reduction in the number of service
units, and the new impact fee to be collected is less than that paid, the city shall rebate the difference, provided that water
meters to serve the development have not been installed.
(b) If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, no tap purchases for
that category of capital improvements have been made to the development, and a modified or new application has not been
filed within six months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written application, rebate the amount of the impact fee to the
record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid. If no application for rebate pursuant to this subsection has
been filed within this period, no rebate shall become due.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.15, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.016 Updates to plans and revision of fees
(a) The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at least every five (5) years,
commencing from the date of adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in accordance with
the procedures set forth in Texas Local Gov't. Code, ch. 395, or in any successor statute. (Ordinance 2001-63, sec. 1(L),
adopted 10/23/01)
(b) The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital improvements plans and other factors such as
market conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (a) to determine whether the land use assumptions and
capital improvements plans should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly, or whether schedules 1 or 2
should be changed. Schedule 2 may be amended without revising land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at
any time prior to the update provided for in subsection (a), provided that the impact fees to be collected under schedule 2 do
not exceed the impact fees assessed under schedule 1.
(c) If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a), the city council determines that no change to the land
use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such update by following the
procedures in Texas Local Gov't. Code, section 395.0575.
(d) The city may amend by resolution the land use equivalency table (exhibit 1) at any time prior to the update provided for
in subsection (a), provided that the number of service units associated with a particular land use shall not be increased.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.16, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.017 Capital improvements advisory committee functions
(a) The capital improvements advisory committee shall perform the following functions:
(1) Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions;
(2) Review the capital improvements plans and file written comments thereon;
(3) Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plans;
(4) Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plans and
impact fees; and
(5) File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the capital improvements plans and identifying
perceived inequities in implementing the plans or administering the impact fees.
(b) The city shall make available to the capital improvements advisory committee any professional reports prepared in the
development or implementation of the capital improvements plans.
(c) The city council shall adopt procedural rules for the capital improvements advisory committee to follow in carrying out
its duties.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.17, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.018 Agreement for capital improvements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/598
(a) An owner of a new development may construct or finance a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the
impact fee capital improvements plan, if required or authorized by the city, by entering into a facility agreement with the city
prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The facility agreement shall be on a form approved by the
city, and shall identify the estimated cost of the improvement or expansion, the schedule for initiation and completion of the
improvement or expansion, a requirement that the improvement be designed and completed to city standards and such other
terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the city. The facility agreement shall provide for the method to be used to
determine the amount of the offset or credit to be given against impact fees due for the development.
(b) The city and such owner either may agree that the costs incurred or funds advanced will be offset or credited against
the impact fees otherwise due from the new development, or they may agree that the city shall reimburse the owner for such
costs from impact fees paid from other new developments which will use such capital improvements or facility expansions, or
from other funding sources. In the event that the city elects to reimburse an owner for the dedication, construction or
financing of a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, the terms of
reimbursement shall be incorporated in the agreement required by subsection (a). Reimbursement agreements shall further
be based on the availability of city funds from all sources including current and projected impact fee fund accounts.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.18, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.019 Exemptions
(a) The city council may partially exempt or reduce applicable impact fees rates to those rates set forth in the rate schedule
in effect as of June 16, 2003 for a regional-scale economic development prospect for which a written proposal has been
presented to the city by 5:00 p.m. July 8, 2003. For the purposes of this subsection, “prospect” means a pending real estate
development that has received preliminary review by the city, but for which no building permits have been issued, as of June
16, 2003; “regional scale” means those singular office, retail or industrial uses with over ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
gross leasable floor area, and generating at least ten (10) employees based on the Institute of Transportation Engineers
employment density factors.
(b) Uses that meet the definition of “church” as provided in the zoning ordinance (Ordinance 89-13 as amended) are
exempt from 100% of roadway, water and sewer impact fees.
(c) There shall be no other exemptions.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.19, adopted 3/8/99; Ordinance 2001-63, sec. 1(M), adopted 10/23/01; Ordinance 2003-24, sec. 1,
adopted 7/8/03; Ordinance 2003-58, secs. 1, 2, adopted 9/9/03)
Sec. 10.03.020 Use of other financing mechanisms
(a) The city may finance capital improvements or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan through
the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public utility districts or other assessment districts, or through any other
authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use of
impact fees.
(b) Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and
supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due
against the property.
(c) The city council may decide that the city shall pay all or a part of impact fees due for a new development pursuant to
duly adopted criteria.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.20, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.021 Additional and supplemental regulations
(a) Impact fees established by these regulations are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other
requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits, the sale of water or sanitary
sewer taps, or certificates of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of city's
comprehensive land use plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city
policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in
conjunction with the development of land.
(b) This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design, and
improvement standards and requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public
improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other regulations of the city, which shall be operative and
remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.21, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.022 Relief procedures
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/598
(a) Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which an impact fee has been paid may petition the
city council to determine whether any duty required by this article has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The
petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the duty be performed within
sixty days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this article and is late in being
performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within sixty (60) days of the date of the request and to continue until
completion. This subsection is not applicable to matters which may be appealed pursuant to section 10.03.013.
(b) The city council may grant a variance from any requirement of this article, upon written request by a developer or
owner of property subject to this article, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such
requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in confiscation of the property.
(c) If the city council grants a variance to the amount of the impact fee due for a new development under this section, it
may cause to be appropriated from other city funds the amount of the reduction in the impact fee to the account for the
service area in which the property is located.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 1.22, adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.023 Schedules
Schedule 1 and schedule 2, as referenced in this article, shall be as follows:
Schedule 1 and Schedule 2 Rates*
Schedule 1 Schedule 2
Type of Impact
Fee
Actual Costs Maximum
allowable at
50% of actual
cost
Residential Percentage of
Actual Costs
Nonresidential Percentage of
Actual Costs
Utility Facilities*
Water $11,092.00 $5,546.00 Based on
meter size
starting at
$2,000.00
18.03% Based on meter
size starting at
$2,000.00
18.03%
Wastewater $7,414.00 $3,707.00 Based on
meter size
starting at
$3,000.00
40.46% Based on meter
size starting at
$3,000.00
40.46%
Roadway Facilities**
Service Area 1 $2,054.00 $1,027.00 $786.00 38.27% $786.00 38.27%
Service Area 2 $1,814.00 $907.00 $786.00 43.33% $786.00 43.33%
Service Area 3 $1,760.00 $880.00 $786.00 44.66% $786.00 44.66%
Service Area 4 $2,470.00 $1,235.00 $786.00 31.82% $786.00 31.82%
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/598
Service Area 5 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 0% $0.00 0%
Service Area 6 $1,816.00 $908.00 $786.00 43.28% $786.00 43.28%
Service Area 7 $5,138.00 $2,569.00 $786.00 15.30% $786.00 15.30%
(Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 5/8/18)
*Rates based on utility equivalency service units multiplier for each use as established below.
** Rates based [from] the table 3-3 set forth in the impact fee study.
Utility Equivalency Service Units
Actual Meter
Size
Equivalency
Service Units
(ESU)
Water Wastewater Total
5/8" 1 $2,000.00 $3,000.00 $5,000.00
1" 1.4 $2,800.00 $4,200.00 $7,000.00
1.5" 2.8 $5,600.00 $8,400.00 $14,000.00
2" 4 $8,000.00 $12,000.00 $20,000.00
3" 14 $28,000.00 $42,000.00 $70,000.00
4" 24 $48,000.00 $72,000.00 $120,000.00
6" 50 $100,000.00 $150,000.00 $250,000.00
8" 72 $144,000.00 $216,000.00 $360,000.00
10" 116 $232,000.00 $348,000.00 $580,000.00
(Ordinance 2016-52, sec. D, adopted 12/13/16)
Secs. 10.03.024–10.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Water Facilities Impact Fees
Sec. 10.03.051 Water service area
(a) The boundaries of the water service areas for land within the city limits and within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction
shall be as set forth in figure 2-1 “Water Service Area” as set forth in the impact fee study. (Ordinance 2016-52, sec. E,
adopted 12/13/16)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/598
(b) The boundaries of the water service area may be amended from time to time, or new water benefit areas may be
delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 10.03.016. (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 2.01(B), adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.052 Water improvements plan
(a) The water improvements plan for the city is as set forth in figure 4-1 and table 4-3 of the impact fee study. (Ordinance
2016-52, sec. F, adopted 12/13/16)
(b) The water improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 10.03.016.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 2.02(B), adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.053 Adopted; amendment
(a) The maximum impact fees per service unit for water facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 1, as
amended, attached to Ordinance 99-12 and made a part hereof by reference.
(b) The impact fees per service unit for water facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby
adopted and incorporated in schedule 2, as amended, and made a part hereof by reference.
(c) The impact fees per service unit for water facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in
section 10.03.016.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 2.03, adopted 3/8/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 10.03.054–10.03.080 Reserved
Division 3. Sanitary Sewer Facilities Impact Fees
Sec. 10.03.081 Sanitary sewer service area
(a) The boundaries of the sanitary sewer service areas for land within the city limits and within the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction shall be as set forth in figure 2-2 “Wastewater Service Area” as set forth in the impact fee study. (Ordinance 2016-
52, sec. G, adopted 12/13/16)
(b) The boundaries of the sanitary sewer service area may be amended from time to time, or new sanitary sewer service
areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 10.03.016. (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 3.01(B), adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.082 Sanitary sewer improvements plan
(a) The sanitary sewer improvements plan for the city is as set forth in figure 4-2 and table 4-4 of the impact fee study.
(Ordinance 2016-52, sec. H, adopted 12/13/16)
(b) The sanitary sewer improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section
10.03.016. (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 3.02(B), adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.083 Adopted; amendment
(a) The maximum impact fees per service unit for sanitary sewer facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in
schedule 1, as amended, attached to Ordinance 99-12 and made a part hereof by reference.
(b) The impact fees per service unit for sanitary sewer facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are
hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 2, as amended, attached to Ordinance 99-12 and made a part hereof by
reference.
(c) The impact fees per service unit for sanitary sewer facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the
procedures in section 10.03.016.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 3.03, adopted 3/8/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 10.03.084–10.03.110 Reserved
Division 4. Roadway Facilities Impact Fees
Sec. 10.03.111 Roadway service areas
(a) The boundaries of the roadway service areas for land within the city limits shall be as set forth in figure 1 “Service Area
Revisions - 2018 Midlothian Roadway Impact Fee Update” as set forth in the 2018 Roadway Impact Fee Update. (Ordinance
2018-27 adopted 5/8/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/598
(b) The boundaries of the roadway service areas may be amended from time to time, or new roadway service areas may
be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 10.03.016. (Ordinance 99-12, sec. 4.01(B), adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.112 Roadway improvements plan
(a) The roadway improvements plan for the city is as set forth in figure 2 “Capital Improvements Plan - 2018 Midlothian
Roadway Impact Fee Update” and appendix B: Roadway Improvement Plan Projects of the 2018 Roadway Impact Fee
Update. (Ordinance 2018-27 adopted 5/8/18)
(b) The roadway improvements plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in section 10.03.016.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 4.02(B), adopted 3/8/99)
Sec. 10.03.113 Adopted; amendment
(a) The maximum impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in schedule 1, as
amended, attached to Ordinance 99-12 and made a part hereof by reference.
(b) The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby
adopted and incorporated in schedule 2, as amended, attached to Ordinance 99-12 and made a part hereof by reference.
(c) The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in
section 10.03.016.
(Ordinance 99-12, sec. 4.03, adopted 3/8/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 10.04 ESCARPMENT DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 10.04.001 Purpose
The purpose of the escarpment development regulations shall be to promote the following objectives:
(1) To maintain the equilibrium of steep slope areas and control problems of erosion, slumping, and other earth
movement.
(2) To minimize the increased runoff that accompanies the development of slopes, especially during the
construction phase when large tracts of land are disturbed.
(3) To minimize soil erosion by limiting activities that unnaturally expose the subsoils such as cuts, stripping off
topsoil, and major regrading.
(4) To reduce the hazards associated with slope development including flash flooding, landslides, mudslides,
rock falls, sheet, gully, and stream erosion.
(5) To minimize the scarring effects of grading and to protect and retain the natural character of the escarpment.
(6) To provide a factor of safety against unstable slopes or slopes subject to erosion and deterioration in order
to protect human lives and property.
(7) To ensure that development is planned to fit the topography, soils, geology, surface and groundwater
hydrology, and other conditions existing on the proposed site.
(8) To ensure a safe means of ingress and egress for vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and within the slope
areas and to provide access for emergency vehicles necessary to serve the slope areas.
(9) To minimize the high cost of public improvements and maintenance associated with the development of
slopes including the need for increased flood control and storm water management measures, maintenance of
sewer and water infrastructure and roadway maintenance.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 1, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.002 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal
planning and engineering practices.
Austin chalk. A geologic formation which overlies the Eagle Ford shale and is composed of alternating beds of resistant white
chalk and less resistant gray marl. The beds of chalk in outcrop are often fractured and are mainly white to buff in color.
Unweathered surfaces are gray.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/598
Beyond. A distance past measured horizontally from an imaginary line passing vertically through a point.
City engineer. That person or group of persons or consultants or any employee thereof, that has been appointed as city
engineer by the city council.
Civil engineer. A licensed professional engineer trained in general civil engineering principles and licensed in the state.
Crest. That point above the escarpment line where the slope becomes flatter than 4:1.
Developer. Anyone, including a person, partnership, or corporation submitting a plan for development in the escarpment
zone.
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estates including, but not limited to grading,
excavating, filling, dumping, removing of vegetation, or erecting of structures.
Eagle Ford shale. A geological formation which is directly overlaid by the Austin chalk. The Eagle Ford is dark gray to black,
soft, fissile to blocky, homogeneous shale which weathers blue-gray to tan.
Engineer. A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as heretofore or hereafter
amended, to practice the profession of engineering.
Escarpment zone. An environmentally fragile hillslope located immediately above and below the contact between the Austin
chalk and the Eagle Ford shale (escarpment line). The zone is a linear corridor, whose width is described as the distance:
(1) The greater of one hundred twenty-five (125) horizontal feet above the chalk and shale contact, or thirty-five
(35) horizontal feet beyond the crest (that point above the escarpment line where the slope becomes flatter than
4:1); and
(2) The greater of eighty-five (85) horizontal feet below the chalk and shale contact, or thirty-five (35) horizontal
feet beyond the toe (that point below the escarpment line where the slope becomes flatter than 5:1).
Factor of safety. A combination of factors which, when considered together, indicate whether the slope is stable at a slip
surface location. The factor of safety (Fs) is determined using the equation:
Fs = CR L + N tan
Ør
T
Where CR is the residual cohesive strength; Ør is the residual angle of internal friction; L is the length of the slip surface; T is
the total driving force tending to cause the slope failure; and N is the total normal force acting perpendicularly to the slip
surface. The factor of safety should be calculated using this basic equation in conjunction with generally accepted and
recognized state of the art methods for slope stability studies.
Geologist. A person licensed to practice geoscience under the provisions of the Texas Geoscience Practice Act and rules
adopted by the Texas Board of Professional Geoscientist within the discipline of geology.
Geotechnical engineer. A licensed professional engineer trained in geotechnical engineering (soils and rock engineering) and
is licensed in the state.
Grading. Any excavation, filling, clearing or combination thereof.
Person. A natural person, and includes heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or
corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of the aforesaid.
Slope. Described as the ratio of tread to rise; 4:1 signifies a land surface that rises one foot vertically over four horizontal feet.
Stable condition. The slope stability factor of safety as required by this article.
Structural engineer. A registered professional engineer, generally civil with special training in structural and foundation design
and registered in the state.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in
some definite manner.
Toe. The point below the escarpment line where the slope becomes flatter than 5:1.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/598
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 2, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.003 Escarpment development regulations
(a) Title. This article shall be known as the “escarpment development regulations” for the city.
(b) Applicability. This article applies to land located within the corporate boundaries of the city and within its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
(c) Development within escarpment zone prohibited. Except as otherwise herein provided, in the escarpment zone, no
construction of structures or other improvements, clearing of natural vegetation, excavation, storage, filling, dumping or other
development shall be allowed.
(d) Development applications. For any parcel of land to be developed that includes a portion of the escarpment zone, all
development applications for such land shall clearly demarcate the boundaries of the escarpment zone and, except as
otherwise provided in the these regulations, shall designate the escarpment zone as a “no build area.” Development may be
clustered on those portions of the development area that are not within the escarpment zone in accordance with section
10.04.004 of these regulations.
(e) Exemptions. The following developments are exempt from the prohibition in this section:
(1) Lawful mineral extraction or stone quarrying and accessory land uses. For land inside city limits, such
activities shall be exempt only if located within a medium or heavy industrial zoning district.
(2) Passive open space.
(f) Exceptions. The following developments shall be allowed in the escarpment zone subject to approval of an escarpment
development plan:
(1) Any lawful land use or development that is located within an area that is a physical remnant of the
escarpment; that is entirely topographically isolated from the continuous escarpment feature due to, for instance,
the construction of roadways bounding the area on more than one side; and, that is less than twenty (20) acres in
area; provided, however, that future development within the escarpment zone for such land shall not include cuts,
or fills resulting in slopes steeper than 6:1 or higher than eight (8) feet.
(2) Utilities located and developed in accordance with section 10.04.008(b)(1).
(3) Roads located and developed in accordance with section 10.04.008(b)(2).
(4) For a structure existing on the effective date of these regulations, the following types of development are
authorized:
(A) Removing less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground cover.
(B) Increasing the size of the structure by less than twenty (20) percent beyond the structure size reported
by the central appraisal district on the effective date of this article.
(C) The applicant may petition the city engineer to waive the slope stability evaluation required by section
10.04.005(c)(3); provided, however that, where alteration of the structure involves modification of any slope
over 6:1 or cuts in the toe area of any shale slope, or cut or fill slopes higher than eight (8) feet, a licensed
civil or geotechnical engineer must evaluate the modification and certify to the city engineer that such a
modification is stable. The city engineer, in his sole discretion, may waive such requirement as part of his
decision on the escarpment development plan in accordance with section 10.04.006.
(5) A development that is not subject to the city's zoning or subdivision regulations by operation of law.
(6) A development for which a petition for relief has been granted by the city council pursuant to section
10.04.010.
(7) Trails and related recreational improvements.
(8) Railroad main line or auxiliary line and necessary rights-of-way.
(g) Development plan. Prior to the acceptance for filing of any application for approval of a development listed in
subsection (f) above, including but not limited to an application for a planned development, plat, site plan, grading permit or
building permit, an escarpment development plan that meets the requirements of this article must be approved by the city. If
an escarpment development plan has been previously approved for the property, the applicant may rely upon such plan only
if the plan addresses the nature and extent of the development proposed.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 3, adopted 12/7/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/598
Sec. 10.04.004 Cluster development plan for planned development (PD) zoning district
(a) Applicability and purpose. For land to be developed within city limits or, for land in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction,
pursuant to a development agreement, that contains any portion of the escarpment zone, the property owner may submit an
application for approval of a cluster development plan. The purpose of a cluster development plan shall authorize the use of
residential density standards in substitution for minimum lot size standards for residential uses, or to authorize increased
impervious cover, lot coverage, or building heights for nonresidential uses within an approved planned development (PD)
zoning district.
(b) Effect. Approval of a cluster development plan authorizes the property owner to submit a plat application for the
property consistent with the approved cluster development plan and the regulations of the PD zoning district.
(c) Concentration of density or intensity of use. Pursuant to the adoption of a PD zoning district, the city may allow
development on that portion of the property not within the escarpment zone up to the maximum residential density or the
maximum intensity of use, for nonresidential development, that otherwise could be developed on the entire property, less any
part of the land within the escarpment zone that is developed pursuant to an exemption or exception in section 10.04.003.
(d) Other applications. A cluster development plan shall be submitted together with any proposed escarpment
development plan, and may be submitted with a plat application, provided that the cluster development plan application and
accompanying planned development ordinance are adopted first.
(e) Application requirements. In addition to the application requirements for a PD zoning district, an application for approval
of a cluster development plan shall contain the following information and documents:
(1) All documents and information required for a concept plan pursuant to the city's planned development
district regulations.
(2) For proposed developments consisting of single-family detached dwellings or duplex units, a detailed plan of
development illustrating the following specific matters:
(A) All environmental features and protected areas, including all areas included within the escarpment
zone;
(B) Layout of residential lots showing density and lot sizes;
(C) A description of how open space serving the development shall be satisfied for the phase of
development subject to the cluster development plan, including any proposed dedications of open space to
the public or to a private maintenance organization;
(D) A chart demonstrating compliance with equivalent residential density standards for the zoning district
in which the property is located.
(f) Processing of application and decision. An application for a cluster development plan shall be processed in the same
manner as an application for a planned development zoning district or significant change to a planned development, in
accordance with section 6.1 of the city's zoning ordinance (Ord. No. 89-13 as amended).
(g) Criteria for approval. The planning and zoning commission in recommending, or the city council, in taking action on the
cluster development plan application, shall apply the following factors:
(1) The cluster development plan meets the standards for residential density, as set forth in the city's adopted
comprehensive plan.
(2) The cluster development plan is consistent with the applicable planned development (PD) district
regulations.
(3) The cluster development plan conforms to the escarpment regulations.
(4) The cluster development plan contains sufficient buffering to assure compatibility with adjacent uses and the
character of the neighborhood.
(h) Expiration. Cluster development plans shall expire in accordance with the rules for expiration of the PD zoning district.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 4, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.005 Application for escarpment development plan
(a) Application. The following shall submit an escarpment development plan to the city.
(1) Any person desiring to develop property in the escarpment zone pursuant to an exception provided under
section 10.04.003 shall submit an escarpment development plan to the city. The application may be submitted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/598
simultaneous with another application for development in the escarpment zone, and where allowed by other
provisions of the city, may be processed with such other application, provided that the application for the
escarpment development plan is decided first. The city may require that information pertaining to the escarpment
development plan be included in other development applications within the escarpment zone.
(2) Any person desiring to develop within the drainage area above the escarpment (i.e. anyone who will
discharge surface water over the slope of the escarpment) shall submit an escarpment development plan to the
city. In this case, the application shall demonstrate compliance with the standards in section 10.04.008(a)(6), (a)
(8), (a)(13) and (a)(14).
(b) Pre-application conference. Upon request of a developer, a pre-application conference between the developer and
representatives from the city shall be conducted. The purpose of this meeting shall be to inform the developer as to what
information he shall be required to submit for evaluation by the various city departments and the number of copies which
must be submitted. Additionally, a tentative timetable for the submission of all requested information shall be determined.
(c) Contents of application. An escarpment development plan shall include the following documents:
(1) General requirements. The following general information, maps and drawings:
(A) The name and address of the developer and a statement of the developer's interest in the proposed
development.
(B) The name and address of any person holding or claiming an ownership interest in the property if
different from subsection (A) above.
(C) The name and address of the person preparing the items submitted.
(D) A general vicinity map of the proposed site on a scale of 1"=2000'.
(E) A brief description of the proposed development.
(F) A map outlining the proposed development site within the escarpment zone and showing the contours
of the property at a minimum of two-foot intervals with details of the terrain and area drainage on a minimum
horizontal scale of 1"=100' and a vertical exaggeration of 4:1.
(G) A drawing which shows cross sections for every one hundred (100) linear feet of the property on a
minimum scale of 1" = 50'.
(2) Site geology report. A geology report showing the geologic profile of the site shall be prepared and sealed
by a geologist, and shall include a discussion of the topography, soils, site geology including boring locations,
descriptions of borings, (including percent core recovery, rock quality designation, and description of
discontinuities), drilling methods used and depth and location of samples taken for laboratory analysis.
(A) The depth of the Austin Chalk–Eagle Ford Shale contact shall be specified on the boring logs. The
position of the water table shall be shown if applicable. Methods used to infer future position of the
groundwater table shall be described in relation to long term slope stability.
(B) The geologist shall construct a geologic map of the site showing the location of the escarpment line,
the area of outcropping Austin Chalk and Eagle Ford Shale. Methods used to delineate the escarpment line
shall be stated and calculations shown.
(C) The report shall indicate the results of a minimum of three borings which penetrate through the Austin
Chalk–Eagle Ford Shale contact. The maximum spacing between borings shall be 1,000 feet and all borings
must be within 1000 feet of the escarpment line. All boring locations shall be surveyed and presented on the
map which shows the location of the escarpment line. This map shall have 2 foot contours and be at a scale
of 1" = 100'. Conclusions and recommendations covering the geology of the site with regard to development
shall also be addressed.
(3) Slope stability evaluation. A slope stability analysis shall be submitted showing slope stability calculations
for each new structure proposed to be erected within the escarpment zone and the results of engineering tests
performed on samples of representative soil and rock within the site to adequately describe the existing geological
conditions.
(A) All tests and calculations for new development within the escarpment zone shall be performed under
supervision and sealed by a geotechnical engineer. The structural foundations for all new developments
shall be designed and sealed by a structural engineer.
(B) Calculations of slope stability analysis will indicate shape of slip surface(s), location of slip surface(s),
assumptions concerning the location of the water table, assumptions made regarding the density, and shear
strength used in the calculations and corresponding factor(s) of safety.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/598
(4) Design report. Recommendations shall be prepared by a licensed civil or geotechnical engineer detailing
design criteria for corrective measures, when necessary; and opinions and recommendations covering the
adequacy and safety of the site for development and long term maintenance of the escarpment slopes, as well as
conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures. The design report shall include the following:
(A) A table showing the results of engineering tests including, but not limited to, direct shear strength
tests, unconfined compression tests, moisture content and bulk density tests, Atterberg limits and swell
tests.
(B) Engineered drawings of each structure to be placed within the escarpment zone, such as foundations,
retaining walls, drainage outfalls, sewer and water lines, utility lines, transmission towers, roadways etc. at
an appropriate scale as determined by the city engineer, together with any preventative measures.
(5) Grading plan. A grading plan prepared by a civil engineer shall be submitted satisfying the city's adopted
grading and excavation permit ordinance requirements. The grading plan shall incorporate recommendations from
the design report.
(A) This plan will also include the pre-development and post-development hydrology/hydraulic analysis
indicating the runoff and flow and velocities over the site for the 1, 2, 5, 10, 25, 50 and 100-year storm
frequencies.
(B) The analysis shall show the proposed drainage plan which shall include the detailed plans for all
surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams, storm sewer outfall design and other
structural or protective devices to be constructed with or as part of the proposed work together with a map
showing the location of each.
(6) Soil erosion plan. A soil erosion control plan prepared and sealed by a licensed civil engineer or licensed
geoscientist complying with the city's adopted regulations and NCTCOG's Storm Water Quality Best Management
Practices for Construction Activities. The plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:
(A) Type of soil cover (as mapped by the U.S. National Resource Conservation Service).
(B) Erodability of mapped soils (K factor) and computation of anticipated erosion losses for the area using
RUSLE (Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation) and appropriate delivery ratios for pre-construction,
construction, and post-development phases.
(C) Existing and proposed development.
(D) A timing schedule indicating anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence
and time of exposure of each area prior to completion of control measures.
(E) Measures to be taken to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation of existing soils during and after
construction.
(F) A detailed site plan at a scale of 1" = 100 feet which shows existing vegetative patterns and proposed
vegetation removal and replanting strategy within the escarpment zone.
(7) Restoration plan. An estimate prepared by a civil engineer of the cost to restore that portion of the
development site which is in the escarpment zone to a stable condition also shall be submitted. Requited site
restoration shall be completed prior to any building permit issuance.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 5, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.006 Escarpment development plan review and approval
(a) Distribution and review. Upon submission to the city of a complete application for approval of an escarpment
development plan, the city engineer shall forward copies of the plan to the planning director, as well as any other interested
departments for their review. Outside consultants may be employed to review all or portions of the escarpment development
plan where such is deemed necessary by the city engineer. Where a consultant is utilized, the city engineer shall inform the
applicant of the consultant's name and address.
(b) City departments. After reviewing all information, reports and plans of the escarpment development plan, the various
city departments shall submit their evaluations in writing to the city engineer.
(c) Decision by city engineer. The city engineer shall review all information, reports and plans submitted by the developer
together with the city department evaluations to determine whether the escarpment development plan meets the standards
set forth in section 10.04.008. The city engineer shall have twenty (20) working days from the date the complete escarpment
development plan application is submitted to review the escarpment development plan and either approve it as submitted,
approve it with conditions, or deny it and provide the developer with a list of written objections. This time period may be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/598
extended for ten (10) working days upon written notice to the applicant by the city engineer stating the reason for the
extension.
(d) Acceptance of conditions. If the escarpment development plan is approved with conditions pursuant to section
10.04.008, the developer shall have ten (10) working days to file a notice of acceptance of these conditions, or the plan shall
be deemed denied. If the applicant accepts the conditions, he shall submit a plan revised in accordance with these conditions
to the city engineer within twenty (20) working days of the city engineer's approval unless the applicant gives the city
engineer written notice of a need for additional time.
(e) Amended plan. If the city engineer denies the escarpment development plan application, he shall provide the applicant
with a list of written objections. The developer will then have an opportunity to amend the plan. In all cases, the developer
shall have fifteen (15) working days to respond to the written objections from the city engineer. If the developer does not
respond to any written objections and receive approval for an amended plan, the plan shall be deemed denied.
(f) Action on amended plan. The city engineer shall have fifteen (15) working days to review the amended plan and either
approve it, approve it with conditions, or submit additional written objections, or the plan shall be deemed approved. This time
period for response to the amended plan may also be extended for fifteen (15) working days upon written notice to the
applicant by the city engineer stating the reason for the extension.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 6, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.007 Appeals to commission
(a) Appeal.
(1) An applicant may appeal the city engineer's decision to deny or conditionally approve the escarpment
development plan, or if the city engineer fails to act within the time periods prescribed in section 10.04.006.
(2) An adverse party may appeal the city engineer's decision to approve or conditionally approve the
escarpment development plan.
(3) A written notice stating the grounds for appeal shall be filed with the city secretary within fifteen (15) days
from the date the city engineer takes action on the application, or, if the city engineer fails to take action within
prescribed time limits, within (15) days from the end of such period. The city secretary shall forward this notice to
the planning and zoning commission.
(b) Hearing and record. The planning and zoning commission shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal. Prior
to the hearing, all materials previously filed with the city engineer by the applicant and all written reports by city departments
and the city engineer as well as the city engineer's findings and objections shall be submitted to the commission. The
commission may retain consultants to assist it in deciding the appeal.
(c) Decision. Upon closing of the hearing, no additional information or evidence may be submitted to the commission by
any party. The commission shall reach its decision within fourteen (14) days of closing the hearing. The commission may act
to:
(1) Approve the escarpment development plan as submitted by the developer;
(2) Approve the developer's escarpment development plan with conditions in accordance with section
10.04.008; or
(3) Deny the developer's escarpment development plan for specified reasons.
(d) Acceptance of conditions. If the escarpment development plan is approved with conditions by the commission, the
applicant shall have ten (10) days to file a notice of acceptance of these conditions, or the plan shall be deemed denied. If
the applicant accepts the conditions, he shall submit plans revised in accordance with these conditions to the city engineer
within thirty (30) days of the commission's action, unless the applicant gives the city engineer written notice of a need for
additional time. If the applicant takes no action within thirty (30) days of the commission's decision, the escarpment
development plan shall be deemed denied.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 7, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.008 Criteria and conditions
(a) Approval standards. The city engineer, or the planning and zoning commission on appeal, shall take action on the
escarpment development plan in accordance with the following general standards:
(1) No structure, cut or fill shall be constructed or placed where the slope stability factor of safety is less than
1.5.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/598
(2) Development shall be fitted to the topography, soils, geology, and surface and groundwater hydrology of the
site.
(3) Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever possible.
(4) When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be kept to the shortest practical period of
time and to as small an area as possible at any one time.
(5) Sediment basins or other approved installations shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from
runoff waters from land undergoing development.
(6) Discharge of storm water over the escarpment face shall be minimized with no concentrations or velocities
greater than that in the existing state or less than 3 fps.
(7) Collection and routing shall be implemented through the use of stilling basins, retention basins or flow
retardant vegetation. No unapproved ponding of water in the escarpment zone shall be allowed.
(8) Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate all increased runoff caused by changed soil and
surface conditions during and after development.
(9) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching or other approved best management practice shall be used to protect
areas exposed during development.
(10) Erosion control planning and methods shall be in conformance with NCTCOG's Storm Water Quality Best
Management Practices for Construction Activities.
(11) Grading shall be planned so as to have the least disturbances on the area's natural topography,
watercourse, vegetation, and wildlife. Grading shall not be allowed within the 100 year floodplain boundaries of
watercourses with the exception of those approved by the city engineer.
(12) Topsoil shall be stockpiled and respread on areas where vegetation will be grown after the grading is
completed, and methods to ensure erosion protection and maintenance of these areas until vegetation is
established shall be implemented.
(13) The increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development must be
maintained at pre-development rates and the increased runoff must be controlled within the approved drainage
facilities.
(14) Stream channel velocities shall not exceed 5 feet per second in the shale.
(15) Cuts for grading or utility installation in the toe area of the slope shall not be allowed, unless the application
conclusively demonstrates that over-steepening due to excavation of the toe will not result in progressive slope
failure.
(b) Standards applicable to particular uses. In addition to the standards in subsection (a), the following criteria apply to
particular types of development within the escarpment zone:
(1) Utility lines. Utility lines shall not be installed parallel to the slope face within the escarpment zone. Where
practicable, utilities shall be installed in a common trench to reduce the number of trench excavations. Roads and
rights-of-way shall be designed to allow flexible offsets for utility trenches. Separate cuts for utilities across the
escarpment shall be discouraged. Utility pipe joints shall be designed for surficial soil creep and expansive soil
conditions. Cut-off walls or seepage collars to decrease downslope seepage along trenches shall be installed to
limit migration of water and slope failures. Steep water and sewer lines situated in grades of 20% or steeper shall
be securely anchored with concrete collars immediately downslope from each bell and keyed into the trenchwalls.
Low density cement stabilized backfill shall be required along utility cutes in such areas of the escarpment.
(2) Roads. The number of roadway cuts through the escarpment zone shall be minimized in order to reduce
long term road maintenance costs as well as disruption of natural corridors.
(c) Conditions. The city engineer, the commission on appeal, or the city council on a petition for relief, may attach such
conditions to the approval of an escarpment development plan as are necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of these
escarpment development regulations, based upon the approval standards set forth in subsection (a) or (b) above. Conditions
may include but are not necessarily limited to, restrictions on the types, and intensity of uses, or the design of structures, that
may be placed on the development site; restrictions on the placement or design of roadway and drainage improvements and
utilities for the development site; structural improvements to assure the stability of the site or of individual lots or
improvements; preservation of existing vegetation or revegetation of the development site; and temporary improvements to
insure the stability of the development site during construction.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 8, adopted 12/7/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/598
Sec. 10.04.009 Approved escarpment development plan
(a) Performance bond. Upon approval of an escarpment development plan, the city engineer shall require the submission
of a performance bond in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost to restore that portion of the
development site which is in the escarpment zone to a stable condition. The performance bond shall not represent a
guarantee of safety or the cost to restore structures, buildings, etc., above, below, or in the escarpment zone. In determining
the amount of the required bond, the cost estimate submitted by the developer may be used, but it is not binding. This bond
shall be in the form of a corporate surety bond or a letter of credit from a bank or savings and loan association acceptable to
the city. Upon satisfactory completion of all work described in the escarpment development plan within the escarpment zone,
the bond shall be surrendered. The bond must be submitted and approved by the city engineer before any work may begin at
the site.
(b) Single-family dwelling exception. Construction of individual single-family dwellings shall be excluded from these
bonding requirements. Any developer activity which damages property and is not repaired is subject to repair by the city. A
lien shall be filed on the property for all cost incurred by the city.
(c) Action on subdivision plat. If the escarpment development plan was submitted with a request for approval of a plat, the
city engineer shall notify the planning and zoning commission of the grant of approval of the escarpment development plan.
The commission's action on the plat shall be consistent with the approved escarpment development plan.
(d) Action on building permit. If the escarpment development plan was submitted with a request for a building permit, the
approved plan shall become a part of the building plans and may not be changed or altered in any way except upon written
approval of the city engineer.
(e) Lapse. If actual development does not begin on the site within two (2) years of approval of the escarpment
development plan, the escarpment development plan shall expire, unless the developer submits a report to the city engineer
signed by a geotechnical engineer stating that there has been no change in existing conditions which requires amending the
approved plans, in which case the escarpment development plan may be extended for a period not to exceed one additional
year.
(f) Maintenance bond. A maintenance bond which is required for the subdivision ordinance shall include the costs of any
improvements required by this article.
(g) Assurances. Before final approval of an escarpment development plan, the applicant is required to submit an affidavit
signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the state stating as follows: “I (engineer's name) do
hereby state that I and/or trained personnel under my direct supervision, made sufficient site visits to the (project)
during construction to confirm that the construction was done in general compliance with the plans and specifications. The
necessary laboratory testing required for quality control was performed by (testing lab). I have reviewed all
testing reports, and there are no deficiencies. After the completion of the construction, I personally made a final inspection of
(project) on (date) and all known deficiencies have been corrected.”
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 9, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.010 Petition for relief
(a) Petition. A property owner may petition the city council in writing for relief under these escarpment development
regulations in the following circumstances:
(1) The property owner is prohibited from developing within the escarpment zone by these regulations, and his
application for a cluster development plan has been denied or approved with conditions which he does not accept;
(2) The property owner's application for an escarpment development plan allowed by these regulations has
been denied or conditionally approved by the planning and zoning commission, or the application is deemed
denied under these regulations.
(b) Grounds for relief. The petition shall set forth the grounds for relief in detail, and must assert that the operation of these
regulations or the denial or conditions imposed on an application hereunder deprives the property owner of a vested right to
develop his land free from one or more requirements contained in these escarpment development regulations, or that the
effect of the regulations or action by the city on his application deprives him of the economically viable use of his property.
The petition also shall identify the provisions of the regulations or the conditions imposed on the application that should be
removed or relaxed in order to provide relief.
(c) Procedures. The petition for relief must be submitted within fifteen (15) days of the date the city takes final action on the
application for the cluster development plan or escarpment development plan to the city secretary. The city secretary shall
forward this notice to the city council and set a date for a public hearing before the council. Prior to the hearing all materials
previously filed with the city engineer by the developer, all written reports by city departments, the city engineer, and the
appeals board, as well as the city engineer's and commission's findings and objections shall be submitted to the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/598
(d) Standards. In deciding whether to grant relief to the applicant based upon the petition, the city council shall take into
consideration the following:
(1) The prospective harm to the public's health, safety and welfare if such relief is granted;
(2) The extent to which development within the escarpment zone on the proposed development site would
constitute public or private nuisance;
(3) The extent to which relief can be provided through redesign of the project;
(4) The types and numbers of development permits for the project previously obtained by the applicant;
(5) Any construction of structures in reasonable reliance on prior development permits;
(6) The installation of infrastructure or issuance of bonds to finance such infrastructure to serve development
within the escarpment zone;
(7) The total expenditures made in connection with the proposed development I reliance on prior development
permits, and whether such expenditures were made in connection with the entire project or a particular portion or
phase;
(8) Any fees reasonably paid in connection with the project;
(9) Any representation made by the city concerning the project and reasonably relied upon to the detriment of
the applicant.
(e) Decision. Upon closing of the hearing, no additional information or evidence may be submitted to the city council by
any party. The city council shall reach its decision within fourteen (14) days of closing the hearing. The city council may:
(1) Approve or modify the decision of the planning and zoning commission on the application for a cluster
development plan or escarpment development plan, in order to avoid a deprivation of a vested right or the
economically viable use of the property. If such action is taken, the city council shall modify conditions or authorize
variation from standards contained in this chapter only to the extent necessary to prevent the deprivation of
economic use, and may impose additional conditions to achieve such objectives.
(2) Deny the petition for relief for specified reasons.
(f) Expiration of approval. Where the city council grants relief on the petition, all claims pertaining to vested rights to
development which is authorized thereby shall be deemed waived, forfeited and void, if the following events occur:
(1) An application for a development permit is not filed within thirty (30) days of the city council's granting of
such relief; or
(2) Substantial construction pursuant to such development permit, including site grading and the pouring of
permanent foundations, is not completed within one year of the issuance of a building permit, or as otherwise
provided by the city council in granting relief.
(g) Resubmission. If the cluster development plan or escarpment development plan is approved with conditions by the city
council on the petition for relief, the property owner shall have ten (10) days to file a notice of acceptance of these conditions,
or the plan shall be deemed denied. If the property owner accepts the conditions, he shall submit plans revised in
accordance with these conditions to the city engineer written notice of a need for additional time.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 10, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.011 Enforcement
(a) Any person conducting development in the escarpment zone without an escarpment development plan, or any person
owning, leasing or occupying property in the escarpment zone on which development is being conducted without an
escarpment development plan shall be considered to be in violation of this article.
(b) Each day that development is conducted in the escarpment zone without an escarpment development plan shall be
considered a separate violation.
(c) Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or shall fail to comply, therewith or with any requirement
thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine, and upon conviction of any such violation in an
amount to not exceed that allowed by state law.
(Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 11, adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.012 Relationship to other regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/598
The escarpment development regulations established by this article are additional and supplemental to, and not in
substitution of any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land. Such development regulations are
intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the city's adopted comprehensive plan, subdivision ordinance,
zoning ordinance, building codes, grading ordinance, and all other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city
seeks to manage the development of land and protect the environment. In the case of any conflict between these
escarpment regulations and any other city regulation, the more strict regulation shall apply. (Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 12,
adopted 12/7/04)
Sec. 10.04.013 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any
provision hereof within the corporate limits of the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject
to a fine provided in section 1.01.009, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable accordingly. (Ordinance 2004-66, sec. 13, adopted 12/7/04)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 AD VALOREM TAXES†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 11.02.001 Additional penalty for delinquency
(a) Whenever any accounts for delinquent taxes owed the city are given to its tax attorney for collection, on or after July 1
of the year they become delinquent, the city shall be entitled to, and shall collect, an additional penalty of fifteen (15) percent
of the delinquent taxes and penalty (including any interest owed) due on each delinquent property at the time of collection,
either before or after suit and/or foreclosure sale as provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code section 33.07.
(b) In addition to the collection expenses provided for in subsection (a) of this section, the city shall be entitled to collect
the actual expenses incurred by the city in providing all data and information as to the name, identity, and location of
necessary parties and the legal description of property necessary to the filing of any suit for delinquent taxes.
(1990 Code, sec. 12-31)
State law reference–Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.02.002 Goods in transit
Goods in transit, personal property, as defined by the amendments to Texas Tax Code, section 11.253 under Senate Bill 1,
shall be, and are hereby declared to be, taxable by the city for tax year 2012 and for every year thereafter, all as provided for
and in accordance with Texas Tax Code, section 11.253. (Ordinance 2011-35 adopted 10/11/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
Secs. 11.02.003–11.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Exemptions
Sec. 11.02.031 Elderly and disabled veterans
(a) Seventy thousand dollars ($70,000.00) of the assessed taxable value of all residential homesteads of married and
unmarried persons sixty-five (65) years or older, male or female, including those living alone, shall be exempt from ad
valorem taxes levied in the tax year by the city.
(b) That disabled veterans be entitled to an exemption from taxation based upon the degree of their disability as provided
by section 11.22 of the Texas Property Tax Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/598
(Ordinance 2018-59 adopted 9/11/18)
State law reference–Residence homestead tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 11.13, 11.22.
Sec. 11.02.032 Limitation for certain residential homestead property owners
Commencing with tax year 2018 and subsequent years thereafter, a limitation on the total amount of taxes that may be
imposed by the city on the homestead of an individual who is 65 years of age or older is established pursuant to section 1-
b(h), article VIII of the Texas Constitution and section 11.261 of the Texas Tax Code. (Ordinance 2018-60 adopted 9/25/18)
Sec. 11.02.033 Freeport goods
(a) Freeport goods, in accordance with section 11.251, Texas Property Tax Code, and article VIII, section 1-j(b)(4), Texas
Constitution, are hereby exempted from ad valorem taxation by the city.
(b) The exemption of freeport goods will be effective upon the adoption of Ordinance 98-60 in accordance with article VIII,
section 1-j(b)(4), Texas Constitution as of January 1, 1999.
(Ordinance 2018-59 adopted 9/11/18)
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAXES*
Sec. 11.03.001 Continuation of tax on gas and electricity
(a) The city does hereby elect to continue to impose a one-percent city sales tax on residential use of gas and electricity.
(b) Residential use, for the purposes of this section, is defined as use in a family dwelling, a multifamily apartment, a
housing complex or building or portion of a building occupied as a home or residence.
(1990 Code, secs. 12-96, 12-97)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Sec. 11.03.002 Telecommunications service
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For the purposes of this section, the
sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device
from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at
the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The rate of the tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales
and use taxes as authorized by the legislature of the state.
(c) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state by United States registered mail a copy of Ordinance
2002-58 along with a copy of the minutes of the city council's vote and discussion on Ordinance 2002-58.
(d) This section shall become effective as of January 1, 2003.
(Ordinance 2002-58, sec. 1 (12-98), adopted 11/26/02)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on the sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
321.210.
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.04.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Consideration. The cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and shall not include the
cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying
of such room for occupancy.
(1990 Code, sec. 12-71)
Hotel. A building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a
hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, roominghouse, or bed and breakfast. The term does
not include:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/598
(1) A hospital, sanitarium, or nursing home; or
(2) A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a
private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by section 61.003, Education
Code, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an
educational program or activity at the institution.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Occupancy. The use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel if
the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a
period of less than thirty (30) days.
Person. An individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel.
(1990 Code, sec. 12-71)
Sec. 11.04.002 Levy; rate
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any hotel where the cost of
occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven (7) percent of the consideration
paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other
governmental agencies. Such seven-percent hotel occupancy tax shall be levied on hotels both inside the city limits and in
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city. Any revenues from the taxes derived hereunder from the consideration paid by an
occupant of the sleeping room to the hotel may only be used for the purposes described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section
351.001. (1990 Code, sec. 12-72; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.04.003 Exemptions
Persons who are exempt from payment of the hotel occupancy tax imposed under this article are the persons described in
V.T.C.A., Tax Code, section 351.006, under the conditions imposed by said section 351.006. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.04.004 Portion of proceeds used for advertising, etc.
Inasmuch as the tax levied under this article is seven (7) percent of the total consideration paid for the occupancy of hotel
rooms, the city shall reserve a portion of the tax revenue equal to at least one (1) percent of the costs of the occupancy of
hotel rooms for the purpose of advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public
meeting and convention facilities, and for promotion of tourism and advertising of the city and its vicinity either by the city or
through contract with persons or organizations selected by the city. (1990 Code, sec. 12-73)
Sec. 11.04.005 Reports
Every person required to collect the tax levied by this article shall file a report with the city treasurer by the last day of the
month following each quarterly period. The report shall include the consideration paid for all room or sleeping space
occupancies in the preceding calendar quarter, the amount of taxes collected on such occupancies, and any other
information the city treasurer may reasonably require. A copy of the state hotel and motel tax report may be used to meet this
reporting requirement. A copy of the state report and check payable to the city for the taxes due shall be forwarded to the city
treasurer. (1990 Code, sec. 12-74)
Sec. 11.04.006 Rules and regulations
The city treasurer shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax
levied in this article and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable the city
treasurer to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the
provisions of this article. (1990 Code, sec. 12-75)
Sec. 11.04.007 Reimbursement for collection
The person required to file a report under this article may deduct and withhold from the taxes otherwise due to the city on the
quarterly return, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, one (1) percent of the amount of the tax due as shown on
the report. If taxes due under this article are not paid to the city within the time required or if the person required to file a
report fails to file the report when due, the person forfeits the claim to reimbursement that could have been taken if the tax
had been paid or the report filed when due. (1990 Code, sec. 12-76)
Sec. 11.04.008 Penalties for violations
If any person shall fail to file a report as required in this article or shall fail to pay the tax imposed under this article, when
such report or payment is due, such person shall forfeit five (5) percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first
thirty (30) days shall forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax, provided that the penalty shall never be less than one
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/598
dollar ($1.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from
the date due. (1990 Code, sec. 12-77)
ARTICLE 11.05 TEXAS ENTERPRISE ZONE PROGRAM
Sec. 11.05.001 City's participation in program
The city council ordains the city's participation in the Texas Enterprise Zone Program pursuant to the Texas Enterprise Zone
Act, chapter 2303, Texas Government Code (act), providing tax incentives and designating a liaison for communication with
interested parties. (Ordinance 2012-32 adopted 10/9/12)
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 Ordinances saved from repeal
Ordinances designating or establishing traffic regulations for specific streets or parts of streets, including stop and yield
intersections, speed limits, one-way streets, parking and loading zones, through streets, etc., have not been included in this
chapter but are specifically saved from repeal and are in full force and effect the same as if they were included in this chapter
in their entirety. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.01.002 Structural prohibitions
No person shall place, construct or erect any pole or structure with a hockey, soccer or basketball goal, rim, hoop or other
device affixed thereto designed or intended to be used for or readily adaptable for athletic or sporting purposes, or any other
obstruction, upon, along, or across any public right-of-way or other public easement in the city. (Ordinance 2005-17, sec. 3,
adopted 5/10/05)
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES†
Sec. 12.02.001 Manual and specifications adopted
All traffic-control devices, including signs, signals and markings on pavement and/or curb, installed or used for the purpose of
directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the manual and specifications for traffic-control devices
adopted by the state transportation commission. All existing traffic-control devices and those erected in the future by the city
being consistent with the manual and specifications, state law and this section shall be official traffic-control devices. (1990
Code, sec. 13-26; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.02.002 Ratification of existing devices
All lawfully erected traffic-control signs, signals, markings and devices in existence on the effective date of the adoption of
this code are ratified and confirmed and continued in full force and effect until changed by order of the city council.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.02.003 Unauthorized installation
It is unlawful for any person other than the city engineer and the police chief, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to
install or cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those
streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals, excluding speed control devices. (1990 Code, sec. 13-28;
Ordinance 98-18, sec. 1, 3/10/98; Ordinance 2002-50, sec. 1, 11/12/02)
Sec. 12.02.004 Evidence of authorized installation
Proof in any prosecution for a violation of this article or any traffic ordinance of the city that any traffic-control device, sign,
signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the
city engineer and the police chief pursuant to the authority of this article and of the ordinance directing the installation of such
device, signal or marking. (1990 Code, sec. 13-29; Ordinance 98-18, sec. 1, 3/10/98; Ordinance 2002-50, sec. 1, 11/12/02)
Sec. 12.02.005 Authority and duty in the regulation of traffic
In the event of construction on or adjacent to any street or highway, the city engineer or designated representative is
authorized to conduct an engineering and traffic investigation to determine if the maximum lawful prima facie speed limit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/598
established by this code should be temporarily reduced in order to preserve and protect the public safety. If the city engineer
determines that such speed limit should be reduced, they shall enter a written finding and order to that effect and, upon
approval of that order in writing by the city manager or their designated representative, the city engineer or designee shall
have the authority to erect temporary official traffic-control devices. These devices shall be erected in proper position and
sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person prior to any enforcement action against an alleged violator.
The finding and order of the city engineer and city manager or their designated representatives shall estimate the length of
time for which such temporary speed limit shall be in effect and, if necessary, an additional order in writing shall be entered in
the event it is necessary to extend such time. No such temporary speed limit shall be effective longer than is provided in such
written order, nor in any event longer than is necessary to complete the construction for which the speed limit was ordered. A
certified copy of the order shall be admissible in evidence in municipal court to establish the authority of such temporary
speed limit, and it is hereby determined and declared that any such temporary speed limit found and ordered in accordance
with this section shall be the speed which is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual
and potential hazards then existing, and any violation of such temporary speed limit shall be considered a violation of this
code. (Ordinance 2008-43 adopted 9/23/08)
ARTICLE 12.03 PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING*
Sec. 12.03.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Corner lot. A lot or property located at the intersection or confluence of two or more streets such that public street rights-ofway
are directly adjacent to at least two contiguous sides of the lot.
Driveway. The continuous improved surface which provides ingress and egress from a garage, carport or off-street parking
area to an adjacent street, alley or other improved public way.
Front yard. A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the street to the largest required setback of either the required,
established, platted building line or projected front yard. Setbacks shall be measured from the front property line. Each street
frontage shall be considered a front yard except that in one- and two-family zoning districts, the extra frontage yards may be
considered a side or rear yard if there are no other front yards projecting along that same block face.
Improved surface. A continuous surface for the movement, parking or storage of a vehicle designed and constructed for all
weather conditions including the use of gravel, paving blocks, asphalt, concrete or other materials as approved by the city
engineer.
Large vehicle. Any vehicle, towable device or combination thereof excluding recreational vehicles (RVs) that measures more
than 25 feet in length or more than eight and one-half (8'-6") feet in height or that exceeds a manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds.
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle smaller than the defined large vehicle.
Old town (OT-Midlothian). That portion of the city known as the original town of Midlothian plat areas and for the purposes of
this article, generally described as the boundaries between 1st Street to North 14th Street and West Avenue A to Walter
Stephenson Road, excluding the area around South 3rd, as depicted in the map below:
Original Town Map
(for the purposes of this article)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/598
Park or parking. The stopping, standing or permitting to stand of any vehicle, trailer or recreational vehicle whether attended
or unattended, and whether with the motor running or not, except for the purpose of taking on and discharging passengers or
freight.
(Ordinance 2009-11 adopted 2/10/09)
Play vehicle. Includes all forms of powered, wheeled transportation, including, but not limited to, roller skates, roller blades,
skateboards, tricycles, scooters, play cars and pedal cars. (Ordinance 2011-43 adopted 12/13/11)
Rear yard. An open unoccupied space, except for permitted accessory buildings, extending across the rear of the lot from
one (1) side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the main building and the rear lot line as prescribed
for the zoning district in which the building is located.
Recreational vehicle.
(1) A vehicle primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational camping or travel use, including a
travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, and motor home; or
(2) A boat, jet ski, or similar equipment with trailer.
Residential district. Includes any zoning district that permits residential uses (including a planned development district as
provided in the zoning ordinance) except for residential lots or tracts that are one (1) acre or more in area.
Side yard. An open unoccupied space or spaces on one (1) or two (2) sides of a main building and on the same lot with the
building situated between the building and a side line of the lot and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
Any lot line, not the rear line or front line, shall be deemed a side lot line.
Towable device. A trailer or any other piece of equipment that is pulled by a motor vehicle.
Trailer. A vehicle without means of motivation and designed to be towed, hauled or pulled by a motor vehicle.
Utility vehicle. A vehicle designed and used primarily for utilitarian purposes including but not limited to a trailer, truck tractor,
semitractor, dump truck, concrete mixing truck, construction equipment, tractor, farm machinery, boat trailer, truck bed
mounted on a chassis, wheeled towing frame, utility trailer, boxed trailer, flat bed trailer, car carrier, panel truck or other
similar vehicle including but not limited to tow truck, box truck, van or bus with a rated capacity of one and one-half tons.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/598
Vehicle. Any and every device upon or which a person or property is or may be transported, drawn or moved including but
not limited to an automobile, motor vehicle, bus, truck, box truck, tractor, motor home or house, farm machinery, motorcycle,
all-terrain vehicle, boat, boat trailer, aircraft, recreational vehicle, golf cart, trailer, semitrailer, semitractor trailer, camper,
camper shell, wheeled towing frame, truck bed mounted on a chassis or similar devices.
Yard. An open space other than a courtyard, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward. In measuring to determine the width of a side yard, the depth of the front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
Sec. 12.03.002 Designation of parking spaces; use
(a) Parking spaces shall be designated, created and identified by appropriate signs, markers, paint stripes, other
recognizable means, or as may be designated by the city council and are on file in the city secretary's office.
(b) Any vehicle must be parked within the limits of such designated parking space.
(c) No vehicle may be parked within the front yard of a lot used for or intended to be used for residential purposes except
as defined herein and on an improved surface.
Sec. 12.03.003 Sidewalk parking
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with
the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, on a sidewalk or on any part of the sidewalk area, which area is
hereby defined as the entire space between the curbline or the lateral line of a roadway and the adjacent property line along
any street, irrespective of whether such area has been improved by concrete, gravel or other walkways. Any driveway
existing prior to the passage of this article with less than 18 feet between the property line and the garage door or wall shall
be exempted from this provision.
Sec. 12.03.004 Improved parking surface
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section it shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any vehicle on a lot less
than 1 acre upon any surface other than an improved parking surface.
(b) Vehicular access to improved parking surface on a lot less than 1 acre shall be provided by means of a continuous full
width, improved driveway surface unless the vehicle is stored behind the rear wall of the residence.
(c) The owner, occupant or person in control of any lot or tract on which an improved parking surface is located shall
maintain such parking surface in good and safe condition free from holes, cracks or other defects in materials.
Sec. 12.03.005 Display prohibitions
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to stand or park a vehicle on any public street, public right-of-way (ROW),
public parking lot, public playground, athletic field, or public school for the principal purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale.
Sec. 12.03.006 Yard parking
(a) Except as otherwise provided in section 12.03.009 it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge of
property to park or store or permit the parking or storage of any vehicle on vacant or unimproved property of any residential
lot or tract that is smaller than two (2) acres in area. In no instance shall parking be allowed within the required front yard of
any residential lot.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in section 12.03.009 it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge of
property within a residential district (lots less than 1 acre) to park or store or permit the parking or storage of any vehicle on
improved property within the side yard except on an improved parking surface if parking surface is visible from a public
street. Any vehicle parked within the side yard shall be screened from view by a fence six (6) feet in height or by a live
screening wall that grows to a height of six (6) feet along the side yard property line running the length of the large vehicle
and/or the towable vehicle.
Sec. 12.03.007 Large vehicles
(a) It is unlawful for any person or owner to leave, park or stand any large vehicle on any public street or street ROW for
more than 48 continuous hours.
(b) The provisions of section 12.03.009 shall not apply to parking or standing of large vehicles for the purpose of
expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise, but not otherwise.
(c) It is unlawful to park a large vehicle or towable device within the side yard of any lot or tract within any residential lots or
tracts less than 2 acres except on an improved parking surface screened from public view by a fence six (6) feet in height or
by a live screening wall that grows to a height of six (6) feet along the side yard property line running the length of the large
vehicle and/or the towable vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/598
(d) It is unlawful to park a large vehicle or towable device on any public street or right-of-way within any residential district.
(e) For lots or tracts within OT-Midlothian occupied by or improved with a residential structure prior the date of adoption of
this article, large vehicles and towable devices may be parked within the side or rear yard on a surface other than an
improved parking surface. For any lots or tracts within OT-Midlothian for which a building permit is issued for the construction
of a new residence or structure on such lot or tract after the date of adoption of this article, any large vehicle or towable
device shall be parked on an approved parking surface screened from public view by a fence six (6) feet in height or by a live
screening wall that grows to a height of six (6) feet along the side yard or rear property line, as the case may be, running the
length of the large vehicle and/or the towable vehicle.
Sec. 12.03.008 Parking recreational vehicles for more than 72 hours
It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to leave, park or stand any recreational vehicle for a period not to exceed 72
hours within any 3-month period. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above-described vehicles for
the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise, but not otherwise.
Sec. 12.03.009 Parking for storage; overnight parking; exceptions
It shall be unlawful to park or store or permit to park or store a large or utility vehicle, during the hours from sundown to sunup
on private property except per section 12.03.007 above, except for the purpose of expeditiously loading or unloading
passengers, freight or merchandise, or, used in conjunction with an approved construction project.
Sec. 12.03.010 Sleeping quarters
No vehicle, motor vehicle, towable device or large vehicle may be used for housekeeping, living, sleeping quarters, or for the
storage of trash, debris or personal property not normally associated with the vehicle, except recreational vehicles which may
be used as temporary living quarters for a period not to exceed 72 hours within any 3-month period.
(Ordinance 2009-11 adopted 2/10/09)
Sec. 12.03.011 Bicycles and play vehicles on sidewalks and city improvements
No person shall ride a bicycle or a play vehicle upon a sidewalk within a business or commercial district or on a city
improvement area (drainage ditches, water flume, construction area, etc.).
Sec. 12.03.012 Signage
The city's public works director is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles
and/or play vehicles by any person on such sidewalk or roadway. Whether such signs are in place or not, the operation of a
bicycle and/or play vehicle on such area shall constitute an offense.
Sec. 12.03.013 Yielding right-of-way
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or play vehicle upon a sidewalk in a nonbusiness or noncommercial zoned area,
such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian.
(Ordinance 2011-43 adopted 12/13/11)
ARTICLE 12.04 TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 12.04.001 Definition
For the purposes of this article, a truck hereby means any type of commercial motor vehicle having three (3) or more axles,
more commonly but not exclusively referred to as a tractor-trailer, semi truck, or 18-wheeler. (Ordinance 2018-46 adopted
8/14/18)
Sec. 12.04.002 Restrictions on certain streets
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to drive, operate or park a truck on or across the streets specified below:
(1) Wyatt Road from U.S. Highway 67 to Ward Road;
(2) Ward Road from Wyatt Road to Cement Valley Road;
(3) North 8th Street from Business 287 (Main Street) to North 9th Street;
(4) Clinton/South Clinton Lane from U.S. Highway 287 to F.M. 1387;
(5) Daisy Road; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/598
(6) Kirk Road.
Sec. 12.04.003 Streets prohibited to certain vehicles
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to drive, operate or park a truck having a combined gross weight over 40,000
pounds on or across the streets specified below:
(1) South Walnut Grove Road from U.S. Highway 287 to FM 1387;
(2) Ashford Lane from South 14th Street to FM 663; and
(3) Mockingbird Lane from Midlothian Parkway to North Walnut Grove Road.
(Ordinance 2019-04 adopted 2/12/19)
Sec. 12.04.004 Signage placement
The city council does hereby authorize its city engineer and the police chief, or either of them, to provide for the placement
and direction of signs, signals and traffic-control devices as are reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
article.
Sec. 12.04.005 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following vehicles:
(1) Emergency vehicles, school buses and commercial motor vehicles serving local businesses and/or
properties along North 8th Street;
(2) Vehicles traveling to or from a truck terminal, garage, place of repair, place of performing a service, or a
place of loading or unloading, over the shortest practicable route to or from a point on a truck route; any such
vehicle shall be permitted to proceed from one such point not on a truck route to another such point without
returning to a truck route, if to so return would unreasonably increase the distance to be traveled between such
points; the operator of any such vehicle shall carry evidence of the location of its last stop and of its immediate
destination in order for this exception to apply;
(3) Emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call;
(4) Vehicles operated by a public utility while cruising in an assigned area for the purpose of inspecting the
facilities of said public utility and/or providing maintenance service to said facilities; and
(5) Vehicles operated for public service, i.e., garbage pickups, street repair and water service and maintenance.
Sec. 12.04.006 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof in the municipal court, such violation shall be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and each and
every instance of the violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate
punishment for each offense.
Sec. 12.04.007 Additional sanctions
In addition to the penalty provided in section 12.04.006 hereof, the police department of the city shall also have the authority
and power to order towing of any truck which is parked and found to be in violation of this article, and the owner of such truck
shall be responsible to the city for the payment of all towing charges, services and fees prior to the release of any such
property to the owner.
(Ordinance 2018-46 adopted 8/14/18)
ARTICLE 12.05 USE OF HANDHELD WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE
PROHIBITED
Sec. 12.05.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Engaging in a call. Talking, dialing, or listening on a handheld wireless communication device, including holding a wireless
communication device to activate or deactivate the device.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/598
Handheld wireless communication device. A text-messaging device or other electronic, two-way communication device that
uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 United States Code section 332, that is designed to receive and transmit
voice communication, text message or pictorial communication, or both, whether by internet or other electronic means. The
term also includes devices such as mobile telephones, personal digital assistants (PDA), MP3 or other portable music
players, electronic reading devices, laptop computers or tablets, portable computing devices, portable global positioning or
navigation systems, pagers, electronic game devices and broadband personal communication devices.
Hands-free wireless communication device. A mobile telephone, a device with speakerphone capability, a telephone
attachment, or another function or other piece of equipment, regardless of whether or not permanently installed in a motor
vehicle, that allows use of the wireless communication device without use of either of the operator's hands, (or prosthetic
device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person).
Operating a motor vehicle. A motor vehicle that is moving, stopped or standing on a public street, highway or right-of-way,
unless it is lawfully parked as that term is defined herein.
Park or parked. The operator of a motor vehicle to completely cease movement of a motor vehicle in a lawful manner and
location. For the purposes of this article, “parked” does not mean a vehicle stopped in a lane of traffic due to either a lawful
traffic-control device, or the conditions on the roadway, or traffic congestion patterns then existing.
Text message. A two-way communication (whether real-time or asynchronous) in which data (composed in whole or in part of
text, numbers, images, or symbols) is sent, entered, or received by a method other than by voice and transmitted through
either a short message service (SMS) or a computer network. This term includes instant messaging and e-mail. The term
does not include a communication transmitted through a global positioning or navigation system.
(Ordinance 2016-12 adopted 5/24/16)
Sec. 12.05.002 Use of a handheld wireless communication device; offense
It is an offense if the person uses a handheld wireless communication device while operating a motor vehicle to:
(1) Engage in a call;
(2) Engage in gaming; or
(3) Engage in any other use of the device while operating a motor vehicle. This includes holding the handheld
wireless communication device.
(Ordinance 2017-69 adopted 9/26/17)
Sec. 12.05.003 Exceptions
This section does not apply to an operator of a motor vehicle using a handheld wireless communication device:
(1) While the vehicle is legally parked as that term is defined herein, or is being driven on private property;
(2) That is used with a hands-free wireless communication device;
(3) If the operator is a law enforcement officer, firefighter, member of a governmental emergency medical
services function, or member of a governmental emergency management function, and the operator is using the
device to conduct official business related to the position; or
(4) Who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a radio frequency device,
other than a handheld wireless communication device; or an operator using a two-way radio communication.
Sec. 12.05.004 Affirmative defenses
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the person was using a handheld wireless communications
device for the purpose of:
(1) Reporting illegal activity to a law enforcement agency;
(2) Communicating with an emergency response operator, a fire department, a law enforcement agency, a
hospital, a physician's office, or a health clinic regarding a medical or other emergency situation;
(3) In the reasonable belief that a person's life or safety is in immediate danger; or
(4) As a global positioning or other navigation system that is affixed to the vehicle.
Sec. 12.05.005 Penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/598
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which
the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. For each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.00. No culpable mental state shall be required to be plead or proven to substantiate guilt in prosecution of any case in
which an offense under this section is alleged.
(b) An offense committed under this article is not a moving violation and may not be a part of a person's driving record or
insurance record.
(Ordinance 2016-12 adopted 5/24/16)
ARTICLE 12.06 SPEED LIMITS
Sec. 12.06.001 Maximum limits generally
(a) No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the city at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per
hour, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article.
(b) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than
is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every
event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on
or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(c) The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (b), drive at an appropriate reduced
speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railway grade crossing, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazard exists
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Sec. 12.06.002 Maximum limits on specific streets
(a) Authority of city council. The city council may alter the maximum speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour on any street
or portion thereof within the city in accordance with the provisions of Texas Transportation Code sec. 545.352, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of such altered limit.
(b) Streets designated. The following prima facie maximum speed limits indicated in this section for motor vehicles are
hereby determined and declared to be reasonable and safe, and such maximum speed limits are hereby fixed at the rate of
speed indicated for motor vehicles traveling upon the named street or highway, or parts thereof, and no motor vehicle shall
be operated along or upon such portions of such named street or highway within the corporate limits of the city in excess of
the speeds now set forth in the following limits:
Street Extent Speed
N. 8th Street N. 9th St. to W. Avenue B 35
N. 9th Street Pebble Creek to Dove Ln. 35
N. 14th Street F.M. 1387 to Business 287 (E. Main St.) 35
S. 14th Street Business 287 (E. Main St.) to George Hopper Rd. 35
S. 14th Street George Hopper Rd. to Ashford Ln. 40
Allen Lane F.M. 663 to F.M. 663 35
Apple Court Apple Ln. west to end of road 35
Apple Lane F.M. 663 west to end of road 35
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/598
Ashford Lane F.M. 663 to Plainview Rd. 35
Auger Road Overlook Dr. to Teal Way 35
Baucum Road Singleton Rd. southeast to corporate city limits 35
Belmont Drive F.M. 663 to Bluegrass Dr. 35
Bluebonnet Lane F.M. 663 west to end of road 35
Bluegrass Drive Belmont Dr. to Pimlico Dr. 35
Brookhollow Drive Power Way south to end of road 35
Cedar Drive Clearview Dr. to Starwashed Dr. 35
Clearview Drive Walter Stephenson Rd. to Starwashed Dr. 35
Dove Lane N. 9th St. to US Highway 67 frontage road 35
Forbes Road VV Jones Rd. southwest to corporate city limits 35
George Hopper Road S. 14th St. to Business 287 (E. Main St.) 35
Gifco Road US Highway 67 frontage road to Union Pacific
railroad 40
Gifco Road Union Pacific railroad west to corporate city limits 35
Harvest Hill Drive F.M. 663 to Walter Stephenson Rd. 40
Hawkins Run Road F.M. 663 to S. 14th St. 35
Honeysuckle Road Skinner Rd. northeast to corporate city limits 35
Kemp Ranch Crossing Railport Pkwy. northeast to end of road 35
King Arthur Drive F.M. 663 west to end of road 35
Ledgestone Lane Plainview Rd. north to end of road 35
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/598
Longbranch Road Hayes Rd. south to corporate city limits 35
McAlpin Road F.M. 663 to F.M. 875 35
N. Midlothian Parkway US Highway 67 to approximately 300' south of Dove
Ln. 35
N. Midlothian Parkway Approximately 300' south of Dove Ln. to Business
287 (E. Main St.) 45
S. Midlothian Parkway Business 287 (E. Main St.) to Mt. Zion Rd. 35
Miller Road US Highway 67 northwest to corporate city limits 35
Mockingbird Lane N. Midlothian Pkwy. east to corporate city limits 35
Mt. Zion Road S. 14th St. to S. Midlothian Pkwy. 35
Mt. Zion Road S. Midlothian Pkwy. to Shady Grove Rd. 35
Old Fort Worth Road US Highway 287 to Ward Rd. 40
Old Fort Worth Road Ward Rd. northwest to corporate city limits 35
Old Highway 67 US Highway 67 south to end of road 35
Old Highway 67 Dove Ln. to Gifco Rd. 35
Onward Road F.M. 1387 to Tar Rd. 35
Overlook Drive US Highway 67 to Auger Rd. 35
Pimlico Drive Bluegrass Dr. east to end of road 35
Plainview Road US Highway 287 to McAlpin Rd. 35
Power Way Railport Pkwy. to VV Jones Rd. 35
Railport Parkway US Highway 67 to Power Way 40
Rex Odom Drive US Highway 287 north to end of road at Mid-Way 35
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/598
Airport
Shady Grove Road US Highway 287 to Plainview Rd. 35
Shiloh Road US Highway 67 to Tar Rd. 40
Shiloh Road Tar Rd. east to corporate city limits 35
Singleton Road F.M. 875 south to corporate city limits 35
Sir Lancelot Circle King Arthur Dr. to King Arthur Dr. 35
Skinner Road Plainview Rd. to Honeysuckle Rd. 35
Starwashed Drive Walter Stephenson Rd. to Pimlico Dr. 35
Stout Road Plainview Rd. southeast to end of public road north of
dam 35
Sudith Lane Mt. Zion Rd. to Ashford Ln. 35
Sweetaire Drive Clearview Dr. to Starwashed Dr. 35
Tar Road New Shiloh Road to Shiloh Rd. 35
Tayman Drive Old Highway 67 west to end of road 35
Tower Road F.M. 663 to Waterworks Rd. 35
US Highway 287 Connector US Highway 287 to Midlothian Pkwy. 45
US Highway 287 Service
Roads S. Midlothian Pkwy. to S. 14th St. 40
VV Jones Road US Highway 67 north to corporate city limits 35
VV Jones Road US Highway 67 south to corporate city limits south of
Sam Ct. 35
VV Jones Road From approximately 0.3 miles north of F.M. 875,
approximately 1.0 mile north to corporate city limits 35
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/598
N. Walnut Grove Road F.M. 1387 north approximately 1.4 miles to corporate
city limits
35
N. Walnut Grove Road Steeple Chase Ct. north to 4200 block of Shiloh Rd. 35
N. Walnut Grove Road 4000 block of Shiloh Rd. north to Windmill Ln. 35
S. Walnut Grove Road US Highway 287 to F.M. 1387 35
Walter Stephenson Road Clearview Dr. to 300 feet north of Sierra Vista Dr. 35
Ward Road Old Fort Worth Rd. to E. Wyatt Rd. 35
W. Highland Avenue Mockingbird Ln. east to corporate city limits 35
Whitehead Road McAlpin Rd. to Ashford Ln. 35
Wyatt Road South Weatherford Rd. to S. Wyatt Rd. 35
E. Wyatt Road N. Ward Rd. to Wyatt Rd. 35
S. Wyatt Road US Highway 67 to Wyatt Rd. 35
Sec. 12.06.003 Maximum limits in school zones generally
(a) Authority of city council. The city council may establish school traffic zones on any street or highway or any portion of
any street or highway within the corporate limits of the city.
(b) When any school traffic zone has been established, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or
any other vehicle in such zone at a speed greater than the posted speed, and any speed in excess of the posted speed shall
be prima facie evidence that the speed is neither reasonable nor prudent.
(c) A person commits an offense if he operates or drives a vehicle in a school zone in the following designated areas or on
the following designated streets at a speed greater than the speed designated by this section for that area or street or portion
thereof, and any speed in excess of the limit provided in this section shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not
reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. The traffic engineer shall post or cause to be posted the appropriate street markings
and/or warning signs.
(d) Designated streets. The following designated locations, measured from centerline of roadway to centerline of roadway,
and areas are declared to be school zones and the maximum speed limit for all motor vehicles operated within such areas
and locations and on such streets on school days, when either a flashing warning signal is in operation, or when appropriate
signs are in place and conspicuous shall be as follows:
Street Extent Speed
George Hopper Road East of Silken Crossing to west of S. 14th Street 20
S. 14th Street North of George Hopper Rd. to south of George
Hopper Rd. 20
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/598
F.M. 1387 East of Walnut Grove Rd. to west of Kensington Dr. 30
Walnut Grove Road North of F.M. 1387 to south of Oak Hollow Dr. 30
Church Street Henderson St. to US Highway 67 20
Henderson Street N. 9th St. to US Highway 67 20
N. 9th Street North of Henderson St. to south of Valley View Ln. 20
S. 2nd Street W. Avenue I to Business 287 (W. Main St.) 20
S. 3rd Street W. Avenue H to Business 287 (W. Main St.) 20
S. 4th Street W. Avenue I to north of W. Avenue H 20
Spur 73 (S. 5th Street) South of W. Avenue I to north of W. Avenue H 20
W. Avenue H S. 3rd St. to west of S. 2nd St. 20
W. Avenue H S. 4th St. to east of S. 4th St. 20
Sudith Lane South of Sunbeam Ct. to south of Somerset Dr. 20
Branchwood Drive South of Meadow Glen Dr. to north of Meadow Glen
Dr. 20
F.M. 1387 West of Branchwood Dr. to south of Bryson Ln. 30
Meadow Glen Drive Branchwood Dr. to east of Branchwood Dr. 20
F.M. 663 North of George Hopper Rd. to north of Stiles Dr. 35
George Hopper Road East of F.M. 663 to F.M. 663 20
S. 5th Street South of Walter Stephenson Rd. to north of Florida
Ave. 20
Walter Stephenson Road West of S. 5th St. to F.M. 663 20
Charisma Drive Tower Rd. to Escape Ct. 20
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/598
F.M. 663 North of McAlpin Rd. to south of Tower Rd. 35
Baltic Avenue Park Place Blvd. to Mockingbird Ln. 20
Mediterranean Avenue Baltic Ave. to south of Baltic Ave. 20
Mockingbird Lane West of Park Place Blvd. to east of Baltic Ave. 20
Oriental Avenue Baltic Ave. to east of Baltic Ave. 20
Pacific Avenue Baltic Ave. to southeast of Baltic Ave. 20
Park Place Boulevard North of St. James Pl. to Mockingbird Ln. 20
Mockingbird Lane East of Walnut Grove Rd. to west of Walnut Grove
Rd. 20
Walnut Grove Road North of Hyde Park Dr. to north of Mockingbird Ln. 20
Sec. 12.06.004 Maximum limits in alleys
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to operate or drive any vehicle in any alley at a greater speed than fifteen
(15) miles per hour.
Sec. 12.06.005 Speed limit signs
Whenever this article or any other ordinance of the city modifies and alters the basic speed limit established in sections
12.06.001, the traffic engineer shall cause signs to be posted at the locations giving notice thereof and no such modification
and alteration shall be effective unless such signs are in place.
(Ordinance 2018-36 adopted 6/12/18)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Charges, fees and rates
The charges, fees and rates for the use of the water and sewer systems by residential, multifamily, commercial, municipal
and mobile home park customers shall be on file in the city secretary's office. All ordinances pertaining to such charges, fees
and rates are specifically saved from repeal. (1990 Code, sec. 14-26; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.01.002 Utility connection policy
Any property, tract, lot, parcel, development, subdivision, building, structure or facility requiring city water and/or wastewater
service must be in compliance with all adopted city codes, regulations and ordinances before any new service connection is
allowed by the city. (Ordinance 2009-007 adopted 1/27/09)
ARTICLE 13.02 WATER SYSTEM†
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/598
Sec. 13.02.001 Front foot charges for construction of water mains
(a) Definitions.
Developer/single customer property. Any property served by a newly constructed approach water main.
Front foot. A linear foot of property frontage along the right-of-way of a public roadway or easement.
(b) Pro rata charges. Front foot charges (pro rata) will be collected by the city and refunded to the developer/single
customer property owner when the following conditions are met:
(1) A developer/single customer property owner who constructs the approach main under a written agreement
with the city is eligible for front foot charge refunds.
(2) The developer/single customer property owner who constructs the approach main shall be entitled to
receive funds equal to, but not greater than, 100% of the cost of the approach main incurred by such
developer/owner.
(3) Front foot charges will be assessed for a period of ten (10) years, commencing on the date that the
approach main is accepted by the city engineer.
(4) Refund shall be made solely from foot charges collected by the city during the period that front foot charges
are assessed for service connections to or extensions from the approach main.
(5) Upon written request, refunds will be made annually to the developer/single customer owner during the last
month of the calendar year from front foot charges paid to the city. It is the responsibility of the developer/single
customer property owner requesting the refund to prove their eligibility to receive the refund due. In the event the
developer/single customer property owner fails to request a refund of front foot charges within six (6) months after
the expiration of the eligibility to receive funds, such refunded front foot charges shall become the property of the
city.
(6) Assignment of eligible refunds of front foot charges shall be evaluated by the city engineer and submitted to
city council for approval, prior to initial construction of the approach main.
(7) Collections for front foot charges will cease when the developer/single customer property owner has been
fully reimbursed or the time period for assessment of front foot charges has lapsed, whichever occurs first.
(8) The refund limit shall be recorded and administered by the city finance department, together with the project
name, date construction was completed, limits of portion of the main upon which front foot charges are collectible,
and name and address of entity entitled to the refund.
(Ordinance 99-19, secs. 1, 2, adopted 6/8/99)
ARTICLE 13.03 SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION*
Sec. 13.03.001 Adoption and purpose
(a) That the sanitary sewer connection requirements are, and the same hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city.
(b) The purpose of these requirements is to promote sound development in the best interest of the health, safety, moral
and general welfare of the citizens of the city as it relates to connection to the city's sanitary sewer system.
Sec. 13.03.002 Scope
(a) These requirements apply to all development and properties located within the city and the extraterritorial jurisdiction
(ETJ).
(b) These requirements address:
(1) Connection required to the sanitary sewer system;
(2) Pro rata; and
(3) Annexation.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 2/8/11)
Sec. 13.03.003 Connection required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/598
(a) Any parcel, lot or tract of land that is impacted by new development, redevelopment or failure of an existing on-site
sewage facility shall be required to connect to the city's sanitary sewer system if said property is situated within the following
distances from the sanitary sewer system:
(1) 300 linear feet. Single customer residential (as measured along the most direct path from the existing
sanitary sewer system to the property line); and
(2) 2,000 linear feet. Commercial, industrial, multi-unit residential and all other types of uses (as measured
along the most direct path from the existing sanitary sewer system to the property line).
Should the parcel, lot or tract be located within these limits, the developer/single customer property owner must obtain a
waiver from the city council in order to install an on-site sewage facility.
(b) The size, type, and design of a proposed sewer line extension that is necessary to connect to the city's existing sanitary
sewer system shall be approved by the city engineer or designee, and all costs associated with the design and installation,
including lift stations, force mains, gravity mains, manholes, etc., shall be borne by the developer/single customer property
owner.
(c) Connection to the sanitary sewer system may be waived by the city council, upon the determination by and
recommendation from the city engineer or designee that said connection is not feasible due to topographical restrictions,
system capacity limitations, or other relevant factors.
(d) For any property having an existing on-site sewage facility that is located within the limits specified in subsections (a)(1)
or (a)(2) above, connection to the city's sanitary sewer system will not be required if the existing on-site sewage facility is
functional and meets all applicable laws, orders, ordinances and regulations governing its operation and maintenance.
(e) For properties located within the limits specified in subsections (a)(1) or (a)(2) above, a property owner shall be
required to immediately connect to the city's sanitary sewer system if the existing on-site sewage facility fails or requires
extensive repairs as determined by the appropriate governing/regulating authority.
(f) Where the city's sanitary sewer system is not available for connection or, if a waiver is granted by the city council, the
design, installation, operation and maintenance of the on-site sewage facility shall be in accordance with all applicable laws,
orders, ordinances and regulations.
(Ordinance 2017-63 adopted 8/22/17)
Sec. 13.03.004 Pro rata
Front foot charges (pro rata) will be collected by the city and refunded to the developer/single-customer property owner when
the following conditions are met:
(1) A developer/single-customer property owner who constructs an approach main under a written agreement
with the city is eligible for front foot charge refunds.
(2) The developer/single-customer property owner who constructs the approach main shall be entitled to
receive funds equal to, but not greater than, 100% of the cost of the approach main incurred by such
developer/owner.
(3) Front foot charges will be assessed for a period of 10 years, commencing on the date that the approach
main is accepted by the city engineer or their designee.
(4) Refund shall be made solely from front foot charges collected by the city during the period that front foot
charges are assessed for service connections to or extensions from the approach main.
(5) Upon written request, refunds will be made annually to the developer/single-customer property owner during
the last month of the calendar year from front foot charges paid to the city. It is the responsibility of the
developer/single-customer property owner requesting the refund to prove their eligibility to receive the refund due.
In the event the developer/single-customer property owner fails to request a refund of front foot charges within six
(6) months after the expiration of the eligibility to receive funds, such refunded front foot charges shall become the
property of the city.
(6) Assignment of eligible refunds of front foot charges shall be evaluated by the city engineer or their designee
and submitted to city council for approval prior to initial construction of the approach main.
(7) Collections for front foot charges will cease when the developer/single-customer property owner has been
fully reimbursed or the time period for assessment of front foot charges has lapsed, whichever occurs first.
(8) The refund limit shall be recorded and administered by the city's finance department, together with the
project name, date construction was completed, limits of the portion of the main upon which front foot charges are
collectible and name and address of entity entitled to the refund.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/598
Sec. 13.03.005 Annexation
(a) A developer/single-customer property owner that voluntarily connects to the city's sanitary sewer system, in accordance
with the above provisions, shall also agree to annex into the city any or all of the property that is affected by the construction
of the approach main. The petition for voluntary annexation shall be acted upon by city council. Should such a petition for
voluntary annexation be denied, council may nonetheless approve the requested connection to the city sanitary sewer
system based upon findings by city staff that said connection will not be detrimental to citywide sanitary sewer service and
land use development patterns.
(b) Other property owners that voluntarily connect to the original approach main shall also annex their respective
properties into the city, based on the process and criteria described in subsection (a) above.
(c) The developer/single customer shall initiate the annexation process with the city, as defined by the Texas Local
Government Code, prior to construction of the approach main.
(1) Nothing herein shall require an act in violation of the Texas Local Government Code as same relates to
annexation.
(Ordinance 2011-04 adopted 2/8/11)
ARTICLE 13.04 INDUSTRIAL WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.04.001 Purpose and policy
(a) This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the
city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code sec. 1251 et
seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations part 403). The objectives of this article are
to:
(1) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its
operation;
(2) Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the
publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the
publicly owned treatment works;
(3) Protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in
the course of their employment and the general public;
(4) Promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
(5) Provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the
publicly owned treatment works; and
(6) Enable the control authority to comply with its state pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions,
sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment
works is subject.
(b) This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This article authorizes the issuance of
wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative
review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting
from the program established herein.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 1.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.002 Administration
Except as otherwise provided herein, the wastewater superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions
of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the wastewater superintendent may be delegated by the
wastewater superintendent to other city personnel. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 1.2, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.003 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/598
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
gpd Gallons per day
mg/l Milligrams per liter
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard industrial classification
SIU Significant industrial user
TPDES Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
TSS Total suspended solids
TTO Total toxic organics
U.S.C. United States Code
ìg/l Micrograms per liter
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 1.3, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.004 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
Act or the act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. sec.
1251 et seq.
Approval authority. The regional administrator of EPA
Authorized representative of the user.
(1) If the user is a corporation:
(A) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the
corporation; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/598
(B) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than
two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five (25)
million dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(2) If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively.
(3) If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or
designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
(4) The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized
representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated
by EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 U.S.C. sec. 1317) which apply to a specific category of
users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405–471.
City. The city or the city council.
Composite sample. A sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete
samples. The sample may be composited either as a:
(1) Time composite sample: composed of discrete sample aliquots collected at constant time intervals providing
a sample irrespective of stream flow; or
(2) Flow proportional composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals
proportional to flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining
a constant time interval between the aliquots.
Control authority. The city, as holder of the TPDES permit.
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional
water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency.
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA
of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter
promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the act.
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of
time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under
section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the act.
Industrial user. An industry that discharges wastewater into the wastewater system.
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at
any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or
disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal and, therefore, is a cause
of a violation of the control TPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of
the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations:
section 405 of the act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act (RCRA); 40 CFR 503 sludge regulations; any state regulations contained in any state sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act and 30 TAC 312; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic
Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body
parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
New source.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/598
(1) Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the
construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c)
of the act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
that section, provided that:
(A) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is
located; or
(B) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that
causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
(C) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation
are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing
source, should be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new
source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of
subsection (1)(B) or (C) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.
(3) Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator
has:
(A) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
(i) Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
(ii) Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
(B) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are
intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate
product, waste product, or finished product.
Normal operations of the industry. Hours per week that an industry operates its facility.
Normal wastewater. Wastewater which the average concentration of suspended solids and five-day BOD does not exceed
250 mg/l each.
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which,
alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
control authority's TPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all
federal, state, and local governmental entities.
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration
can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than
a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment standards or standards. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/598
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in section 13.04.031 of this article.
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A “treatment works,” as defined by section 212 of the act (33 U.S.C. sec. 1292)
which is owned by the city and/or the control authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection,
storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
Sewage. Human excrement and graywater (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.).
Shall and may. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
Significant industrial user.
(1) A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
(2) A user that:
(A) Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the
POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(B) Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry
weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant;
(C) Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement; or
(D) Is defined as subject to national categorical pretreatment standards by the United States EPA.
(3) Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any
time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in
40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in section 13.04.031 of this article.
Standard industrial classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued
by the United States Office of Management and Budget.
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation,
including snowmelt.
Superintendent, director, supervisor, etc. The person designated by the city who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative.
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other
liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering.
Total toxic organics. The sum of the masses or concentration of specific toxic organic compounds found in industrial users'
discharge at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l. For noncategorical and categorical SIUs the TTO list is 40 CFR 122
appendix D, table 2, unless specifically designated in a particular categorical classification.
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge.
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings,
industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 1.4, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.005–13.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. General Sewer Use Requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/598
Sec. 13.04.031 Prohibited discharge standards
(a) General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater
which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they
are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
(b) Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants,
substances, or wastewater:
(1) Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams
with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21;
(2) Wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or more than 9.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage
to the POTW or equipment;
(3) Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in
interference, blockage, or damage to the POTW;
(4) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the
POTW;
(5) Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees F (65 degrees C), or which will inhibit biological
activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at
the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C);
(6) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause
interference or pass through;
(7) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that
may cause acute worker health and safety problems;
(8) Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the wastewater superintendent and
the control authority in accordance with section 13.04.064 of this article;
(9) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for
maintenance or repair;
(10) Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not
limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's
effluent, thereby violating the applicable TPDES permit;
(11) Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations;
(12) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, and
unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the wastewater superintendent and the control authority;
(13) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes;
(14) Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the wastewater superintendent and/or the control
authority in a wastewater discharge permit;
(15) Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a
toxicity test;
(16) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW;
(17) Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 200 mg/l;
(18) A discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste that in rate of flow exceeds, for a
duration of longer than fifteen minutes, more than four times the average hourly flow rate during normal operations
of the industry;
(19) Insecticides and herbicides in concentrations that are not amenable to treatment;
(20) Polychlorinated biphenyls;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/598
(21) Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an extent that all particles will be carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle having greater than one-half inch (1/2")
cross-sectional dimension;
(22) Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the city, unless approval in writing from the
wastewater superintendent and the control authority has been given to the person discharging the waste; or
(23) Without the approval of the wastewater superintendent and the control authority, a substance or pollutant
other than industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet waste that is of a
toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of whether or not it is amenable to treatment, including but not limited to
bulk or packaged chemical products.
(c) Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that
they could be discharged to the POTW.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 2.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.032 National categorical pretreatment standards
(a) The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405–471 are hereby
incorporated.
(b) Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a
pollutant in wastewater, the wastewater superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(c) When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same
standard, the wastewater superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR
403.6(e).
(d) A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the
procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from
the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
(e) A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 2.2, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.033 Local limits
(a) The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall
discharge, or cause or permit to be discharged, wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum
allowable discharge limits:
0.80 mg/l cadmium.
1.78 mg/l copper.
1.00 mg/l lead.
2.80 mg/l zinc.
7,605 mg/l chlorides.
(b) The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic
substances are for “total” metal unless indicated otherwise. The wastewater superintendent and/or control authority may
impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 2.4, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.034 City's right of revision
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or
requirements on discharges to the POTW. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 2.5, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.035 Dilution
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an
applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The wastewater superintendent and/or control authority may impose mass
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/598
limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases
when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 2.6, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.036 Plant loading
(a) No industry shall discharge wastewater containing a BOD or TSS loading that causes the city's pro rata share of the
total BOD or TSS loading to the POTW system to exceed the city's pro rata share of the total flow to the POTW system.
(Example: If the city contributes 25% of the total wastewater flow to the system, the city's cumulative BOD or TSS loading to
the system, as measured at the city's points of entry to the system, shall not exceed 25% of the total BOD or TSS loading to
the system.)
(b) Any industry with a wastewater strength that will cause the city's cumulative wastewater loading, at the city's points of
entry, to exceed the city's pro rata share of the total wastewater loading based upon flow shall be required to install
pretreatment facilities to reduce its wastewater strength to an acceptable level.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 2.7, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.037–13.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Pretreatment of Wastewater
Sec. 13.04.061 Pretreatment facilities
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 13.04.031 of this article within the time
limitations specified by EPA, the state, the control authority, or the wastewater superintendent, whichever is more stringent.
Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans
describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the wastewater superintendent for review, and shall
be acceptable to the wastewater superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 3.1, adopted
2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.062 Additional pretreatment measures
(a) Whenever deemed necessary, the wastewater superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak
flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and require such other conditions as may be
necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article.
(b) The wastewater superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their
property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
(c) Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the wastewater superintendent, they are
necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
wastewater superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.
(d) Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved
combustible gas detection meter, or other control device as deemed necessary by the wastewater superintendent.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 3.2, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.063 Slug control plans
At least once every two (2) years, the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority shall evaluate whether each
permitted significant industrial user needs a slug control plan. The wastewater superintendent and/or control authority may
require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. A slug control plan shall address, at a
minimum, the following:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the wastewater superintendent and control authority of any slug
discharge, as required by section 13.04.166 of this article; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/598
(4) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 3.3, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.064 Hauled wastewater
(a) Septage waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the wastewater superintendent and
control authority, and at such times as are established by the wastewater superintendent and control authority. Such waste
shall not violate division 2 of this article or any other requirements established by the city. The wastewater superintendent
and/or control authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
(b) Septage waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the
name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and
volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of generator, known or suspected waste constituents,
and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 3.4, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.065–13.04.080 Reserved
Division 4. Wastewater Discharge Permit
Part I. In General
Secs. 13.04.081–13.04.100 Reserved
Part II. Application
Sec. 13.04.101 Wastewater analysis
When requested by the wastewater superintendent and or control authority, a user must submit information on the nature and
characteristics of its wastewater within ten (10) days of the request. The wastewater superintendent and/or control authority
are authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. (Ordinance
2001-09, sec. 4.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.102 Requirement
(a) No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge
permit from the wastewater superintendent, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant
to section 13.04.103 of this division may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein.
(b) The wastewater superintendent may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry
out the purposes of this article.
(c) Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article
and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in division 8, parts II and III, of this article.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 4.2, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.103 Existing connections
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the
effective date of this article (February 13, 2001) and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall, within ninety
(90) days after said date, apply to the wastewater superintendent for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with
section 13.04.105 of this division, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after ninety (90) days of
the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the wastewater
superintendent. If, in the wastewater superintendent's judgment, the passing of this article does not significantly affect the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/598
industrial user's current permit, then the existing permit will continue through to the expiration date. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec.
4.3, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.104 New connections
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the
POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater
discharge permit, in accordance with section 13.04.105 of this division, must be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 4.4, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.105 Contents
(a) All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The wastewater
superintendent may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information:
(1) All information required by section 13.04.161(b) of this article;
(2) Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials
and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the
POTW;
(3) Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation;
(4) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production;
(5) Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day);
(6) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and
appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge;
(7) Time and duration of discharges; and
(8) Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the wastewater superintendent to evaluate the
wastewater discharge permit application.
(b) Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 4.5, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.106 Signatories and certification
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user
and contain the following certification statement:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or
supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate
the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting
false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 4.6, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.107 Decisions
The wastewater superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within
thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the wastewater superintendent will
determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The wastewater superintendent may deny any application
for a wastewater discharge permit. A person whose application for a permit is denied or who's permit is suspended or
revoked may appeal that decision to the city council. This right of appeal shall be cumulative of all other remedies that may
be available. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 4.7, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.108–13.04.130 Reserved
Part III. Issuance Process
Sec. 13.04.131 Duration
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/598
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date
of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the
wastewater superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 5.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.132 Contents
(a) A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the wastewater
superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's
effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the
POTW.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits must contain:
(1) A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5)
years;
(2) A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in
accordance with section 13.04.134 of this division, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a
copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards;
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type
based on federal, state, and local law; and
(5) A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
(c) Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions:
(1) Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow
regulation and equalization;
(2) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate
containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment
works;
(3) Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions
including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine
discharges;
(4) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants
discharged to the POTW;
(5) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to
the POTW;
(6) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment;
(7) A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of
responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
(8) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the wastewater superintendent to ensure compliance with this
article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 5.2, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.133 Modification
The wastewater superintendent may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
(2) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or
character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/598
(3) A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the
authorized discharge;
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to POTW, POTW personnel, or the
receiving waters;
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
(6) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit
application or in any required reporting;
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or
(9) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 5.4, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.134 Transfer
(a) Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty
(30) days' advance notice to the wastewater superintendent and the wastewater superintendent approves the wastewater
discharge permit transfer. The notice to the wastewater superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner
or operator which:
(1) States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and
processes;
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
(3) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit.
(b) Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility
transfer.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 5.5, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.135 Revocation
(a) The wastewater superintendent and/or control authority may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(1) Failure to notify the wastewater superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the
changed discharge;
(2) Failure to provide prior notification to the wastewater superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to
section 13.04.165 of this article;
(3) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application;
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(6) Refusing to allow the wastewater superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records;
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
(11) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application;
(12) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/598
(13) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or
this article.
(b) Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All
wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to
that user.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 5.6, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.136 Reissuance
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete permit application, in accordance with section 13.04.105 of this article, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 5.7, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.137–13.04.160 Reserved
Division 5. Reporting Requirements
Sec. 13.04.161 Baseline monitoring reports
(a) Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final
administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users
currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the wastewater superintendent a report which
contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge,
new sources, and sources that will become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the wastewater superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b),
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A
new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(b) Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
(1) Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
(2) Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(3) Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard
industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic
process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
(4) Flow measurement. Information showing the measured or estimated average daily and maximum daily flow,
in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(5) Measurement of pollutants.
(A) The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
(B) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where
required by the standard or by the wastewater superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be
analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 13.04.170 of this division.
(C) Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 13.04.171 of this
division.
(6) Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified
professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(7) Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in
section 13.04.162 of this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/598
(8) Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
section 13.04.106 of this article.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.162 Compliance schedule progress reports
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 13.04.161(b)(7) of this division:
(1) The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion
of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet
the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction,
and beginning and conducting routine operation);
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months;
(3) The user shall submit a progress report to the wastewater superintendent no later than fourteen (14) days
following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by
the user to return to the established schedule; and
(4) In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the wastewater
superintendent.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.2, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.163 Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the
case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the wastewater superintendent a report containing the information
described in section 13.04.161(b)(4)–(6) of this division. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of
allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
section 13.04.106 of this article. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.3, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.164 Periodic compliance reports
(a) All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the wastewater superintendent but in no case less
than once every six months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are
limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
At the city's discretion, sampling and analysis may be performed by the city in lieu of industrial monitoring. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 13.04.106 of this article.
(b) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement
facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to
keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
(c) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
wastewater superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in section 13.04.171 of this division, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.4, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.165 Reports of changed conditions
(a) Each user must notify the wastewater superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change.
(b) The wastewater superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to
evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section
13.04.105 of this article.
(c) The wastewater superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 13.04.107 of this article or
modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 13.04.133 of this article in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/598
(d) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent
20% or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants that are determined to be of concern.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.5, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.166 Reports of potential problems
(a) In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic
nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the city and the control authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location of
the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
(b) Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the wastewater superintendent, submit a
detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article.
(c) A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to
call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may
cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.6, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.167 Reports from unpermitted users
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the wastewater
superintendent as the wastewater superintendent may require. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.7, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.168 Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the wastewater superintendent within twenty-four
(24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the wastewater superintendent within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is
not required to resample if the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority monitors at the user's facility at least once
a month, or if the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority samples between the user's initial sampling and when
the user receives the results of this sampling. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.8, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.169 Notification of discharge of hazardous waste
(a) Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261. Such notification must
include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is
known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation
of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification
under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under section 13.04.165 of this division. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring
requirements of sections 13.04.161, 13.04.163, and 13.04.164 of this division.
(b) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a), above, during a calendar month in which they
discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in
a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a
one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.
(c) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous
waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the wastewater superintendent, the
POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the
discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
(d) In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/598
(e) This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this
article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.9, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.170 Analytical requirements
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or
report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, unless otherwise specified in an
applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.10, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.171 Sample collection
(a) Except as indicated in subsection (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional
composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the wastewater superintendent and/or
control authority may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may
be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
(b) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be
obtained using grab collection techniques.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.11, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.172 Timing
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage
prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.12, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.173 Recordkeeping
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of
information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records
shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the
dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of
such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a
longer retention period by the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 6.13, adopted
2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.174–13.04.200 Reserved
Division 6. Compliance Monitoring
Sec. 13.04.201 Right of entry for inspection and sampling
(a) The wastewater superintendent and/or the control authority, state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ), or
U.S. EPA or their designated representative shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the
user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users
shall allow the inspecting or sampling person ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
(b) Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the city, control authority, TCEQ or U.S. EPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of
performing specific responsibilities.
(c) The wastewater superintendent and/or control authority shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. All sampling and
analysis performed by the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority to monitor compliance shall be at the expense
of the industrial user.
(d) The wastewater superintendent and/or control authority may require the user to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/598
condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated, at a
minimum, annually to ensure their accuracy.
(e) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be
promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
(f) Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting or sampling person access to the user's premises shall be a violation of
this article.
(g) In accordance with 40 CFR 403, the city shall inspect and monitor each permitted industrial user a minimum of once
per year. If the city elects to perform compliance monitoring for the industry, then the city will monitor the industry a minimum
of once every 6 months.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 7.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.202 Search warrants
If the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any
part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is
a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from
an appropriate court. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 7.2, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.203–13.04.230 Reserved
Division 7. Confidentiality
Sec. 13.04.231 Confidential information
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater
discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public
without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city and/or
control authority, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled
to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held
confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to
the TPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other “effluent data” as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 8, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.232–13.04.250 Reserved
Division 8. Enforcement Procedures
Part I. In General
Sec. 13.04.251 Publication of users in significant noncompliance
The wastewater superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the
POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term “significant noncompliance” shall mean:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or
more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average
limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount;
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more
of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
(3) Any other discharge violation that the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority believes has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/598
health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or
has resulted in the wastewater superintendent's or control authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or
prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained
in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline
monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
(8) Any other violation(s) which the wastewater superintendent and/or control authority determine will adversely
affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 9, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.252–13.04.270 Reserved
Part II. Administrative Enforcement Remedies
Sec. 13.04.271 Notification of violation
When the wastewater superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the wastewater
superintendent may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an
explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required
actions, shall be submitted by the user to the wastewater superintendent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the wastewater superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 10.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.272 Show cause hearing
The wastewater superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before
the wastewater superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be
served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such
action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to
the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a
bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 10.3, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.273 Compliance orders
When the wastewater superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a
wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the wastewater
superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance
within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly
operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional selfmonitoring
and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance
order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 10.4,
adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.274 Cease and desist orders
(a) When the wastewater superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article,
a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the
user's past violations are likely to recur, the wastewater superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease
and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/598
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(b) Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
user.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 10.5, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.275 Emergency suspensions
(a) The wastewater superintendent or control authority may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice
to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The wastewater
superintendent and control authority may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to
respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to
the environment.
(b) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a
user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the wastewater superintendent or control authority
may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The wastewater superintendent or control
authority may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the
wastewater superintendent or control authority that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in section 13.04.276 of this division are initiated against the user.
(c) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a
detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence, to the wastewater superintendent and the control authority prior to the date of any show cause or termination
hearing under section 13.04.272 or 13.04.276 of this division.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 10.7, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.276 Termination of discharge
(a) In addition to the provisions in section 13.04.135 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject
to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics
prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling;
or
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article.
(b) Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause
under section 13.04.272 of this division why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the
wastewater superintendent shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 10.8, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.277–13.04.300 Reserved
Part III. Judicial Enforcement Remedies
Sec. 13.04.301 Injunctive relief
When the wastewater superintendent or control authority finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/598
the wastewater superintendent may petition the 40th judicial district court of the county through the city's attorney for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the
wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The wastewater
superintendent may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for
the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against a user. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 11.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.302 Civil penalties
(a) A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit,
penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(b) The wastewater superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the
city.
(c) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit
gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as
justice requires.
(d) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 11.2, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.303 Criminal prosecution
(a) A user who violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more
than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment as decided by an appropriate court, or both.
(b) A user who introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalties described in subsection (a) of this section. This
penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law.
(c) A user who makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the same penalties described in subsection (a) of this section.
(d) Criminal responsibility. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this article. A person is
criminally responsible for a violation of this article if:
(1) The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits another person to
commit a violation; or
(2) The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the cause of the illegal discharge
under section 13.04.031, 13.04.032, 13.04.033, 13.04.064, or 13.04.102.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 11.3, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.304 Remedies nonexclusive
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The wastewater superintendent may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the city enforcement response plan. However, the wastewater superintendent may take other action against
any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the wastewater superintendent is empowered to take more than one
enforcement action against any noncompliant user. (Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 11.4, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.305 Applicability of more stringent regulations
(a) If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in this
article are promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for certain industries, the more stringent
national pretreatment standards will apply to the affected industrial user. A violation of the more stringent national
pretreatment standards will also be considered a violation of this article.
(b) If more stringent pretreatment standards, state surface water quality standards, or state pollutant discharge elimination
system permit conditions are promulgated, the city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/598
permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW.
(c) An industrial user within the city who discharges industrial waste ultimately received and treated by another
governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale wastewater contract or a reciprocal agreement with the city is subject to the
following additional rules:
(1) If the governmental entity has more stringent discharge limits than those prescribed by this article, or by a
discharge permit issued hereunder, because the United States Environmental Protection Agency requires the
more stringent discharge limits as part of the governmental entity's wastewater pretreatment program, the more
stringent discharge limits shall prevail.
(2) The wastewater superintendent is authorized to issue a discharge permit to an industrial user affected by
subsection (c)(1), to insure notice of and compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. If the industrial user
already has a discharge permit, the wastewater superintendent may amend the permit to apply and enforce the
more stringent discharge limits. An industrial user shall submit to the wastewater superintendent an expected
compliance date and an installation schedule if the more stringent discharge limits necessitate technological or
mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes.
(3) If the wastewater superintendent chooses not to issue or amend a permit under subsection (c)(2), the
wastewater superintendent shall notify the affected industrial user in writing of the more stringent discharge limits
and their effective date. Regardless of whether or not a permit is issued or amended, an industrial user shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to comply with the more stringent discharge limits.
(4) The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply upon termination of the city's wholesale wastewater
contract or reciprocal agreement with the governmental entity, or upon modification or elimination of the limits by
the governmental entity or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The wastewater superintendent
shall take the appropriate action to notify the affected industrial user of an occurrence under this subsection (c)(4).
(d) Variances in compliance dates. The wastewater superintendent may grant a variance in compliance dates to an
industry when, in the wastewater superintendent's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or corrective
measures. In no case shall the wastewater superintendent grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry affected by
national categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliance dates established by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
(e) Authority to regulate. The wastewater superintendent may establish regulations, not in conflict with this article or other
laws, to control the disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to insure compliance with the
city's pretreatment enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment regulations promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. The regulations established shall, where applicable, be made part of any discharge permit
issued to an industrial user by the wastewater superintendent.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 11.5, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.306–13.04.330 Reserved
Division 9. Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
Sec. 13.04.331 Upset
(a) For the purposes of this section, “upset” means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An
upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
(b) An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment
standards if the requirements of subsection (c), below, are met.
(c) A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with
applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the wastewater superintendent within twenty-four (24)
hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided
within five (5) days):
(A) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/598
(B) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time
the noncompliance is expected to continue; and
(C) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(d) In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of
proof.
(e) Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(f) Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical
pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative
method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 13.1, adopted 2/13/01)
Sec. 13.04.332 Bypass
(a) For the purposes of this section:
Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility.
Severe property damage. Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
(b) A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but
only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of
subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
(c) (1) If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the wastewater
superintendent, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(2) A user shall submit oral notice to the wastewater superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds
applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass.
The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
wastewater superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within twenty-four (24) hours.
(d) (1) Bypass is prohibited, and the wastewater superintendent may take an enforcement action against a
user for a bypass, unless:
(A) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage;
(B) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities,
retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition
is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable
engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
(C) The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section.
(2) The wastewater superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if
the wastewater superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this
section.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 13.3, adopted 2/13/01)
Secs. 13.04.333–13.04.360 Reserved
Division 10. Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.04.361 Pretreatment charges and fees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/598
(a) The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment
program which may include:
(1) Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications;
(2) Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a
user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users;
(3) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(4) Fees for filing appeals; and
(5) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees
relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties
chargeable by the city.
(6) Fees for treating abnormal strength wastes.
(7) Fees incurred from an upset, bypass or unauthorized discharge.
(b) Surcharge. The city may surcharge industrial users for the treating of abnormal strength wastes. Water or wastes
having (1) a five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million (ppm) by weight or (2)
containing more than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million by weight of total suspended solids shall be subject to the
review and approval of the wastewater superintendent and the control authority. Where the wastewater superintendent has
approved the admission of (1) or (2) above into the POTW, that discharge may be subject to a surcharge as determined by
the wastewater superintendent and control authority. In no case shall a discharge be accepted that will prevent the POTW
from meeting its limits. The surcharge will be assessed according to the following formula each month using the most current
pollutant concentration data and the current months' wastewater flow:
Surcharge = Q x [a(BOD - x) + b(TSS - y)] [8.34]
1,000,000
Where:
Q = flow in gallons
8.34 = weight in pounds of one gallon of water
x = normal limits of BOD in domestic wastewater expressed in milligrams
per liter
y = normal limits of TSS in domestic wastewater expressed in milligrams
per liter
a = unit cost of treatment per pound of BOD
b = unit cost of treatment per pound of TSS
A surcharge is an additional charge by the POTW for the increased cost of handling discharge of unusual strength and
character and shall not serve as a variance to the requirements of this article. Exercise of this provision shall not be a bar to, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(Ordinance 2001-09, sec. 15.1, adopted 2/13/01)
ARTICLE 13.05 PRIVATELY OWNED UTILITIES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/598
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.05.001 Compliance with ordinances and regulations
Every privately owned public utility operating within the corporate limits of the city is hereby required to comply with every
regulation and ordinance of the city currently in force and effect, and as same may be amended, concerning the construction,
installation, operation, and maintenance of its plants, structures, equipment and lines. The city council deems compliance
with these ordinances and regulations by privately owned public utilities necessary to protect the public. (1990 Code, sec. 14-
1)
Secs. 13.05.002–13.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Regulatory Fees
Sec. 13.05.031 Established
Absent an agreement with the city and to the extent authorized by state law, any person providing retail utility service within
the corporate limits of the city pursuant to a certificate or other authorization issued by a state regulatory authority shall pay to
the city a regulatory fee equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts from sales within the city. The proceeds from the
regulatory fee shall be used for the purpose of compensating the city for the regulatory functions provided by the city
pursuant to state law; provided, however, this regulatory fee shall not include and shall be in addition to such other regulatory
expenses incurred by the city and actually reimbursed by the person to the city pursuant to state law. (Ordinance 98-04, sec.
1, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.032 Due date
Any person owing a fee to the city pursuant to this division shall pay the city quarterly on the first (1st) days of January, April,
July and October of each year based upon the gross amount received by the person from the retail sale of services within the
corporate limits of the city for the preceding three (3) months ending November 30th, February 28th, May 30th and August
31st, respectively. Accompanying each payment, the corporation, person or other entity shall file or cause to be filed a
statement, certified by a duly qualified officer of the corporation, person or other entity, showing the gross receipts from sales
within the city during the three-month period for which the payment is made. For the purpose of determining the amount of
the gross receipts, the corporation, person or other entity shall keep in its office at the disposal of and open to inspection by
any auditor authorized and appointed by the city at all reasonable times, books of accounts and other records showing a full,
true, complete and accurate account of the gross receipts of the corporation, person or utility from its revenues received from
activities conducted within the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 98-04, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.033 Penalty
The failure to timely pay the city the fees imposed by this division in the manner specified by this division shall be a violation
punishable, upon final conviction, by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009. Each violation on each day shall be considered a
separate violation. The city may also bring suit for injunction against any corporation, person or other entity that shall violate
or threaten to violate any provision of this division. (Ordinance 98-04, sec. 3, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.034 Authorization
The city manager, city attorney or any person designated by them are authorized and directed to take such action as may be
necessary to enforce the terms of this division, including, but not limited to, obtaining court orders enforcing this division.
(Ordinance 98-04, sec. 5, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.035 Acceptance
The acceptance by the city of the regulatory fee required by this division is not intended to be and shall not be construed or
deemed to be evidence of consent by the city for the use of streets, roads, alleys, highways or public grounds located within
the corporate limits of the city, or the grant of the privilege of providing any service within the corporate limits of the city, but
such consent or grant shall only be evidenced by a separate franchise agreement between the city and the person.
(Ordinance 98-04, sec. 7, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.036 Waiver
This division, or any section or provision herein, is not intended to waive or limit, and shall not be deemed to waive or limit,
any right or privilege belonging to the city under federal or state law. (Ordinance 98-04, sec. 8, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.037 Third party use
Absent an agreement with the city or otherwise specifically authorized by state law, a person whose lines are being used by
third parties shall pay the above required regulatory fees based on the gross receipts from all sales resulting from the use of
such person's lines and facilities, regardless of whether those sales are made by such person or the third party, to the city.
(Ordinance 98-04, sec. 9, adopted 1/13/98)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/598
Secs. 13.05.038–13.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Technical Requirements for Electric Utility Service
Sec. 13.05.061 Standards
Except as otherwise required by state law or rule and absent a franchise agreement with the city to the contrary, any person
providing electric service within the corporate limits of the city pursuant to a certificate or other authorization issued by a state
regulatory authority or using the roads, streets, alleys and public property in the city for the installation, maintenance, and
operation of electric facilities shall comply with the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electrical Code, and the
requirements of this division, but in the event of a conflict between the three, then the strictest requirement shall apply.
(Ordinance 98-06, sec. 1, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.062 Temporary relocation of wires
On the written, reasonable request of any responsible person, firm, corporation, governmental authority, city official or
employee, the utility shall relocate, raise or lower its wires, where located on, in, under or over the streets, alleys and other
public ways of the city, temporarily, to permit construction work in the vicinity thereof, or to permit the moving of houses or
other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary relocation, raising or lowering of such wires shall be paid by the
benefited party or parties, and the utility may require such payment in advance, being without obligation to remove, raise or
lower its wires until such payment shall be made; provided, however, that no such payment shall be required of the city or a
city-owned utility. The utility shall be given not less than seventy-two (72) hours' prior written notice to arrange for such
temporary wire changes. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 2, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.063 Location
(a) To the extent allowed by state law, the installation of facilities within the streets or other public rights-of-way of the city,
the location and routes of all poles, stubs, guys, anchors, lines, conduits, underground ductlines, manholes, and cables
placed and constructed, and to be placed and constructed, by the utility in the construction and maintenance of its electrical
lighting and power system in, within, through, upon or under the streets, alleys or other public rights-of-way of the city shall
be subject to reasonable and proper regulation, control and direction by the city, or by the city official to whom such duties
have been or may be delegated. Except for routine maintenance and repairs of existing facilities, the utility shall furnish
proposed routings of installations in advance of installation to, and obtain the approval of, city's designated representative. All
poles, guys or anchors erected by the utility shall be so set that they will not cause diversion of surface waters in any gutter
or drain so as to cause damage to adjoining property, and so that the same will interfere as little as practicable with ordinary
travel on the streets, sidewalks and other public rights-of-way of the city. The regulation and control herein reserved shall
include, but not by way of limitation, the right of the city to require the utility, at the utility's expense, to relocate its poles, lines
or conduits so as to permit the following activities undertaken by the city on its behalf:
(1) The widening or straightening of any street or alley located within the city;
(2) The closing, opening or relocation of any street or alley within the city;
(3) The location or relocation of any water or sewer lines within the city;
(4) The changing of grade of any street, alley, curb or sidewalk within the city;
(5) The construction and maintenance of parks and other public improvements owned by the city and located
within the city;
(6) The construction of facilities by a city-owned utility.
(b) In all cases where the utility is required to relocate, change the route of, or the position of, the poles, lines, or conduits,
the city shall give at least thirty (30) days' advance written notice to the utility specifying the new location, route, or position of
the poles, lines, or conduits involved; provided, however, that the utility shall be entitled to be paid for its costs and expenses
for any relocation, raising or lowering of its wires, required by the city, pursuant to this section, only if such expenses or costs
are reimbursable or payable to the utility or the city by the state, the United States or any governmental agency or subdivision
of either, whether directly or indirectly. Nothing herein shall impose any obligation on the city to pay such costs and expenses
except to the extent it actually receives funds from the United States, state, or any governmental agency or subdivision of
either, for the reimbursement or payment of same.
(Ordinance 98-06, sec. 3, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.064 Excavation
The extent allowed by state law, the city grants to the utility the right and privilege to take up pavements and sidewalks, if
any, in, upon, under, and across said streets, alleys, avenues, highways and other public ways in the city for the purpose of
making such excavation and installation as may be necessary. The utility shall not take up or excavate any pavement at any
time without first securing the written permission of the city's designated representative. Further, all excavations and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/598
installations so made shall be performed in such a manner as will cause the least reasonable inconvenience to the public,
and shall ensure public safety, including, but not limited to, using safety barriers or temporary fencing around excavation and
construction areas; and the utility shall promptly restore or cause to be restored to as good a condition as existed before the
work was undertaken, all such pavements and sidewalks, streets, alleys, avenues, highways or other public places in the city
to the reasonable satisfaction of the city's designated representative. If weather or other conditions do not permit the
complete restoration required by this section, the utility may, with the approval of the city, temporarily restore the affected
public ways or property, provided that the temporary restoration is at the utility's sole expense, and provided further that the
utility promptly undertakes and completes the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no longer
prevent permanent restoration. Upon the request of the city, the utility shall restore the public ways or property to a better
condition than existed before the work was undertaken, provided the city shall bear any additional costs of the improved
restoration. If the utility fails to promptly restore the public ways or property as required by this section, the city may, upon
giving fourteen (14) days' written notice to the utility, restore the public ways or property or remove the obstruction at the
expense of the utility. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 4, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.065 Damage
If any of the facilities installed by the utility shall be in any respect damaged or injured by the city or any of its officers, agents,
representatives or employees in connection with the performance of any work or repairs that may be done upon the streets,
avenues, alleys, public places and other public ways of the city, the utility shall not be entitled to prosecute or maintain a
claim and hereby waives same against the city for any such damage or injury sustained by it, except where such damages
are the result of willful acts of the officers, agents, representatives or employees of the city, and said right by the utility is
hereby waived. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 5, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.066 Other powers
The city, by the enactment of this division, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, imperil or lessen the lawful
powers and rights now or hereafter vested in the city under the constitution and statutes of the state and under the charter of
the city to regulate the rates and services of the utility. Notwithstanding anything contained in this division to the contrary, all
work done in connection with the construction, repair, maintenance and operation of all facilities of the utility is subject to the
continuing police power of the city. The utility shall comply with all present and future laws, ordinances and regulations,
except such as conflict with any provisions hereof lawfully surrendering the city's authority. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 6, adopted
1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.067 Service
It shall be the utility's obligation to furnish efficient and reliable electrical service to meet the standards of the industry for the
area. The utility, to the extent it is lawfully authorized, shall serve every consumer requesting the utility service within the city,
regardless of cost, amount of usage, customer deposits, return on investment, access and other reasonable factors. The
utility shall not discriminate against any person, corporation, firm or association in its charges and service rendered under like
circumstances. The utility shall not directly or indirectly grant any discount or rebate or give things of value unless authorized
by the appropriate regulatory authority. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 7, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.068 Pole attachments
The utility shall hereafter hold itself ready to furnish free of charge, to the city, such pole space as may be reasonably
required from time to time for the installation of city-owned wires, cables, switches, street light equipment, traffic, police and
fire alarm system conductors, and alarm or other necessary signal boxes. Such space used by the city shall not exceed the
capacity on any one pole, must be available on then-existing poles, and must be requested three (3) days in advance, in
writing, by the city's representative prior to installation. The specific location of such facilities on the utility's poles shall be
governed by industry standards in the area. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 8, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.069 Conduit
Where an underground ductline is hereafter constructed or installed between manholes by the utility, to the extent the utility is
authorized to do so under state law, the utility shall, as a part of same, provide free space for the installation by city of its
electric, traffic, police, fire alarm, or other cables and related equipment, on request in writing by the city's representative prior
to construction, with one top duct having one capped-off entry channel and one capped-off exit channel between each two
manholes and terminate in a city-specified handhold, which location is also specified by city. Such entry and exit channels
must leave the duct bank enclosure outside of, but near to, such manholes, and no cable or other equipment of the city shall
enter the utility's manholes. The utility shall, prior to each addition by it to any duct now existing or hereafter constructed,
notify the city's designated representative of the nature and location of such intended addition. The utility shall, along with its
application for a permit to open a street for the purpose of laying a new duct, to the extent the utility is authorized to do so
under state law, provide the city's designated representative with a set of plans showing the type, number, and location in the
street of the ducts to be constructed. The city, prior to the original installation by it of its equipment in any such top duct, shall
notify the utility three (3) days in advance of the time and place it intends to make such entry and installation. All cables
installed by the city in the utility ducts shall be of the nonmetallic, sheathy type to prevent corrosive or electrolytic action
between the city and the utility-owned cables. All city-owned conductors and cables, whether on poles or in ductlines, shall
be constructed, maintained and operated in such a manner as to maximize the public safety so as not to create a hazard in
the operation of the utility's electrical transmission and distribution system. Further, all city-owned traffic, police and fire alarm
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/598
conductors, and alarm boxes, and any city circuits on the utility poles, and all cables installed by city in ducts constructed by
the utility, shall be installed in strict compliance with the applicable provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code and
National Electrical Code and other applicable federal, state and local codes. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 9, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.070 Street lighting
The utility must provide the necessary facilities and poles for street and alley lighting in the areas where the utility provides
service. The expense of any change in location of lighting standards, whether wood or steel poles, shall be borne by the
utility. All extensions to the city's present street lighting system in the area where the utility is providing power for street
lighting shall be noticed to the utility before they are made. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 10, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.071 Tree trimming
Only to the extent that the utility has the authority to do so by state law or easement, the utility may trim trees upon and
overhanging the streets, alleys, avenues, sidewalks, public places and public ways of the city so as to prevent the branches
of such trees from coming into contact with the wires or other equipment of the utility. If the utility holds such permission
without a franchise from the city, the trees and vegetation shall be trimmed in a manner that there shall be a proper clearance
between the nearest wires or equipment and any portion of the trees or vegetation. The trees and vegetation shall be
trimmed so that no branches, twigs or leaves come in contact with or in any way interfere with the city's or the utility's
facilities. The utility shall exercise reasonable care to avoid unnecessary destruction of or serious harm to trees located in the
public ways or property. The utility shall notify the city, in writing, no less than seven (7) days before it plans to perform this
work. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 11, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.072 Underground facilities
The utility shall install underground future planned utility facilities, unless the city otherwise authorizes aboveground
installation by city ordinance. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 12, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.073 Nuisance
The utility shall remove and abate at its own expense any installation or structure that is dangerous to life or property. Should
the utility, after reasonable notice, fail or refuse to act, the city shall have the power, using reasonable means and methods,
to remove or abate the same at the expense of the utility, all without compensation or liability for damages to the utility.
(Ordinance 98-06, sec. 13, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.074 Duplication
Without written approval by city's designated representative based upon engineering considerations, utilities shall not
duplicate facilities to serve customers within the city who apply to switch electric service providers once electric retail
competition is lawful. The provider shall have the right to use existing utility facilities to serve retail customers and shall pay
the utility reasonable rental charges established by the city council, unless general statutes provide otherwise. The utility
shall notify the city of any customers that are being provided service by third parties or utilities other than the utility over the
utility's lines within the city limits. The utility must provide the city with the names of the provider or providers using the utility's
lines or facilities in the city rights-of-way. The utility must provide the city on the tenth (10th) day of each month the names of
the providers using its lines or facilities and the names of the corresponding customers being served by each provider. The
utility must also notify the city of the amount paid to the utility by providers using the utility's lines or facilities for the use of
said lines or facilities. To the extent that the utility has access to such information, the utility must also include in such
notification to the city the rate class applied to each customer by its particular provider and the gross receipts each provider
derives from its customers by virtue of the use of the utility's lines or facilities. Similarly, the utility or other utilities must use
existing electric facilities to serve existing customers within the city and pay the city-owned electric system's facilities charges
where those facilities are owned by the city-owned electric system. No customer shall have their electric service provider
switched without their consent. When a customer consents to the switching of service to a utility, reasonable notice of the
switch must be given to the provider which was previously serving that customer. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 14, adopted
1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.075 Insurance
The utility shall at all times maintain comprehensive general liability, motor vehicle, fire and casualty insurance through
recognized, reliable companies licensed and qualified to do business in the city in such reasonable amounts as the city may
deem adequate and shall maintain copies of such policies in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 15,
adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.076 Emergencies
The utility shall, in coordination with the city's police and fire departments, establish standard operating procedures for
emergency situations, including procedures for cutting and restoring power at locations involved in police and fire
emergencies. In the event of an emergency that the utility believes poses a threat of immediate harm to the public, the utility
is granted access to the public ways or property without a permit to ameliorate the threatened harm. The utility shall advise
the city of the emergency at its earliest feasible opportunity. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 16, adopted 1/13/98)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/598
Sec. 13.05.077 Local facilities
The utility shall maintain local offices and facilities within the city adequate for the purpose of providing repair and
maintenance services and personnel available during office hours to address concerns the city might have regarding the
provision of electric services within the boundaries of the city and the administration of this division. The utility shall designate
a service representative for the city area and provide the city with the location and telephone number of the local office, and
the name and telephone number of the utility's service representative. The utility shall maintain local offices and facilities
within the city for the purpose of providing the city with 24-hour emergency service pertaining to the operation of the utility
facilities. The utility shall provide the city with the location and telephone number of the local office, the name of the utility's
emergency representative and the direct telephone number or other direct numbers at which the utility's emergency
representative can be reached twenty-four (24) hours a day. Neither a computerized network of numbers to call nor an
answering machine is acceptable. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 17, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.078 Reports
The utility shall provide to the city a copy of each periodic report or records filed with any state or federal agency regulating
the utility's rates, service, issuance of securities, or compliance with affirmative action and equal opportunity requirements.
The utility shall provide to the city a copy of its articles of incorporation and any amendments thereto, its current bylaws
including amendments thereto, and a copy of its current tariff schedules. The utility shall provide the city with a copy of the
order by the state public utility commission granting the utility a certificate of convenience and necessity to serve within the
corporate limits. The utility must also provide to the city a copy of its terms and conditions for service to customers. In
addition, the utility must provide the city with a list of its customers' names, customer rate classes, and the number of
customers and amount of revenues received by the utility for each rate class, as well as the location of each customer. Said
list must be updated to include any customers added during the previous month, and must be supplied to the city by the tenth
(10th) day of the following month. Included in the list shall be the number of the utility customers added during the previous
month and the total number of customers being served by the utility. The utility shall also provide the city with a copy of any
report made to the federal or state regulatory authorities regarding an event involving hazardous materials within the city
limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction. The utility must also provide the city with the name and address of its registered agent for
service of process. The reports described in this section shall not be provided to the city to the extent that the utility is
required by applicable law or regulation to keep these reports confidential. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 18, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.079 Indemnity
In the construction, installation, repairing, operation and maintenance of all transmission and distribution lines, poles,
conductors, wires, conduits, substations, apparatus and appliances and other facilities for the distribution of electrical energy
and power, the utility shall use every reasonable precaution to avoid damage or injury to persons or property. The utility shall
indemnify the city from any and all such damage, injury, or expense, including reasonable and necessary attorneys' fees and
court costs, caused by any act or failure to act by the utility, its officers, agents and employees in the connecting, installing,
repairing, and maintaining of any of its facilities, or in excavating the public streets and highways or public ground of the city,
including the paving, repaving or repairing of any of the public streets, highways or public property of the city. Further, the
utility shall indemnify and hold the city harmless for any and all claims, demands or causes of action and expenses, including
court costs and all reasonable and necessary attorneys' fees, brought against the city occasioned by or arising out of the
construction, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of the utility's electrical lighting and power system, either directly or
indirectly, and shall defend all suits and pay all final judgments; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not
be applicable to any claims, damages, actions or causes of actions proximately resulting from the use by the city, city officers,
city agents, city representatives or city employees of the utility's poles and ductlines for the installation, maintenance or
removal of city's equipment, as provided in this division, or for which the city is otherwise liable as provided herein. At the
option of the city, the utility may be made a party to any court proceeding. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 19, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.080 Penalty
The failure to timely pay the city the fees imposed by this division in the manner specified by this division shall be a violation
punishable, upon final conviction, by a fine as provided in section 1.01.009. Each violation on each day shall be considered a
separate violation. The city may also bring suit for injunction against any corporation, person, or other entity that shall violate
or threaten to violate any provision of this division. (Ordinance 98-06, sec. 21, adopted 1/13/98)
Sec. 13.05.081 Enforcement
The city manager, city attorney, or any person designated by them are authorized and directed to take such action as may be
necessary to enforce the terms of this division, including, but not limited to, obtaining court orders enforcing this division.
(Ordinance 98-06, sec. 23, adopted 1/13/98)
ARTICLE 13.06 SOLID WASTE
Sec. 13.06.001 Establishing rules and regulations
(a) The rules and regulations for solid waste collection and disposal (residential/commercial), residential recycling are
made part hereof for all purposes is, and the same hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/598
(b) All persons, companies, corporations, businesses, residential, industrial and commercial establishments within the city
shall be required to use the solid waste disposal and recycling services provided by the city or through a company
designated in a franchise awarded by the city.
(Ordinance 2016-29 adopted 10/11/16)
Sec. 13.06.002 Definitions
Bags. Plastic sacks designed to store residential refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted
by top. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed thirty-five (35) pounds. (Ordinance 2016-07 adopted 4/12/16)
Bin. Metal receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use only at commercial and industrial units.
Brush. The cuttings or trimmings from trees, shrubs, or lawns and similar materials.
Bulky waste. Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture and other waste materials other than
construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those allowed for
containers.
(Ordinance 2013-34 adopted 9/10/13)
Bundle. An easily handled package securely tied together not exceeding three (3) feet in length and 6" in diameter and/or
thirty-five (35) pounds in weight. (Ordinance 2016-07 adopted 4/12/16)
City. City of Midlothian.
Commercial and industrial refuse. Garbage, rubbish and stable matter generated by a producer at a commercial and
industrial unit.
Commercial and industrial unit. Any premises, location or entity, public or private, requiring refuse collection within the
corporate limits of the city which is not a residential [unit].
Construction debris. Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
Container. A receptacle with capacity of greater than twenty (20) gallons but less than thirty-five (35) gallons construction of
plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting. The mouth of a container shall have a diameter
greater than or equal to that of the base. The weight of the container and its contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds.
Contractor. The person, corporation or partnership performing refuse collection and disposal contracted by the city.
Dead animals. Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten (10) pounds in weight that have expired from any
cause, except those slaughtered or killed for human use or consumption.
Disposal site. A refuse depository including but not limited to sanitary landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste
processing/separation centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction
and requiring such licenses, permits or approvals to receive refuse and dead animals for processing or final disposal.
Garbage. Any and all dead animals of less than ten (10) pounds in weight except those slaughtered for human consumption;
every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing,
consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition, of meats, fish, fowl,
birds, fruits, grains. Or the animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used in tin cans and other food
containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable animal or vegetable waste matter which is likely to attract flies or
rodents); except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals,
hazardous waste, recyclables, rubbish or stable matter.
Hazardous waste. Waste, in any amount which is defined, characterized or designated as hazardous by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste, in any amount,
which is regulated under federal or state law. For purposes of this contract, the term hazardous waste shall also include
motor oil, gasoline, paint and paint cans.
Producer. An occupant of a residential unit who generates refuse.
Receptacle. Plastic bin used for collection of recyclables which is obtained from the collection service provider.
(Ordinance 2013-34 adopted 9/10/13)
Recycle bags. Clear recycling bags with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top. Total weight
of a recycle bag and its contents shall not exceed thirty-five (35) pounds. (Ordinance 2016-07 adopted 4/12/16)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/598
Recyclables. Material in the recycling process diverted or removed from the solid waste stream that may be reused, and a
substantial amount of the materials is consistently utilized to manufacture a product which otherwise would have been
produced using a virgin material. Recyclables are not solid waste.
Refuse. This term shall refer to residential refuse and bulky waste, construction debris and stable matter generated at a
residential unit unless the context otherwise requires.
Residential refuse. All garbage and rubbish generated by a producer at a residential unit.
Residential unit. A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not
more than four families. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or domestic light and power services
are being supplied thereto. A condominium dwelling, whether of a single or multi-level construction, consisting of four (4) or
less contiguous or separate single-family dwelling units within any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a
residential unit.
Rubbish. All waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cutting, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches
thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and
discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for
packaging or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or metallic substances, and any
and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky-waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage,
hazardous waste, recyclables or stable matter.
Stable matter. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or
poultry enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
Sec. 13.06.003 Type of collection
(a) Services provided.
(1) Contractor shall provide curbside and/or alley collection service for the collection of residential refuse to
each residential unit two (2) times per week.
(2) Contractor shall provide collection and processing of residential recycling one (1) time per week.
(Ordinance 2013-34 adopted 9/10/13)
(3) Contractor shall provide collection service for the collection of commercial and industrial refuse to
commercial and industrial units according to individual agreement. (Ordinance 2016-29 adopted 10/11/16)
(4) The contractor shall provide for the special collection from residential unit of brush, bulky waste,
construction debris and stable matter. Also, the contractor may provide for the special collection of dead animals
and hazardous waste at commercial and industrial unit and residential units at its sole discretion and upon such
terms and conditions, as contractor shall specify. (Ordinance 2013-34 adopted 9/10/13)
(b) Location of containers, bags and bundles for collection.
(1) Containers, bags and bundles of brush in piles no greater than three (3) feet in length and 6" in diameter,
shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. Curbside refers to that portion of rightof-
way adjacent to paved or traveled city roadways (including alleys). Containers, bags, bundles shall be placed
as close to the roadway as practical without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or
pedestrians. When construction work is being performed in the right-of-way, containers, bags, and bundles shall
be placed as close as practical to an access point for the collection vehicle. Contractor may decline to collect any
container, bag and bundle not so placed or any residential refuse not in a bag.
(Ordinance 2016-07 adopted 4/12/16)
(2) Contractor shall provide bins for commercial and industrial units whenever customers request their use
within twenty-four (24) hours. Each bin shall be placed in an accessible, outside location on a hard surface
according to individual agreement. Contractor may decline to collect refuse in bins not so placed. (Ordinance
2013-34 adopted 9/10/13)
Sec. 13.06.004 Preparation of collection
(a) Garbage and refuse, with the exception of branches, tree trimmings, leaves and brush, shall be placed in a bag.
Recyclables shall be in clear recycle plastic bags and placed within a receptacle that can be obtained by contacting the
contracting provider of service. Any additional clear bags of recyclables may be placed alongside the receptacle.
(b) Cut and bundled brush:
(Ordinance 2016-07 adopted 4/12/16)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/598
(1) Cut and bundles brush shall be picked up at the curb with the residential trash at no additional charge.
(Ordinance 2013-34 adopted 9/10/13)
(2) Brush must be cut in three (3) feet lengths, bundled with string or rope, and not greater than 6" inches in
diameter. (Ordinance 2016-07 adopted 4/12/16)
(3) No bundle shall exceed thirty-five (35) pounds each. It will be picked up with the normal garbage service
each week. Residents are limited to two (2) cubic yards per week. (Ordinance 2013-34 adopted 9/10/13)
Sec. 13.06.005 Operation
(a) Hours of operation. Collection of residential refuse shall not start before 7:00 a.m. or continue after 6:00 p.m. on the
same day. Exceptions to collection hours shall be affected only upon the mutual agreement of the city and contractor, or
when the contractor reasonably determines that an exception is necessary in order to complete collection on an existing
collection route due to unusual circumstances.
(b) Holidays.
(1) The following holidays shall be observed:
(A) New Year's Day;
(B) Thanksgiving Day; and
(C) Christmas Day.
(2) Contractor may decide to observe any or all of the above mentioned holidays by suspension of collection
service on the holiday, but such decision in no manner relieves the contractor of its obligation to provide collection
service at residential units at least once per week.
(Ordinance 2016-07 adopted 4/12/16)
Sec. 13.06.006 Levy of fees for garbage/refuse and recycling collection service
(a) Residences are to be billed as per the fee schedule adopted by ordinance passed by the city council and on file in the
office of the city secretary. (Ordinance 2016-29 adopted 10/11/16)
(b) Said fee shall be billed to each person affected by including same on the regular monthly bill for water and sewer, if a
subscriber, and if not a subscriber, by direct billing to the person affected, in the same manner.
(c) In the event of nonpayment of said fee within 30 days of the billing date thereof, said city shall discontinue water, sewer
and/or garbage refuse collection service (as may be applicable) until payment has been made in full.
(d) Businesses are to be billed as per the schedule on file in the office of the city secretary at city hall.
(Ordinance 2014-06 adopted 3/11/14)
Sec. 13.06.007 Unlawful activities enumerated
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person or organization to place, dump, throw, or permit to be placed, dumped or
thrown, or to permit to remain or to accumulate, any garbage, refuse or dead animals on private property, except for the
purpose of collection as herein provided; or to place or dump same on city property.
Sec. 13.06.008 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or who shall fail to comply with any
provision hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable accordingly.
(Ordinance 2013-34 adopted 9/10/13)
ARTICLE 13.07 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.07.001 Adopted
The city hereby adopts the cross-connection control and backflow prevention program as policy for the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/598
Sec. 13.07.002 Purpose
The purposes of this policy are to:
(1) Protect the city potable water system from contamination or pollution by preventing contaminants and
pollutants from residential, commercial/retail and industrial uses from entering the city water system.
(2) Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control by requiring the installation
of approved backflow prevention assemblies as required by the plumbing code adopted by the city, and requiring
the certification of all testable backflow prevention assemblies upon initial installation.
(3) Provide for a continuing program of cross-connection control by requiring the operational testing of all
testable backflow prevention assemblies that are directly served potable water by the city.
(4) Comply with federal regulations related to cross connections and backflow prevention, including without
limitation, those of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA).
(5) Comply with state regulations related to cross connections and backflow prevention, including, without
limitation, those of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
Sec. 13.07.003 Applicability
(a) As a condition of receiving water service from the city, all new customers shall execute a water service agreement
attached as appendix A to Ordinance 2014-20, and install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in
accordance with the city's plumbing code, cross-connection control and backflow prevention program, city ordinances and
TCEQ regulations. If there is a conflict between any of the provisions contained within these documents or codes, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
(b) This policy applies to all direct connections to the city's potable water system, and to all initial installations of backflow
prevention assemblies that fall under the city's regulatory jurisdiction, regardless of whether the connection or assembly is
located within the city's certificated water service area, and regardless of whether the connection or assembly is for a retail,
wholesale, industrial or other customer or user of the city's water system.
Sec. 13.07.004 Definitions
For the purpose of this policy, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. If a word or term used in this policy is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used,
shall have the meanings or definitions listed in title 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) section 141.2. Definitions or terms
not found in 40 CFR section 141.2 shall have the meanings or definitions contained in the latest edition of The Drinking Water
Dictionary, prepared by the American Water Works Association (AWWA).
Air gap. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet
conveying water to a tank, fixture, receptor, sink, or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. The vertical,
physical separation must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, but never less than one (1) inch.
Approved backflow prevention assembly or backflow assembly or assembly. An assembly to counteract backpressures or
prevent backsiphonage. An assembly that has been approved, manufactured, tested and approved in accordance with the
standards adopted by AWWA, or approved and listed by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker. A device, which contains a flat check (poppet), a check seat and an air inlet vent. When water
pressure is reduced to a gauge pressure of zero or below, air enters the device, preventing backsiphonage. It is designed to
protect against backsiphonage only. Because AVB devices are not mechanically testable, the city will no longer allow their
installation. However, any existing devices in place prior to the adoption of this policy shall be inspected annually.
Auxiliary supply. Any water source or system other than the public water system that may be available in the building or on
the property.
(1) Approved. An auxiliary water supply, which has been investigated and approved by the health authority,
meets water quality regulations, and is accepted by the water purveyor.
(2) Unapproved. An auxiliary water supply, which is not approved by the health authority.
AWWA. American Water Works Association.
Backflow. A hydraulic condition, caused by a difference in pressures, that causes nonpotable water or other fluid to flow into
the city's water distribution system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/598
Backflow prevention assembly tester (BPAT). A person who has met all of the requirements of the TCEQ to be recognized as
a certified tester in the state and is registered with the city. A certified tester who is employed by a state-approved fire
protection contractor shall test fire protection assemblies.
Boresight or boresight to daylight. Providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in vaults through
the use of an unobstructed drainpipe.
City. City of Midlothian.
City building official. The building official of the city or their designated representative.
City public works director. The public works director of the city or their designated representative.
Combination protection. An assembly installed for point-of-use isolation in addition to a premises isolation assembly.
Commercial customers. Generally defined as customers whose business is primarily engaged in the sale of goods,
commodities or services to consumers.
Contamination. The entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to
health and/or quality of the water.
Cross connection. Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly (actual or
potential), with any other nonpotable water system, used water system or auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit,
swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp coolers, air-conditioner units, fire protection system, or any other
assembly which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which
may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections, swivel or change over assemblies, or other temporary or permanent assemblies through
which, or because of which, backflow may occur are considered to be cross connections.
Customer. Any person to whom water is sold or furnished from the city water supply by the city's water system. (Can mean
either owner or lessee.)
Customer service inspector or CSI. An individual who has fulfilled the requirements set out in TCEQ rules and regulations for
public water systems and is capable of conducting inspections on a customer's water system.
Degree of hazard. The health or nonhealth classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross connections.
Double check detector assembly or DCDA. An approved assembly consisting of two approved double check valve
assemblies, set in parallel, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or use. This
unit must be purchased as a complete assembly.
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check or DC assembly or DC. An
assembly which consists of two (2) independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The
assembly comes complete with a gate valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness.
Hazardous contaminant (health hazard). A cross connection, potential contamination hazard, or other situation involving any
substance that can cause death, illness, spread of disease, or has a high probability of causing such effects if introduced into
the potable water supply.
Industrial customers. Generally defined as customers whose business is primarily engaged in manufacturing, processing,
assembling or storing/distributing products or goods.
Inspector. A person that is a cross-connection inspector recognized by the city.
Midlothian. City of Midlothian.
Mobile unit. Any operation, which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into potable water systems from a mobile
source. These include, but are not limited to: carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles, liquidwaste
vehicles, power-wash operations, and pest-control vehicles.
Nonresidential use. Includes, but is not limited to, duplexes, multiplex housing and apartments where the units are not on
separate meters, and all other uses not specifically included in “residential use” defined in this section.
Person. A natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint
venture stock company or association, and other such entity.
Plumbing code. The current version of the plumbing code as adopted by the city by ordinance.
Plumbing hazard. An internal or plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system that may be either a
pollutional or a contamination-type hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/598
Point-of-use isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the
actual or potential cross connection exists.
Pollutional hazard. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or
the consumer's water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree of
intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance, or
be aesthetically objectionable, or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.
Potable water supply. Any water that has been tested as required by state regulations for drinking water supplies and is
considered safe for human consumption.
Premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures
located on it.
Premises isolation or containment. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water
system and the water user.
Pressure vacuum breaker assembly. An approved assembly consisting of a spring-loaded check valve loaded to the closed
position, an independently operating air inlet valve loaded to the open position and installed as a unit with and between two
resilient seated shut-off valves and with suitable connections for testing. This type of assembly is designed to protect against
backsiphonage only.
Public water system or system. Any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public domestic use.
The system must meet all the health requirements set forth by the TCEQ. The system will include all services, reservoirs,
facilities and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing or conveying water for public consumption.
Reduced pressure detector assembly or RPDA. An approved assembly consisting of two approved reduced pressure
backflow assemblies, set in parallel, equipped with a meter on the bypass line to detect small amounts of water leakage or
use. This unit must be purchased as a complete assembly.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RP assembly or RP.
An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operated,
mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the
first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the
assembly.
Residential use. Includes single-family dwellings or where the individual units are each on a separate meter.
Service connection. The terminal end of a connection from the city water system, i.e., where the city loses jurisdiction and
sanitary control over the water at the point of delivery to the customer. If a meter is installed at the point of delivery, the
“service connection” means the point at which the terminal end on the discharge side of the water meter connects to the
customer's system.
Spill resistant vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an independently-operating, internally-loaded check valve, and an
independently-operating, loaded air-inlet valve, located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be
equipped with a properly located, resilient, seated test cock; a properly located bleed/vent valve, and a tightly closing,
resilient, seated shut-off valve attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a
nonhealth hazard (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e., contaminant) under a backsiphonage condition only.
System hazard. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable
water supply, or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the
system.
Thermal expansion. Tendency of water to change in volume due to an increase in its temperature.
TCEQ. Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its predecessor or successor agencies.
Used water. Water supplied by a public water system to a customer's system after it has passed through the service
connection.
Secs. 13.07.005–13.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Authority and Responsibility
Sec. 13.07.031 Authority of city public works director
(a) The city public works director is responsible for enforcing the requirements of this policy with respect to connections
made to the city water system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/598
(b) To ensure adequate protection in individual cases, the city may assess and determine the degree of hazard to the
public potable water system posed in the case of individual connections, customers or users.
(c) When the city determines that a backflow prevention assembly is required for the protection of the city water system,
the city will require the customer to have installed, at the customer's expense, an approved assembly at each service
connection or hazard point.
(d) The city may refuse to initiate service, or may discontinue service to any customer that maintains an actual or potential
sanitary hazard in the customer's system, or whose plumbing is susceptible to cross connections, or where the city
determines that adequate protection against backflow is not provided.
Sec. 13.07.032 Authority of building official
The building official is designated under this policy for enforcing all provisions of the plumbing code pertaining to cross
connections (i.e., proper installation and location of each customer's system), including the connection to the city water
system. Additionally, the building official will coordinate all building permit approvals to ensure compliance with this policy.
Sec. 13.07.033 Inspection - inspectors - testers
(a) Customer service inspection.
(1) Pursuant to TCEQ regulations, an inspection for cross-connection control shall be completed by the city
prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances:
(A) A newly constructed facility or previously existing premises, which is requesting water service.
(B) Where any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises has occurred.
(C) The city deems it necessary to ensure the protection of its water system.
(2) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a newly constructed facility(ies) until the inspection by the
city is completed.
(3) Inspections will be carried out by an inspector employed by the city, or authorized by the city to perform
inspections.
(b) Customer service inspectors. Inspectors performing cross-connection control duties within the city must be authorized
by the city, and shall be employed by or be an independent contractor for the city.
(c) Certified backflow prevention assembly testers and tester responsibilities.
(1) All backflow assembly testers operating within the city shall be certified in accordance with all applicable
regulations and requirements of the TCEQ.
(2) At the time of registration, recertification, and upon the city's request, each person certified as a backflow
prevention assembly tester shall furnish evidence to show that they are insured and bonded to perform services
on private property, and have current licenses as required by the state and the city to perform these services.
(3) Persons certified as backflow prevention assembly testers shall meet the following requirements:
(A) Hold a TCEQ-approved backflow prevention assembly tester certification.
(B) Maintain commercial general liability insurance: $500,000.00 combined single limit per occurrence for
bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. This policy shall have no coverages removed by
exclusions. Automobile liability insurance: $500,000.00 combined single limit per accident for bodily injury
and property damage. Coverage should be provided as a “code 1,” any auto.
(C) Agree to abide by all requirements of OSHA, including but not limited to confined space requirements.
(4) No certified backflow assembly tester shall operate within the city without registering with the city, both
initially and on an annual basis, and paying the required fees.
(5) A registration shall remain in effect provided:
(A) The tester maintains eligibility for registration and certification, as defined in this policy;
(B) The tester attends and successfully completes a recertification training course as required by the
TCEQ;
(C) The tester's registration is not revoked by the city; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/598
(D) An annual (January 1st through December 31st) registration fee as specified in appendix B to
Ordinance 2014-20 shall be paid by each registered tester prior to any work commencing within the city.
Fees are due and payable no later than January 31st for the registration year.
(6) Upon recertification, a backflow prevention assembly tester shall renew their registration with the city. If a
certification remains expired for a period of one (1) year, the backflow prevention assembly tester may re-establish
registration eligibility by showing proof that they have retaken the TCEQ-approved backflow prevention tester
certification course.
(7) Each applicant for registration shall:
(A) Provide evidence to the city to establish that the applicant has available the necessary tools and
equipment to properly test backflow prevention assemblies; and
(B) Identify all test gauges the applicant will use in testing backflow prevention assemblies.
(8) A registered backflow prevention assembly tester shall:
(A) File the serial number of each of their test gauges with the city;
(B) Annually, have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated to within a maximum
discrepancy of two percent (2%) of industry standards;
(C) Perform competent and accurate testing or inspection of each backflow prevention assembly and
submit a written report, stating the backflow prevention assembly has been tested or inspected and is
functioning properly. A copy of the test or inspection results along with a nonrefundable processing fee in the
amount as specified in appendix B to Ordinance 2014-20 per each assembly tested or inspected, shall be
submitted to the city within 15 days of testing the device;
(D) List registered serial numbers of test gauges on tests and maintenance reports prior to submitting
them to the city; and
(E) Not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly.
(9) The city may revoke a registration if it is determined that the tester:
(A) Has made false, incomplete or inaccurate assembly testing reports;
(B) Has used inaccurate gauges;
(C) Has used improper testing procedures;
(D) Has expired insurance;
(E) Is not in compliance with safety regulations;
(F) Has failed to annually register the serial numbers of their test kits, or failed to calibrate gauges as
required by this policy;
(G) Has failed to pay the annual registration fee as required by this policy;
(H) Has failed to maintain a current certification from TCEQ; or
(I) Has violated any other provision of this policy.
Sec. 13.07.034 Responsibilities of customers (owners, agents and lessees)
It is the responsibility of all property owners and their agents and lessees to abide by the requirements of this policy.
Secs. 13.07.035–13.07.060 Reserved
Division 3. Standards and Requirements
Sec. 13.07.061 General requirements
(a) The TCEQ rules and regulations for public water systems, as amended from time to time, will govern the design,
construction, operation and maintenance of the city water system with respect to cross-connection control and backflow
prevention. Each customer must comply with all applicable provisions of these rules and regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/598
(b) All backflow prevention assemblies must be mechanically testable, tested upon installation by a certified tester, and
certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention assemblies which are directly served potable water by the
city and are installed to provide protection against hazardous contaminants must also be tested and certified to be operating
within specifications by a certified tester as required by this policy.
(c) Gauges used in the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be tested for accuracy annually in accordance with
the University of Southern California's Foundation of Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research and/or the AWWA's
Manual of Cross-Connection Control (Manual M-14). Each certified tester that performs tests related to the city water system
must include test gauge serial numbers on all test and maintenance report forms to verify that the tester used gauges that
have been tested for accuracy.
(d) A test report must be completed by the certified backflow prevention assembly tester for each assembly tested. The
signed and dated original must be submitted to the city for recordkeeping purposes. If the tester chooses to use a report
which differs from the city form, it must contain at least all of the information required on the city form.
(e) The use of a backflow prevention assembly at a service connection will be considered additional backflow prevention,
and will not negate the need for use of backflow prevention on internal hazards as defined in this policy or the city's adopted
plumbing code.
(f) It is unlawful for a customer to install, or to cause or permit the installation of a bypass that has not been approved in
advance by the city. All bypasses on backflow prevention assemblies must themselves include provisions for backflow
prevention as described in this policy.
Sec. 13.07.062 Types of backflow prevention
(a) Refer to appendix C to Ordinance 2014-20 - TCEQ Backflow Requirements - Assessment of Hazards and Selection of
Assemblies for the list of all approved assemblies. This list may be amended from time to time without having to amend this
policy.
AG Air Gap Separation
RPDA Reduced Pressure Detector Assembly
RP Reduced Pressure Backflow Prevention Assembly
DC Double Check Valve Assembly
DCDA Double Check Detector Assembly
PVB Pressure Vacuum Breaker
AVB Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker *Installation no longer allowed
(b) Variances from these requirements will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the city. No deviations shall be
permitted without prior written approval from the city.
Sec. 13.07.063 Air gap separation
(a) Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and may be utilized at premises where a
substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
(b) An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of
the receiving vessel; however, in no case shall the separation be less than one (1) inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular
screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45° angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of
the angle. Hoses shall not be allowed.
(c) Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way and shall be available for inspection at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/598
Sec. 13.07.064 Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB)
Because AVB's cannot be mechanically tested, they are no longer allowed for new installations.
Sec. 13.07.065 Detector check valve assembly
Detector check assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly or a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly and detector metering. Double check detector valve assemblies and reduced
pressure detector assemblies shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve assemblies
and reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies.
Sec. 13.07.066 Double check valve backflow prevention assembly (DC)
All DC assemblies will be tested in each of the following circumstances: immediately upon installation, after repair, if it is
moved and in compliance with this policy (refer to section 13.07.095 records and testing).
(1) DC assemblies may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but
not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
(2) DCs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served.
(3) Premises where noninterruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two assemblies of the same
type installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum
water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
(4) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipefittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be
installed.
(5) Vertical installations are allowed on sizes up to and including four (4) inches that meet the following
requirements:
(A) Internally spring-loaded check valves;
(B) Flow is upward through assembly;
(C) Approved by the city; and
(D) Found on the approved list of assemblies.
Sec. 13.07.067 Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB) and spill-resistant vacuum breaker (SVB)
(a) PVBs and SVBs may be utilized at point-of-use protection only. PVBs and SVBs protect against backsiphonage only
and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure.
(b) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest use outlet or overflow level
downstream from the assembly.
(c) PVBs and SVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water
discharge.
(d) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches
all around the assembly.
(e) PVBs and SVBs shall be located between twelve (12) inches and sixty (60) inches above ground level.
(f) A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly.
Sec. 13.07.068 Reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly (RP)
All RP assemblies shall be tested in each of the following circumstances: immediately upon installation, after repair, if it is
moved, and in compliance with this policy (refer to section 13.07.095 records and testing).
(1) RPs shall be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to the public health
if introduced into the potable water system. An RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical.
An RP is effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure.
(2) RPs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served.
(3) Premises where noninterruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two assemblies of the same
type installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/598
water requirements while the two together will provide the maximum flow required.
(4) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipefittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be
installed.
(5) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and shall be located in an area where
water damage to buildings or furnishings will not occur from relief valve discharge. An approved air gap funnel
assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly; this assembly will not control flow in a
continuous relief situation. Full relief valve discharge flow should be considered when installing this assembly.
(6) Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances.
(7) RP assemblies may be installed in a vault only if relief valve discharge can be drained to daylight through a
boresight type drain. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and shall
be screened on both ends.
(8) An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. This air gap shall be at
least twice the diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically above the top rim of the drain, but in no
case, less than one (1) inch.
Sec. 13.07.069 Backflow assembly requirements
A customer service inspector or utility inspector, employed by or under contract with the city, shall determine the type and
location of a backflow assembly to be installed within the city's water service area. The assembly shall be required in each of
the following circumstances, but the inspector is in no way limited to just these circumstances:
(1) When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection with any
activity at a premises, or materials stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply.
(2) When a premises has one or more cross connections as that term is defined in section 13.07.004,
definitions.
(3) When internal cross connections are present that are not correctable.
(4) When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether cross
connections exist.
(5) When a premises has a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
(6) When entry to a premises is restricted so that inspections for cross connections, or testing of required
assemblies, cannot be made, a RP assembly will be required to be installed and maintained, in accordance with
this policy, at the service connection.
(7) When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result.
(8) When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by an inspector to be necessary
to accomplish the purpose of this policy.
(9) When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the city.
(10) In all new nonresidential construction, there shall be installed an approved backflow assembly at the
service connection. The type of the assembly will be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by
an inspector.
(11) When a building is constructed on a commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not
determined, or could change, a RP assembly shall be installed at the service connection to provide protection of
the public water supply in the event of the most hazardous use of the building.
(12) Any used water-return system that has received approval from the city.
(13) If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this policy, the installation of a
RP assembly will be required at the service connection.
(14) If an inspector determines that additions or rearrangements have been made to the plumbing system,
without the proper permits as required by the city's plumbing code, premises isolation shall be required.
(15) All commercial multi-story buildings, or any buildings with a booster pump or elevated storage tank.
Sec. 13.07.070 Testing of assemblies
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/598
(a) The city will cause to be inspected and tested, all required backflow assemblies in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Immediately after installation;
(2) Based on classification of hazard, refer to section 13.07.095 records and testing; and appendix C to
Ordinance 2014-20 - assessment of hazards and selection of assemblies.
(3) Immediately after repair;
(4) Whenever the assembly is moved.
(b) Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the city deems it necessary.
(c) All mechanically nontestable backflow prevention devices (atmospheric vacuum breakers) installed prior to the adoption
of this policy must be inspected annually.
(d) All assembly testing and inspections shall be performed by a certified and registered backflow prevention assembly
tester, in accordance with TCEQ-approved test procedures.
(e) It is the responsibility of the property owner to have all assemblies tested or inspected in accordance with this policy.
(f) The city shall not be liable for damage to an assembly that may occur during testing.
Sec. 13.07.071 Maintenance of assemblies
(a) A person who owns, operates, or manages premises in which required backflow prevention assemblies are installed,
shall maintain such assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. All maintenance and repair
of assemblies shall be done in accordance with all applicable regulations of the TCEQ and this policy.
(b) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in a manner that allows them to be tested by a method that has
been approved by the TCEQ.
Sec. 13.07.072 Installation requirements
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements, to ensure their proper
operation and accessibility. The city may require backflow devices at the water meter, based upon the level of hazard.
(1) (A) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with all plumbing codes
adopted by the city and this policy. The assembly installer shall obtain the required plumbing permits prior to
installation or replacement, and shall have the assembly inspected by a cross-connection inspector that is
employed by the city, as required by the plumbing code. In the event there is a conflict between the plumbing
code and the installation requirements set forth in this policy, the more stringent will apply.
(B) The backflow device shall be installed directly after the water meter (outside of the city meter box), not
more than five feet from the property line. The city may allow a variance to install the device so that it does
not obstruct a sidewalk, driveway, or other public easement. The city building department can assist with
exact placement.
(2) All new installations of irrigation systems, residential and nonresidential, will have a minimum of a DC
assembly. A RP assembly will be required if any solution or any other source of supply is used or if it is deemed
necessary by an inspector.
(3) No part of a RP assembly shall be submerged in water, or installed in a location subject to flooding. If a DC
assembly is installed in a vault, brass plugs shall be maintained in the test ports at all times and adequate
drainage shall be provided.
(4) In the event a premises isolation assembly is required, the assembly shall be installed at the point-ofdelivery
of the water supply, before any branch in the line, and on private property located just outside the
boundary of the city's right-of-way, and/or the point of the cross connection.
(5) The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(6) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the city.
(7) All vertical installations shall be approved in writing by the city prior to installation.
(8) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance and testing.
(9) If the backflow assembly is installed inside of a building, the assembly shall be readily accessible for
inspection and testing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/598
(10) If an assembly is installed pursuant to this policy and is five (5) feet or higher above the floor, it shall be
equipped with a rigid and permanently installed scaffolding acceptable to the city. This installation shall also meet
all applicable requirements set out by OSHA and the Texas Occupational Safety and Health laws.
(11) The property owner and/or installer-tester shall register all backflow assemblies with the city. Registration
shall consist of the date of installation, manufacturer, model, serial number of the backflow prevention assembly,
initial test report, location of device and the name and license number of the installer.
(12) Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required
ahead of the assembly.
(13) The property owner, their lessee, or their agent, assumes all responsibility for leaks and damage. The
owner shall also see that any vault is kept reasonably free of silt and debris.
Sec. 13.07.073 Irrigation systems
(a) All irrigation systems, which currently have no backflow protection or systems installed after the effective date of this
policy, shall be required to meet all requirements pertaining to irrigation systems as stipulated by TCEQ regulations and
requirements, the city's adopted plumbing code, or as amended by city ordinance. In the event that there is a conflict
between these codes and regulations, the more restrictive shall apply.
(b) All irrigation systems which do not currently meet the requirements as stipulated in this section, will be required to meet
these requirements upon notification from the city, or if the device fails a certification test.
(c) In the event an assembly is removed each year to protect against freezing, it must be tested immediately upon
reinstallation.
Sec. 13.07.074 Mobile units
(a) A person who owns or operates any mobile unit that uses water from the city's public water system shall make
application, pay appropriate fees and obtain a permit from the city before accessing the public water system. The city may
require a fixed air gap, or a backflow assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard, mounted either on the vehicle or
piping.
(b) The failure of the owner or operator of the unit to comply with this policy shall be grounds for the city to revoke any
permit or license required under the city code to operate the unit, or the business for which such unit is used.
(c) The city may deny a permit to any person who is not in compliance with this policy, or who has a history of violating the
requirements of this policy.
(d) All assemblies used to protect the water supply, when using a mobile unit, must abide by the maintenance and testing
sections of this policy.
Sec. 13.07.075 Multiple service connections
If premises with multiple service connections require premises isolation, a backflow assembly shall be installed at each
service connection. The assemblies shall be commensurate with the degree of the highest potential hazard.
Sec. 13.07.076 Plumbing code
As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain and operate their piping and plumbing systems in
accordance with the city's plumbing code. If there is a conflict between this policy and the plumbing code, the more restrictive
provision shall apply, or a RP assembly will be required to be installed at the service connection.
Sec. 13.07.077 Thermal expansion
If a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly at the service connection, it is the
responsibility of the property owner to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion. Installations of thermal expansion relief
devices are to be installed in accordance with the city's plumbing code.
Sec. 13.07.078 Pressure loss
Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the city.
Sec. 13.07.079 Residential service
Any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross connection, or has violated the city's
plumbing code in any way, shall be equipped with an approved backflow prevention assembly, installed in accordance with
this policy.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/598
Sec. 13.07.080 Fire systems
(a) An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) shall be the minimum protection on all new
fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use, and/or that does not provide for
periodic flow-through during each twenty-four (24) hour period. A reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention
assembly (RPDA) must be installed, if any solution other than the potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system.
If the city representative/inspector or fire chief/marshal determines a chemical loop system can be isolated by installing a RP
assembly at the point of the chemical injection, this, in conjunction with the installation of the DCDA, will be adequate
protection. Retrofitting on fire sprinkler systems will be required in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Where improper maintenance has occurred;
(2) On all high hazard systems; and
(3) Wherever an inspector deems necessary.
(b) All fireline assemblies must be tested by fireline testers only.
(c) All fireline assemblies shall be installed in a vault at the point of connection with the city's water system unless
otherwise permitted by the city.
Sec. 13.07.081 Retrofitting
Approved testable backflow prevention assemblies, which shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined
by an inspector, shall be immediately installed on all actual or potential cross connections, regardless of the date the potential
hazard was created. Existing AVBs, which are inspected annually and are functioning properly, do not have to be replaced. In
the event an AVB needs to be replaced, it must be replaced with a mechanically testable backflow prevention assembly.
Secs. 13.07.082–13.07.090 Reserved
Division 4. Procedures
Sec. 13.07.091 General regulations
(a) The procedures outlined in this policy are based on the principle of containment of all actual and potential
contamination hazards within the customer's system.
(b) A customer may request approval from the city for a proposed deviation from or exception to the standards in this
policy. The city may approve a deviation or exception only if it does not involve an increased risk of contamination to the city's
water system.
Sec. 13.07.092 Access to premises
(a) Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall permit the city representative to enter their
premises and buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used to
determine compliance with this policy.
(b) If a customer refuses to allow access to city representatives for an inspection or a water use survey, the city may either
refuse or discontinue the customer's water service or assume that a high contamination hazard exists, and therefore require
the highest degree of protection on the customer's system.
(c) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the assembly for the purposes of this policy shall
be promptly removed by the water user at the written or verbal request of the city, and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
(d) Any and all costs associated with premises isolation or containment protection shall be the sole responsibility of the
property owner, lessee and/or agent.
Sec. 13.07.093 New facilities
(a) All new facilities are required to comply with the requirements of this policy. Compliance by a new city water system
customer with the requirements for installation of one or more backflow prevention assemblies will be verified in conjunction
with the customer's application for water service, or with the customer's building and plumbing permits.
(b) The city may require field inspection of the customer's premises, in addition to plan submittal and review, to determine
the actual or potential hazards and backflow prevention assembly requirements.
(c) In accordance with TCEQ's regulations and requirements, the city will require a customer service inspection
certification in all of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/598
(1) Prior to providing continuous water service to new construction;
(2) On any existing service when the city has reason to believe that cross connections or other unacceptable
plumbing practices exist; and
(3) After any substantial improvement, alteration, correction, or addition to a customer's system.
Sec. 13.07.094 Existing facilities
(a) Inspection procedure. The city may inspect the existing facilities of all city water system customers that do not have a
record of backflow prevention assembly installation on file. After the inspection is completed, the city will provide a written
notice to the customer advising of the backflow prevention assembly requirements for the customer's system.
(b) Building inspections - plan review. Plans submitted to the building inspections department for approval of plumbing
modifications, or additions to an existing plumbing system, will be reviewed by the city to determine the type of backflow
prevention method or assembly required. The method and type of assembly required and location will be noted on the plans.
Sec. 13.07.095 Records and testing
(a) Required. In order to assure that backflow prevention assemblies continue to operate satisfactorily, each customer that
is required to use an assembly is required to have periodic testing of the assembly performed in accordance with this policy.
All assemblies must be tested at the time of installation, and at the time of any repair or relocation. All tests and repairs must
be performed by a certified tester. The tester must complete a test and maintenance report form and submit the form to the
city.
(b) Testing.
(1) The city shall implement a program to provide for city and/or third-party testing of only residential (singlefamily
dwellings) backflow prevention devices on irrigation systems after initial installation by the customer and
successful testing of the device has been performed. The cost for this testing shall be as specified in appendix B
to Ordinance 2014-20. If the BPAT finds that a backflow prevention device has failed inspection, notification by the
city will be made to the customer by letter and will provide the customer with the option of water termination or
contacting a plumber for repairs. No repairs or replacements of backflow prevention devices will be performed by
the city and/or the contracted BPAT. All repairs, replacements and retesting will be the responsibility of the
customer. However, if the city notification is presented at the time of application to obtain the proper permit from
the city the permit fee and report processing fee will be waived.
(2) This program is for residential customers of single-family dwellings (i.e. nonhealth hazard backflow
assemblies installed for irrigation systems) that are directly connected to the city water distribution system.
(c) Time schedule.
(1) All assemblies must be tested in accordance with the schedule specified in appendix C to Ordinance 2014-
20.
(2) The city may require devices to be tested at more frequent intervals based upon imminent public health and
safety hazards that may exist.
(d) Testing by city. City personnel may perform periodic tests on assemblies at random locations to ensure that acceptable
test standards are being followed by certified testers. City personnel may also randomly select and tag assemblies in a
manner that will determine if the assemblies have been tested as required.
Sec. 13.07.096 Right-of-way encroachment
(a) No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way except as
provided by this section.
(b) A backflow prevention assembly required by this policy may be installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the
owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and installing it in the right-of-way
will in no way interfere with the city's use of the right-of-way. The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth,
enclosure and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation.
(c) Any assembly or portion of an assembly which extends aboveground shall be located no closer than four (4) feet to the
back of the curb.
(d) A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's sole expense, relocate a backflow prevention
assembly which encroaches upon any city's right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction or
repairs or for purposes of public safety.
Sec. 13.07.097 Cost of compliance
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/598
Unless otherwise stated in this policy, the cost and expense of complying with this policy shall be the responsibility of the
property owners, their lessees, or agents. These costs include, but are not limited to, purchasing, installation, testing, repair,
replacement and maintenance of the assembly. These costs shall include point-of-use and premises isolation assemblies.
Any cost incurred by the city to enforce this policy is the responsibility of the property owners and their lessees.
Sec. 13.07.098 Disconnection
Failure, refusal or inability on the part of a customer or user to comply with any provision of this policy will constitute grounds
for the city to refuse to provide or to discontinue water service.
Sec. 13.07.099 Enforcement
(a) The public works director is hereby authorized to enforce the provision of this policy by any one or more of the
enforcement mechanisms set forth in this policy.
(b) The inspectors, agents or representatives of the city charged with enforcement of this policy, shall be deemed to be
performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public, and neither the city, nor the individual inspector,
agent or representative of the city engaged in inspection, or endorsement activities under this policy, when acting in good
faith and without malice, shall ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused, or alleged to
have been caused, as a result of the performance of such governmental function.
(c) Failure on the part of any customer to discontinue the use of all cross connections, and to physically separate cross
connections, is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to the premises by the city.
(Ordinance 2014-20 adopted 6/10/14)
ARTICLE 13.08 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN
Sec. 13.08.001 Retail drought contingency plan
The city retail drought contingency plan attached to Ordinance 2014-13 as exhibit A and made part hereof for all purposes
be, and the same is hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city.
Sec. 13.08.002 Wholesale drought contingency plan
The city wholesale drought contingency plan attached to Ordinance 2014-13 as exhibit A and made part hereof for all
purposes be, and the same is hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city.
Sec. 13.08.003 Water conservation plan
The water conservation plan attached to Ordinance 2014-13 as exhibit A and made part hereof for all purposes is, and the
same hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city.
(Ordinance 2014-13 adopted 4/22/14)
ARTICLE 13.09 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.09.001 Compliance with other authority
(a) Compliance with federal authority. The city shall comply with, enforce and adopt all applicable federal regulations
pertaining to stormwater discharges from regulated small municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s). All persons within
the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with all applicable federal laws including the Clean Water act (33 United States
Code section 1251 et. seq.) and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) regulations, as they now exist
or as hereafter amended.
(b) Compliance with state authority. The city shall comply with, enforce and adopt all applicable sections of chapter 26 of
the Texas Water Code as it now exists or as hereafter amended. The city shall comply with all applicable Texas Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permits and requirements or any state permit, issued hereafter, for stormwater
discharges from its MS4. All persons within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with all applicable state laws including
the Texas Water Code, the city's MS4 Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System General Permit and the TPDES
regulations as they now exist or as hereafter amended.
(c) Right of revision. The city reserves its right to revise and establish, by ordinance, more stringent standards or
requirements on pollution prevention and discharges within its jurisdiction into, or adjacent to, water within the state.
Sec. 13.09.002 Adoption and purpose
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/598
(a) Stormwater management. The city hereby adopts its stormwater management as policy for the city with the purposes
and objectives as follows:
(1) To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the city, the North Central
Texas Region, and the state.
(2) To prevent the illicit discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial, residential,
and construction sites into the MS4 and natural waters within the city.
(3) To promote public awareness of hazards involved with the improper discharge of hazardous substances,
petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides,
herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers and natural waters of the city.
(4) To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products.
(5) To facilitate compliance with state and federal regulations, standards and permits by owners and operators
of industrial and construction sites within the city.
(6) To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to
ensure compliance with all federal, state and local laws and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges.
(b) Development of a stormwater design manual. The city may furnish additional policy, criteria and information including
specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article and may provide such
information in the form of a stormwater design manual. This manual would be approved under a separate, future ordinance.
Sec. 13.09.003 Applicability
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4 from any developed or undeveloped lands, unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
Sec. 13.09.004 Administration
The city engineer or their designated representative, except as otherwise provided herein, shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article. The city engineer may appoint such inspectors and assistants as necessary to assist in
the performance of these duties. The city engineer shall also be responsible for addressing other stormwater issues as they
relate to the city's compliance with its small MS4 stormwater permit as issued by the TCEQ.
Sec. 13.09.005 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations when used in this article shall have the designated meanings:
BMP: Best Management Practices.
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
CGP: Construction General Permit, TX150000.
CWA: Clean Water Act.
EPA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
MS4: Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.
NOI: Notice of Intent.
NOT: Notice of Termination.
NPDES: National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
PST: Petroleum Storage Tank.
SWPPP: Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
TAC: Texas Administrative Code.
TCEQ: Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
TPDES: Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
USC: United States Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/598
Sec. 13.09.006 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the
meanings hereinafter designated:
Authorized enforcement agency. Employees or designees of the city engineer that are designated to enforce this article or
the TCEQ have authority to enforce this article and/or the TPDES regulations.
Best management practices. Schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution
prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the
discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into stormwater receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spills or leaks, sludge or wastewater
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing
water.
City. The City of Midlothian, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. section 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
Commercial activity. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit.
Construction activity. Soil disturbance, including clearing, grading, and excavating. This does not include routine
maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the site (e.g.,
the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing rights-of-way, and
similar maintenance activities).
Large construction activity. Construction activity that results in land disturbance of equal to or greater than five (5)
acres of land. Large construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than five (5) acres of total land area
that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan will ultimately disturb equal
to or greater than five (5) acres of land.
Small construction activity. Construction activity that results in land disturbances equal to or greater than one (1)
acre and less than five (5) acres of land. Small construction activity also includes the disturbance of less than one
(1) acre of total land area that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale if the larger common plan
will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one (1) and less than five (5) acres of land.
Control authority. The city engineer (or other official designated by the city manager), or his duly authorized agent or
representative. For the purposes of this article, control authority shall be synonymous with MS4 operator.
Detention. The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak
discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants.
Detention facility. A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or
surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
Developer. An individual, entity or corporation that undertakes land disturbing activities.
Drainage easement. A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
Erosion control plan. A plan that clearly and legibly defines existing property lines, features and utilities, defines limits of
proposed work, shows proposed construction improvements and features, shows existing drainage patterns and facilities and
specifies BMPs to be used including location, extent, type and construction details.
Final stabilization. A construction site status where any of the following conditions are met:
(1) All soil disturbing activities at the construction site have been completed and a uniform (e.g. evenly
distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least 70 percent of the native
background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by
permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as riprap or gabions) have been
employed;
(2) For individual lots in a residential construction site, the homebuilder has completed final stabilization on the
individual lots(s) as specified in subsection (1) above;
(3) For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g. pipelines across crop or rangeland),
final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/598
Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent
to surface water and areas, which are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use, shall meet the
final stabilization requirements of subsection (1) above.
Fire protection water. Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other than the fire
department, to control or extinguish a fire.
Floatables. Waterborne litter and debris, which mainly come from street litter that ends up in the city's storm drains
(catchbasins) and sewers.
Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following:
(1) Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, that allows an illegal discharge to enter the
storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances that allow any nonstormwater discharge including
sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm
drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously
allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
(2) Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that
has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement
agency.
Illicit discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section
13.09.032 of this article.
Impervious surface. A surface that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks,
driveways, etc.).
Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial stormwater permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14).
Industrial stormwater permit. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued to a commercial industry or
group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site
pollution control strategies.
Infiltration. The process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil.
Infiltration facility. Any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be
above grade or below grade.
Jurisdictional wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation.
Land disturbing activity. Any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land
surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving,
construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of
any natural or manmade watercourse.
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated
by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and that is not used for collecting or conveying
sewage.
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state
under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
Nonpoint source pollution. Pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances,
and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and
urban runoff sources.
Nonstormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
Off-site facility. A stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit
application for land development activity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/598
On-site facility. A stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit
application for land development activity.
Person. A natural person, which includes heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or
corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of the aforesaid.
Pollutant. In accordance with the Texas Water Code section 26.001(13), a pollutant includes the following: dredged spoil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, filter backwash, munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste discharged into any water in the state.
Pollution. In accordance with the Texas Water Code, section 26.001(14), the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or
biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to
humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public
enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks
and parking strips.
Redevelopment. Any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding square feet in areas where existing land use is high
density commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential.
Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing
into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or water in the state.
Stop-work order. An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped.
Storm drainage system. Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited
to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention
and detention basins, natural and humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures.
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation.
Stormwater management. The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce storm water runoff
pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect
water quality and habitat.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A document that describes the best management practices and activities to
be implemented by a person or entity to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving water to the maximum extent
practicable.
Stormwater retrofit. A stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either
no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of
the site.
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater (TPDES) Discharge Permit. A permit issued by the TCEQ, under
the authority of Texas Water Code sections 26.027 or 26.040 that authorizes the discharge of pollutants into or adjacent to
water within the state. The TPDES program is administered under the authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. section
1342(b).
Unauthorized discharge. Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm drain system except as exempted in
section 13.09.032 of this article.
Uncontaminated. Not containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant.
Water in the state. Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers,
streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other
bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the
beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or
inside the jurisdiction of the state.
Watercourse. A permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries
surface water.
Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in
interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters,
including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect
interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/598
definition; all tributaries of water identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any
waters within the federal definition of “waters of the United States” at 40 CFR section 122.2; but not including any waste
treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
Water quality standard. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the
narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in chapter 307 of title
31 of the Texas Administrative Code.
Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility.
Yard waste. Any leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping maintenance and
land-clearing operations.
Secs. 13.09.007–13.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Illicit Discharges
Sec. 13.09.031 Specific discharge prohibitions
(a) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced, into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), including
drainageways and streams, any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except those discharges listed in
allowable nonstormwater discharges in section 13.09.032. Violators of this section shall implement containment and cleanup
activities immediately at their own expense.
(b) No person shall discharge any substance to the MS4 that is prohibited by the Clean Water Act, the Texas Water Code,
or the Texas Administrative Code.
(c) No person shall release or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4, nor
onto or into the ground or air such that the substance may enter the air or groundwater:
(1) Any used motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
(2) Any regulated or industrial waste;
(3) Any hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste;
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste (from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
or trailers), grease trap waste, or grit trap waste;
(5) Any wastewater or equipment washwater from a commercial or carwash facility;
(6) Any vehicle or equipment washwater from a commercial or industrial facility;
(7) Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft;
(8) Any use of power washing at a commercial facility that generates wastewater containing any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other cleaning substance, or any oils, grime, grit, dirt
or substance resulting from the cleaning;
(9) Wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of any pavement where release of regulated material has
occurred;
(10) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the
blown-down from a boiler;
(11) Any discharge from water line disinfection by superchlorination;
(12) Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4;
(13) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a
leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from remediation of any such PST
release;
(14) Any wastewater from commercial floor, rug, or carpet treatment;
(15) Any discharge of solids or waste from soil boring, core drilling, or any other site investigative technique;
(16) Any discharge from gas well drilling, derrick washing, fracturing, or other activities relating to gas pipelines,
compression stations, or gas well pad sites;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/598
(17) Any paint or paint-related materials;
(18) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard or storage yard;
(19) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain, or spa;
(20) Any polluted or unpolluted liquid not covered by this section.
(d) No person shall connect to the MS4 a line conveying domestic, commercial, or industrial sanitary sewer or wastewater.
(e) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material
associated with clearing, grading, excavation, filling, hauling, soil boring, core drilling, or other construction activities.
(f) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced to the MS4 any sediment, unused ready mix concrete, mortar,
asphalt, or other unused construction materials or washwater associated with these materials.
(g) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced to the MS4 any sediment, dust, or other solid material from any
activity not intended for outside disposal or accumulation.
(h) No person shall use or store any solid waste, regulated waste, or hazardous waste or regulated waste in a manner that
the material could enter the MS4.
(i) No person shall cause or allow leaves, grass clippings, or other yard waste to enter into the MS4.
(j) No person shall knowingly discharge or cause to be discharged water containing fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides into
the MS4.
(k) No person shall introduce or allow to be introduced into or upon any public or private property that drains or may drain
to the MS4 any solid or semi-solid material, such as floatables, or discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and
accumulations, on property whether or not it was generated, placed, stored, or located by the user of such materials in such
a manner that causes the material to be transported by the wind, rain, or other atmospheric conditions into the MS4.
(l) No person shall introduce nonnative solids or liquids into the MS4 or to the waters of the United States with the
exception of those activities listed in section 13.09.032 (allowable nonstormwater discharges) of this article.
Sec. 13.09.032 Allowable nonstormwater discharges
(a) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that is not composed entirely of
stormwater, with the exception of those activities listed in subsections (1) through (14), below, unless said activities are
determined to be a nuisance.
(1) Discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, NPDES/TPDES construction or multisector industrial
permits;
(2) Discharge or flow resulting from firefighting activities by the fire department;
(3) A discharge or flow of fire protection water that does not contain oil or hazardous substances;
(4) Unpolluted agricultural stormwater runoff;
(5) A discharge or flow from potable water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless
the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely impact aquatic life);
(6) Uncontaminated runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing
potable water, groundwater, or surface water sources that does not create a nuisance;
(7) Discharges from unpolluted pumped groundwater or rising groundwater;
(8) Unpolluted groundwater infiltration;
(9) Unpolluted discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, footing drain, or sump pump;
(10) Discharges from air-conditioning condensation free of oils;
(11) Discharges from individual residential vehicle washing;
(12) Discharges from a riparian habitat or wetland; and/or
(13) Stormwater runoff from a roof that is not contaminated by any runoff or discharge from an emissions
scrubber or filter or any other source of pollutant;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/598
(14) Swimming pool water that has been dechlorinated so that total residual chlorine (TRC) is less than 1.0
mg/L and that contains no harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or
disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning.
(b) Persons wishing to discharge water other than that listed under subsection (a) of this section and not listed as a
specific prohibition under section 13.09.031, must file a written request to the control authority five (5) days prior to the date
of discharge that details the source of the discharge and the volume of the discharge. Written authorization must be obtained
from the control authority prior to discharge.
Sec. 13.09.033 Unpermitted discharges prohibited
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, stormwater associated with regulated commercial, industrial or
construction activities, without first having obtained an NPDES or TPDES permit to do so.
Sec. 13.09.034 Prohibition of illicit connections.
(a) The construction, use, maintenance, or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 are prohibited.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(c) A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying an illegal discharge to the
MS4, or allows such a connection to continue.
Sec. 13.09.035 Suspension of MS4 access
(a) Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city, without prior notice, may suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, the health or welfare of persons, the MS4, water in the state, or
waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized
enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4, water in the
state, or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons.
(b) Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharges. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may
have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator
of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for a reconsideration and hearing in
accordance with current city policy.
(c) Reinstatement without permission. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city.
Sec. 13.09.036 Industrial or construction activity discharges
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES or TPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with
all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to
allowing discharges to the MS4.
Sec. 13.09.037 Submission of notice of intent (NOI) to the city
(a) The operator of a facility, including construction sites, that is required to have a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) and/or a
construction site notice (CSN) to the city at the same time the operator submits the original NOI to the EPA or the TCEQ, as
applicable. The copy of the NOI may be delivered to the city either in person or by mail.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operating a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with an
industrial or construction activity does so without having submitted a copy of the NOI to the city.
(c) All persons must submit a copy of the notice of termination (NOT) to the city at the same time the person submits the
NOT to the TCEQ.
Secs. 13.09.038–13.09.060 Reserved
Division 3. Construction Site Stormwater Runoff Control
Sec. 13.09.061 Stormwater discharges associated with construction activities
(a) General requirements and responsibilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/598
(1) The construction site operator(s) (hereinafter referred to as operator) of large and small construction
activities shall comply with all requirements of the construction permit and all other applicable regulations as may
be required to ensure compliance with federal, state, and local rules and regulations.
(2) Any person who is contracted by the city to conduct the day-to-day operational activities at a site of
municipal construction activity shall be responsible for providing, completing, submitting, displaying and retaining
all documents required by, and in accordance with, the construction permit, and the implementation and
maintenance of best management practices required by the construction permit and this article.
(3) Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not that owner is an operator, is jointly and severally
responsible for compliance with requirements in this article.
(4) Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who is
responsible under his/her contract or subcontract for implementing a pollution prevention control measure,
including site inspections, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or negligent failure on his/her part to
adequately implement that control measure.
(5) The city does not currently have a specific manual or guide for stormwater management criteria. All
operators, owners and contractors of construction activities shall use current, industry-accepted BMPs to minimize
the discharge of pollutants to the MS4. The city's hydraulic calculation procedures for storm sewers will be used to
calculate the amount of stormwater runoff (with a 2-year design frequency) to be managed.
(b) Construction site.
(1) A construction site is the location and all the areas wherein construction activity, which is all or part of a
common development or project, are occurring, proposed to occur, or have occurred, irrespective of whether that
construction is in compliance with this section or whether that construction activity is ongoing or temporarily
suspended for any purpose or whether the city engineer has granted authorization to undertake the construction
activity. For purposes of this section, a construction site shall encompass:
(A) All land and surface water areas where the construction activities of any type, including all areas of
land surface disturbed by or as a consequence of the construction activities or other activities in support of
the construction activities, are undertaken as part of a common plan of development or project;
(B) All areas of land to be disturbed by construction of a common plan of development or project,
irrespective of whether such construction is undertaken or planned to be undertaken in one phase or stage
or different phases or stages and irrespective of whether such construction is undertaken or planned to be
undertaken at different, separate, or simultaneous times;
(C) All areas of land where the land is to be disturbed by construction of a common plan of development
or project, irrespective of whether untaken at contiguous or separate locations within the general area
encompassed by the common plan of development or project, provided such boundary lies on or is within
the boundary of property collectively owned or leased by one or more parties undertaking any or all of the
construction activities; and
(D) All areas of ongoing, temporarily suspended, yet-to-be undertaken, or completed construction
encompassing the totality of the construction activities, irrespective of whether any or all the construction
activities are within compliance with this section.
(2) Redefining of construction site limits. The city engineer shall have the right to redefine, for purposes of
compliance with this article, the limits of a construction site in extent and amount necessary and sufficient in the
judgment of the city engineer to prevent the actual or potential discharge of pollutants from the construction site to
the MS4, water in the state or waters of the U.S. to the maximum extent practicable, provided the limits so defined
lies on or within the boundary of property collectively owned or leased by one or more operators undertaking any
or all of the construction activities at the site.
(3) Cessation of construction site. A construction site shall, for the purposes of this section, cease to be a
construction site only at such time that all requirements for closure of the construction site as specified by this
section have been met.
(c) Stormwater pollution prevention plan.
(1) Operators of all small and large construction activities shall develop, implement, and maintain (including
updates and modifications) a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) in accordance with all applicable
requirements of the TPDES construction discharge permit.
(2) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage under the TPDES construction permit for stormwater
discharges from a construction activity shall submit copies of the completed and signed SWPPP and NOI to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/598
control authority in conjunction with any application for a development permit, building permit, or any other city
permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction at the site.
(3) After reviewing the SWPPP, the city may withhold approval of any development permit, building permit, or
any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction, if the SWPPP does not comply
with the TPDES construction discharge permit.
(4) The SWPPP shall be completed and implemented prior to the commencement of construction activities at
the site.
(5) If the control authority observes upon a construction site inspection that the SWPPP no longer meets the
requirements of the TPDES construction discharge permit or this article, the operator will be notified of any
deficiencies. The operator shall correct any deficiencies with the SWPPP within seven (7) calendar days of
receiving notification.
(6) The SWPPP, with any modifications attached, shall be retained at the construction site from the date of
commencement of construction activities until final stabilization has been completed on all disturbed areas or until
a new operator assumes control over the construction activity and provides a new SWPPP. For a large
construction activity, the SWPPP shall be retained at the construction site until a notice of termination (NOT) is
submitted. If the construction site is inactive or does not have an onsite location to store the SWPPP, the location
of the SWPPP shall be described on the construction site notice posted at the site. The SWPPP and any
modifications to it shall be made readily available to the control authority, upon request.
(7) The following records shall be maintained and either attached to or referenced in the SWPPP, and made
readily available to the control authority upon request:
(A) The dates when major grading activities occur;
(B) The dates when construction activities temporarily or permanently cease on a portion of the site;
(C) The dates when stabilization measures are initiated;
(D) An up-to-date version of the site map; and
(E) The dates and descriptions of all pollution prevention deficiencies noted at the site as well as the
corrective actions that were taken.
(d) Obtaining authorization to discharge stormwater.
(1) Primary operators of large construction activities, or who are otherwise required by the TCEQ to obtain
authorization for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity, shall submit a notice of intent (NOI)
to the TCEQ in accordance with the TPDES requirements. A copy of the signed and certified NOI shall be
provided to the control authority and any secondary operator in accordance with the TPDES construction
discharge permit.
(A) Primary and secondary operators shall sign and certify a completed TCEQ construction site notice
(CSN) in accordance with the TPDES permit. A copy of the CSN shall be provided to the control authority in
accordance with the TPDES permit.
(B) All persons meeting the definitions of secondary operator are regulated by the TPDES permit, but are
not required to submit an NOI, provided that another operator at the site has submitted an NOI, or is
required to submit an NOI and the secondary operator has provided notification to the operator of the need
to obtain coverage (with records of notification available upon request).
(2) Primary operators shall post copies of the signed and certified NOI and construction site notice at the
construction site in a location where they are safely and readily available for viewing by the general public and
control authority prior to commencement of construction activities, and shall be maintained at that location until
final stabilization has been completed on all disturbed areas, or until a new operator assumes control over the
construction activity and applies for permit coverage.
Secondary operators shall post a copy of the signed and certified construction site notice at the construction
site in a location where it is safely and readily available for viewing by the general public and the control
authority prior to commencement of construction activities, and shall be maintained at that location until final
stabilization has been completed on all disturbed areas, or until a new operator assumes control over the
construction activity and applies for permit coverage.
(3) If the construction project is of a linear nature (e.g. highway, pipeline, etc.), the notices shall be placed in a
publicly accessible location near where construction is actively underway, and shall be relocated, as necessary,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/598
along the length of the project. The notice shall be posted in a location where it is safely and readily available for
viewing by the general public and the control authority.
(4) Discharges of stormwater runoff from construction support activities, including concrete batch plants,
asphalt batch plants, equipment staging areas, material storage yards, material borrow areas, and excavated
material disposal areas may not be required to be authorized under a separate construction permit, provided that
the activity is conducted in accordance with the TPDES permit.
(5) If an operator becomes aware that it submitted incorrect information, failed to submit relevant information, or
that relevant information submitted in the NOI has changed, the operator shall submit a notice of change (NOC)
letter to the permitting authority, and provide a copy of the signed letter to the control authority, within fourteen (14)
days of discovering such information.
(6) Operators of small construction activities may be automatically authorized under the TPDES permit, and
operators of these construction sites are not required to submit an NOI provided that they:
(A) Develop a SWPPP in accordance with the provisions of the TPDES permit;
(B) Sign and certify a completed TCEQ CSN;
(C) Post a copy of the signed and certified CSN at the construction site in a location where it is safely and
readily available for viewing by the general public and the control authority, prior to commencement of
construction activities, and maintain the notice in that location through the date of final stabilization, or until a
new operator assumes control over the construction activity and applies for permit coverage; and
(D) Provide a copy of the signed and certified CSN to the control authority in accordance with the
requirements of the TPDES permit.
(7) All NOIs, NOTs, NOC letters, and TCEQ CSNs shall be signed in accordance with title 30 section 305.44
and 305.128 of the Texas Administrative Code.
(8) Construction activities that do not qualify as a small or large construction activity under the construction
permit shall be exempt from this article but shall satisfy all local permitting and approval requirements prior to
being authorized to discharge stormwater.
(e) Best management practices.
(1) The operator, owner or contractor shall use best management practices (BMPs) to control and reduce the
discharge to the MS4 and water in the state of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with
clearing, grading, excavation, and any other construction activities to the maximum extent practicable. Such BMPs
and erosion control measures may include, but are not limited to, the following measures:
(A) Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where feasible and that disturbed portions of the
construction site are stabilized, in accordance with the requirements of the construction permit, on portions
of the construction site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased. Stabilization
measures may include, but are not limited to the following:
(i) Temporary seeding;
(ii) Permanent seeding;
(iii) Mulching;
(iv) Sod stabilization;
(v) Vegetative buffer strips;
(vi) Protection of trees; and
(vii) Preservation of mature vegetation.
Stabilization measures shall be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site where
construction activities temporarily or permanently ceased, and except as provided herein, shall be
initiated no more than 14 days after the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily
or permanently ceased.
(B) Where construction activity on a portion of the site is temporarily ceased, and earth disturbing
activities will be resumed within 21 days, temporary stabilization measures are not required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/598
(C) Where the initiation of stabilization measures by the 14th day after construction activity temporarily or
permanently ceased is precluded by snow cover or frozen ground conditions, stabilization measures shall be
initiated as soon as practicable.
(D) Where stabilization measures are utilized, erosion and sediment control measures shall remain in
place and be maintained until the area of disturbance meets the definition of final stabilization in this section.
(2) Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the
discharge of pollutants from the construction site to the extent feasible.
(3) Minimization of the tracking of sediments offsite by vehicles, the generation of dust, and the escape of other
wind-blown wastes from the construction site.
(4) Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, and mortar, to the MS4
or water within the state.
(5) Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels,
septic waste, and other hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to ensure proper
cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with state, federal, and local requirements.
(6) Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including covering and
minimizing ground contact with waste materials.
(7) Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other BMPs management
practices in good and effective operating condition.
(8) Installation of permanent structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in
stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed. Such installed structural
measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(A) Stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds);
(B) Stormwater retention structures;
(C) Flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions;
(D) Other velocity dissipation devices;
(E) Infiltration of runoff onsite; and
(F) Sequential systems, which combine several practices.
(9) The washing out of concrete trucks at construction sites shall be permitted, provided the following
requirements are met:
(A) Direct discharge of concrete truck wash out water to the MS4 or surface water within the state is
prohibited;
(B) Concrete truck washout water shall be discharged to areas at the construction site where structural
controls have been established to prevent direct discharge to the MS4 or surface water within the state or to
areas that have a minimal slope that allow infiltration and filtering of wash out water to prevent direct
discharge. Structural controls may consist of temporary berms, temporary shallow pits, temporary storage
tanks with a slow rate release, or other reasonable measures to prevent runoff from the construction site;
(C) Washout of concrete trucks during rainfall events shall be minimized. The direct discharge of concrete
truck washout water is prohibited at all times and the operator shall ensure that its BMPs are sufficient to
prevent the discharge of concrete truck washout water as a result of rain;
(D) The discharge of washout water shall not cause or contribute to groundwater contamination;
(E) If a SWPPP is required to be implemented, the SWPPP shall include concrete washout areas on the
associated plan sheet(s).
(10) Vehicular traffic onto and off of the construction site shall be prohibited during rainy conditions or when
muddy conditions exist, unless measures are in place that prevent mud from being tracked offsite.
(11) All BMPs shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the details and specifications listed in the
approved SWPPP.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/598
(12) All plans and specifications that are prepared for the construction of site improvements shall illustrate and
describe the BMPs that will be implemented at the construction site. The city may withhold any permit or approval
necessary to commence or continue construction, if it determines that the BMPs are inadequate or inappropriate
for the project. If the city observes upon a construction site inspection that the BMPs described in the plans and
specifications are absent or ineffective at controlling or reducing the discharge or sediment, silt, earth, soil, and
other materials associated with clearing, grading, excavation, or any other construction activities to the maximum
extent practicable, the operator, owner or contractor will be notified, in writing. The operator, owner or contractor
shall initiate repairs to deficient BMPs within seven (7) calendar days of receiving notification. If no corrective
measures have been initiated within seven (7) calendar days of receiving notification of the deficiencies, the city
may escalate enforcement actions including, but not limited to, issuance of a warning citation or citation,
revocation or suspension of a development permit or building permit, or withholding issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or final acceptance. If existing BMPs require repairs or modifications, or if additional BMPs are
necessary, an implementation schedule (including a reasonable completion date) shall be developed and,
wherever possible, those changes shall be implemented prior to the next storm event. If implementation before
the next anticipated storm event is impracticable, these changes shall be implemented as soon as possible
thereafter. If the deficient or absent BMP is causing or allowing a discharge of a harmful quantity of any
substance, as determined by the control authority, the operator, owner or contractor shall immediately implement
an interim control measure, or cease the activity associated with the discharge until the corrective action has been
completed.
(13) The operator, owner or contractor shall make every reasonable effort to prevent dirt and sediment from
accumulating on paved or impervious surfaces and locations where offsite discharge would occur during storm
events. If installing structural control measures in these areas is impracticable, alternative measures such as
frequent sweeping shall be implemented.
(14) If fuels, oils or other chemicals are used or stored on-site, these materials shall be used and stored in such
a manner that discharge into the MS4, water within the state or the environment is prevented. In the event of a
discharge of these materials, the responsible party shall remove all contamination and restore the area prior to the
next storm event or as soon as possible thereafter.
(15) For large and small construction activities, the operator shall be responsible for the design, installation and
maintenance of all stormwater pollution prevention practices in accordance with the TPDES permit. The operator,
owner or contractor shall be responsible for the maintenance of all stormwater pollution prevention practices from
the time of commencement of construction activities until final stabilization has been completed on all disturbed
areas or until a new operator, owner or contractor has assumed control over the construction activity. For large
construction activities, the operator shall retain responsibility until the construction activity qualifies for termination
of permit coverage and a NOT has been submitted, in addition to any other requirements set forth in this section.
(f) Site inspection and monitoring requirements.
(1) Personnel (provided by the operator) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site that have not
been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, discharge locations,
and structural controls for evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering the MS4 or water within the state.
Personnel conducting these inspections shall be knowledgeable of the TPDES permit, familiar with the
construction site, and knowledgeable of the SWPPP for the site. Erosion and sediment control measures identified
in the SWPPP shall be inspected to ensure that they are operating correctly. Locations where vehicles enter or
exit the site shall be inspected for evidence of offsite sediment tracking. Inspections shall be conducted at least
once every 14 calendar days and within 24 hours of the end of a storm event of 0.5 inches or greater. As an
alternative to the above-described inspection schedule, the SWPPP may be developed to require that these
inspections will occur at least once every seven (7) calendar days. If this alternative schedule is developed, the
inspection shall occur on a specifically defined day, regardless of whether or not there has been a rainfall event
since the previous inspection. The specifically defined day, on which the inspections will occur, shall be
documented in the SWPPP. The SWPPP shall clearly identify which inspection schedule will be implemented. The
inspection may occur on either schedule provided that the SWPPP reflects the current schedule and that any
changes in the schedule are conducted in accordance with the requirements of the construction permit. In the
event of flooding or other uncontrollable situations which prohibit access to the inspection sites, inspections shall
be conducted as soon as access is practicable.
(2) The SWPPP shall be modified based on the results of inspections, as necessary, to better control pollutants
in stormwater runoff. Revisions to the SWPPP shall be completed within seven (7) calendar days following the
inspection, or receiving written notification from the control authority. If existing BMPs are modified or if additional
BMPs are necessary, an implementation schedule shall be described in the SWPPP and, wherever possible,
those changes shall be implemented prior to the next storm event. If implementation before the next anticipated
storm event is impracticable, these changes shall be implemented as soon as practicable. Any claims that
implementation is not practicable before the next storm shall be verified and approved by the control authority.
(3) A report summarizing the scope of the inspection, names and qualifications of personnel making the
inspection, the dates of inspection, and major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP shall be
made and retained as part of the SWPPP. At a minimum, major observations shall include:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/598
(A) The locations of discharges of sediment or other pollutants from the construction site;
(B) Locations of BMPs that need to be maintained;
(C) Locations of BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved inadequate for a particular location;
and
(D) Locations where additional BMPs are needed.
Actions taken as a result of inspections shall be described within, and retained as part of SWPPP. Reports
shall identify any incidents of noncompliance. Where a report does not identify any incidents of
noncompliance, the report shall contain a certification that the construction site is in compliance with the
SWPPP and the TPDES permit. The operator shall store the inspection reports with the SWPPP and make
those reports available for onsite review within seven (7) calendar days from the date that the inspection
was conducted. All inspection reports which are not included in the SWPPP, and which are greater than
seven (7) days old, shall be made available onsite within 24 hours of request by the control authority.
(4) All discharges of stormwater runoff from concrete batch plants that qualify for coverage, and that are
authorized to discharge stormwater under the provisions of the construction permit, shall be monitored for
compliance with benchmark values in accordance with such permit. Results of monitoring for determining
compliance with benchmark values shall be recorded and, where applicable, reported to the permitting authority in
accordance with the construction permit. The operator shall make records of discharge monitoring readily
available to the control authority, upon request.
(5) It shall be the responsibility of the operator, owner or contractor to clean any spills or discharges of fuel, oil
or any other chemicals used or stored at the construction site. If any harmful quantity of fuels, oils or other
chemicals is spilled or discharged, the operator, owner or contractor shall provide documentation indicating that
the area has been cleaned and restored in accordance with state and federal rules and regulations.
(g) Terminating authorization to discharge stormwater.
(1) Operators who have submitted an NOI shall terminate authorization for discharges associated with
construction activity by submitting a notice of termination (NOT) in accordance with the requirements of the
construction permit. The NOT shall be submitted to the permitting authority, and a copy of the signed and certified
NOT provided to the control authority within thirty (30) calendar days after:
(A) Final stabilization has been achieved on all portions of the construction site that are the responsibility
of the operator;
(B) Another permitted operator has assumed control over all areas of the construction site that have not
been finally stabilized; or
(C) All silt fences and other temporary erosion controls have been removed, scheduled for removal as
defined in the SWPPP, or transferred to a new operator, if the new operator has sought permit coverage.
Operators are not required to remove, or schedule the removal of, erosion controls, which are designed to
remain in place for an indefinite period, such as mulches and erosion mats. Operators of small construction
activities shall also meet the requirements listed in subsections (A) through (C), above, in order to consider
their automatic permit coverage to be terminated. Notification of the termination of automatic permit
coverage shall be made to the control authority in accordance with the requirements of the construction
permit.
(2) Operators of large and small construction activities shall remove the NOI and/or construction site notice
immediately following termination of permit coverage.
(h) Final acceptance and certificate of occupancy. The control authority shall not recommend that small or large
construction activities be approved for final acceptance unless those construction activities are in compliance with this article.
If the operator seeking final acceptance will not be associated with any further construction activity after final acceptance is
granted, the construction activity shall also meet the requirements necessary to qualify for termination of permit coverage. A
final certificate of occupancy shall not be recommended until final stabilization has been achieved on all disturbed areas, all
potential pollutants associated with the construction activity have been removed, and the construction activity meets any
additional requirements necessary to qualify for termination of permit coverage. A final certificate of occupancy may be
granted prior to meeting the above conditions, on a case-by-case basis, provided that the signatory authority certifies in
writing that the construction activity will maintain compliance with the construction permit and/or this article until the
construction activity has been completed. Recommendation for final acceptance or a final certificate of occupancy for all
other construction activities shall not be made until final stabilization has been achieved on all disturbed areas. Final
acceptance may be recommended, where final stabilization has not yet occurred, provided that either the disturbed soils
have been temporarily stabilized or a new operator, owner or contractor has assumed control over the construction activity
and the construction site will not remain inactive for more than twenty-one (21) calendar days. Final acceptance and a final
certificate of occupancy may also be withheld in the event of outstanding violations or enforcement actions. A final certificate
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/598
of occupancy may be granted prior to meeting the above conditions, on a case-by-case basis, provided that the signatory
authority provides written documentation to the control authority certifying that the construction activity will maintain
compliance with the TPDES permit and/or this article until the construction activity has been completed.
(i) Signatory authority. All applications, notices, reports, and all other applicable documents required under the construction
permit shall be signed in accordance with the signatory requirements set forth in title 30 section 305.44 of the Texas
Administrative Code as it now exists or as hereafter amended. The authority to sign documents other than the NOI, NOT,
NOC letter and construction site notice may be delegated to other qualified personnel provided that the requirements set
forth in title 30 section 305.128 of the Texas Administrative Code, as it now exists or as hereafter amended, are met. All
operators, owners and contractors shall designate an authorized representative. The authorized representative will be the
point of contact for all pollution prevention matters for the site. If no authorized representative is designated for a small or
large construction activity, the signatory authority for the NOI or construction site notice shall be the default authorized
representative. For all other construction activities, the default authorized representative shall be the property owner. All
communications and enforcement actions shall be addressed to the authorized representative.
(j) Recordkeeping requirements. The operator shall retain a copy of the SWPPP, all reports, notices, applications,
monitoring and inspection records and other documents required by the TPDES permit or this article, for the construction
site, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, for a period of at least three (3) years from the date that an NOT is
submitted. For activities that are not required to submit an NOT (e.g. small construction activities that are not required to
submit an NOI), records shall be retained for a period of at least three (3) years from the date that either: final stabilization
has been achieved on all portions of the construction site that are the responsibility of the operator; or another permitted
operator has assumed control over all areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized. The operator shall
make all documents and data, required by the TPDES permit or this article, readily available to the control authority, upon
request.
Secs. 13.09.062–13.09.090 Reserved
Division 4. Post-Construction Stormwater Runoff
Sec. 13.09.091 Post-construction stormwater runoff requirements
(a) Specific objectives.
(1) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development or redevelopment in order to reduce
flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream
channels;
(2) Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development and
redevelopment which would otherwise degrade local water quality;
(3) Minimize the total volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site following development to
not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable;
(4) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible,
through stormwater management controls and ensure that these management controls are properly maintained
and pose no threat to public safety.
(b) Exempted activities.
(1) Any agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil conservation plan prepared or approved by
the city, as applicable;
(2) Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures;
(3) Development and redevelopment that disturbs less than one (1) acre of land, provided it is not part of a
larger common development plan (final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a
review by the control authority);
(4) Activities exempt from permit requirements of section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as specified in 40
CFR 232 (primarily, ongoing farming and ranching activities);
(5) Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the control authority.
(c) Permit procedures and requirements.
(1) No land owner or land operator shall receive approval of construction plans or building or grading permits
required for land disturbing activities without first meeting the requirements of section 13.09.061(a) of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/598
(2) The SWPPP, as discussed in section 13.09.061(c) of this article, shall be prepared to meet the city's
hydraulic requirements and be capable of handling design storm with a 2-year recurrence interval.
(d) Waivers to stormwater management requirements.
(1) Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this article, unless a written
request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall
be submitted to the control authority for approval.
(2) The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written
request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies:
(A) It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the
objectives of this article.
(B) Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be
in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or
greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices.
(C) The control authority finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible
due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site.
(D) Nonstructural practices will be used on the site that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site,
the size and cost of stormwater storage, and the pollutants generated at the site.
(3) In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the city may grant a variance from strict compliance
with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided.
However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the control authority
that the variance will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways:
(A) Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures;
(B) Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
(C) Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation;
(D) Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, property.
(4) Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management are waived, the
applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the control
authority. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(A) The grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should
be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality
and aquatic habitat.
(B) The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously
developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and
constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this article.
(C) Entering into an agreement with the city for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by
the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement
shall be entered into by the applicant and the city prior to the recording of plats, or, if no record plat is
required, prior to the issuance of the building permit.
(e) General performance criteria for stormwater management. Unless judged by the city to be exempt or granted a waiver,
the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites after development or
redevelopment construction activities have been completed:
(1) All permanent stormwater management practices installed during construction shall continue to control the
peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate
stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent
practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity.
(2) All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly
into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed,
the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the
control authority. In no case, shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the U.S. Army Corp
of engineers (USACE) or the TCEQ.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/598
(3) To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel protection criteria may be provided as
approved by the control authority.
(4) Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and
shall file a NOI under the provisions of the NPDES general permit. The SWPPP requirement applies to both
existing and new industrial sites.
(5) Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the control authority to determine if they are subject
to additional stormwater design requirements.
(6) The city's standard for calculation of peak flows shall be used for sizing all stormwater management
practices.
(f) Maintenance of structural BMPs. The owner of a structural BMP installed pursuant to this section shall maintain and
operate the BMP so as to preserve and continue its function in controlling storm water quality and quantity at the degree or
amount of function for which the structural BMP was designed.
(g) Nonstructural stormwater practices. The use of nonstructural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to
minimize the reliance on structural practices. These nonstructural practices must be approved by the city and documented
and shall remain unaltered by subsequent property owners.
(h) Requirements for a SWPPP. The SWPPP prepared in accordance with section 13.09.061 of this article shall include
and identify the post-construction BMPs for the development.
(i) Failure to maintain stormwater treatment practices. If the requirements of maintaining post-construction stormwater
treatment practices are not being met, the control authority shall direct the responsible party, in writing, to take action within
60 days to meet the maintenance requirements. If the condition of post-construction stormwater treatment practices become
a danger to public safety or public health, the responsible party shall have 10 days to correct the condition after a written
notice from the control authority. If the responsible party fails or refuses to correct deficiencies in the post-construction
stormwater treatment practices within the applicable time frame after receiving written notice from the control authority, the
city may, but is not required to, correct the deficiencies of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing, or
causing to be performed, all necessary work to restore the facility to proper working condition on behalf of and at the expense
of the responsible party. The city shall invoice the responsible party for the cost of such work and any penalties and the
responsible party shall pay said costs and penalties within 30 days after receipt of the invoice. In the event that the
responsible party fails to remit payment to the city, the city may impress a priority lien on the property upon which the postconstruction
stormwater treatment practices are located in order to secure reimbursement for the costs to the city. Such lien
shall be perfected by filing in the office of the county clerk an affidavit identifying the property to be charged with such lien,
stating the amount thereof, and making reference to this article.
Secs. 13.09.092–13.09.120 Reserved
Division 5. Enforcement, Penalties and Other Items
Sec. 13.09.121 Responsibility of other entities
The control authority may require any person, whether or not they are required by federal or state rules and regulations, to
develop and maintain a SWPPP and/or implement BMPs, approved by the control authority, that prevent or minimize the
discharge of pollutants into or adjacent to, water within the state. The SWPPP shall be made readily available to the control
authority, upon request.
Sec. 13.09.122 Submission of documents
All persons required by federal or state regulation or this article to submit documents, pertaining to discharges of stormwater
or accidental discharges into the local MS4, shall submit all applicable documents to the following mailing address:
City of Midlothian
Engineering Department
104 West Avenue E
Midlothian, Texas 76065
Sec. 13.09.123 Discharges
(a) Spill containment. The control authority may require any person to implement spill containment measures for storage
and use of any substance it deems a potential threat to the MS4 or the environment should such substance be discharged.
Such spill containment measures shall be provided and maintained at the person's own expense. Upon notification from the
control authority that containment measures are required, the person shall develop and submit detailed plans, showing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/598
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection, to the control authority for review. The control authority shall
approve all required spill containment measures, prior to installation or implementation. Review and approval of such plans
shall not relieve the person from the responsibility to modify the facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
(b) Notification and remedies. In the event of any discharge into the MS4 or water within the state, it is the responsibility of
the responsible party to notify the control authority immediately, in addition to the appropriate federal and state agencies. The
responsible party shall implement containment and cleanup activities immediately at the owner's expense. The notification
shall include location of the discharge, type of material discharged, concentration and volume, and corrective action. Within
five (5) calendar days following a discharge, the person shall submit to the control authority a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and measures to be taken to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the person of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
MS4, fish kills, or any other damage to persons or property, nor shall such notification relieve the person of any fines, civil
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. The initial notification shall be made
using the following contact information:
City of Midlothian - Engineering Department
(during normal business hours (972) 775-7199)
After Hours Reporting - Nonemergency Police Line
(972) 775-3333 ask for Utilities On-Call
(c) Notice to employees. A notice should be permanently posted on the person's bulletin board or other prominent place
advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or
suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
Sec. 13.09.124 Sampling, inspections and investigations
(a) The control authority may randomly sample and analyze the stormwater runoff from any facility within the city and
conduct surveillance activities in order to identify, independent of information supplied by the person or persons, occasional
and continuing noncompliance with stormwater requirements of the state or this article.
(b) The control authority shall investigate instances of noncompliance with stormwater requirements, as indicated in
required reports, analytical results, and surveillance activities. Noncompliance investigations may require that the control
authority conduct an inspection of the facility in noncompliance.
(c) Collection of information by the control authority shall be performed with sufficient care to produce evidence admissible
in enforcement proceedings or judicial actions.
(d) All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA Administrator
pursuant to section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act and 40 CFR, part 136 and amendments thereto.
(e) The control authority may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine stormwater or nonstormwater
constituents. Chain of custody procedures shall be followed.
Sec. 13.09.125 Noncompliance notification procedure
(a) General procedure. Each noncompliance with federal, state or local regulations may result in the person receiving a
verbal notice and/or written notice of violation. A written notice of violation shall require that the person respond, in writing, to
the control authority within 15 working days from the date of the notice of violation.
(b) Enforcement actions.
(1) In addition to the notice set forth in subsection (A) of this section, noncompliance may result in enforcement
actions by the control authority, including, but not limited to:
(A) Issuance of a warning citation;
(B) Issuance of a citation;
(C) Recommendation for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a development permit, building permit or
any other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy.
(2) The control authority shall determine the level of enforcement needed to promote compliance.
(c) Discharge constituting an imminent or substantial endangerment. The control authority may, by use of all legal means
available, stop an actual or threatened discharge by verbal order to cease discharge if, in the opinion of the control authority,
the discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment or which may be in violation of federal, state or local regulations. If the person does not voluntarily comply with
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/598
the order to cease discharge, the control authority shall take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
damage to the MS4 or environment or endangerment to the public. Prior to resuming activity, the person shall demonstrate to
the control authority that permanent corrective measures have been taken to prevent reoccurrences of the offense. Any cost
incurred by the control authority for sampling, analysis, assessment or remediation may be recovered from the person, or its
authorized representative.
(d) Discharge of hazardous waste. Hazardous waste as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act is
prohibited from entering the MS4. A person shall notify the control authority, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and the state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the MS4 of a substance, which, if
otherwise disposed of, would be hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12 (p).
(e) Fraud and false statements. The reports and other documents required to be submitted or maintained, under this
section shall be subject to:
(1) The provisions of U.S.C. section 1001 relating to fraud and false statements;
(2) The provisions of section 309(c)(4) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. section 1319(c)(4), as amended,
governing false statements, representation, or certification;
(3) The provisions of section 309(c)(6) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. section 1319(c)(6), as amended,
regarding responsible corporate officials; and
(4) Any false or fraudulent statements made by persons required to submit documents in accordance with
section 13.09.122 (submission of documents) of this article.
Sec. 13.09.126 Charges and fees
(a) The city council may adopt charges and fees, by separate ordinance, which may include:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs of implementing the city's stormwater management;
(2) Fees for inspection, investigation, sampling and surveillance procedures;
(3) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures, SWPPPs, and construction plans; and
(4) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
(b) These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other applicable fees
chargeable by the city.
Sec. 13.09.127 Access to records
(a) The control authority shall have access to, and the right to inspect and copy, any and all persons' records which pertain
to that person's discharge to the MS4, disposal and/or generation of hazardous waste and discharges into the environment.
The person shall be required to retain records of all information resulting from any monitoring or reporting activity required by
these regulations for a minimum of three (3) years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the person or MS4 or when requested by the permitting authority or control authority.
(b) The constituents and characteristics of stormwater discharged by a facility to a MS4 shall not be considered
confidential and shall be available to the public without restriction. Other information obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless the person specifically
requests, in writing, at the time the information is known to be obtained by the control authority, that the information is to be
considered confidential. Information submitted to the control authority by the person shall be stamped “Confidential
Information” on each page containing such information that the person wishes to be held confidential. If a claim of
confidentiality is asserted, the control authority shall determine if such information may be held confidential in accordance
with 40 CFR part 2 (public information). If the person does not claim the information as confidential at the time the control
authority obtains the information, it will be available to the public without further notice.
Sec. 13.09.128 Falsifying information
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, notice, record,
report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or any TPDES or NPDES permit, or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, may
be punished by a fine and may be subject to prosecution.
Sec. 13.09.129 Protection from damage
No unauthorized person shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or by criminal negligence, cause damage to, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, which is part of the MS4. Any person violating
this provision shall be subject to prosecution.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/598
Sec. 13.09.130 Power to enter property
(a) Any industrial user, developer or other entity holding a TPDES permit under this article or discharging post construction
stormwater runoff into the city's MS4 hereby consents to the control authority and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification in accordance with 33 U.S.C. section 1318(a)(4)(B)(i-ii) are entitled to:
(1) Enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the sole purpose of enforcing this article; and
(2) Enter all private property through which the city holds an easement for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, maintenance or repair.
(b) All activities conducted under this authority shall be in full accordance with all applicable terms, rules and regulations
pertaining to safety and security.
(c) If the control authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, or welfare of the community, the control authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate judicial
authority.
(d) Except when caused by negligence or failure of the person to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the
person against loss or damage to its property by city employees through the course of their activities when representing the
city, and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person.
(e) No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any area not having direct or potential impact on the
kind and source of a discharge to the MS4, disposal and/or generation of hazardous waste and discharges into the
environment, except as provided in section 13.09.127 (access to records) of this article.
Sec. 13.09.131 Legal action
If any person discharges, permits or causes to be discharged prohibited discharges, as defined in section 13.09.031,
hazardous waste or other wastes in violation of article 26 of the Texas Water Code or into the MS4 contrary to the provisions
of this article, state requirements, federal regulations, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief, including injunctive relief, in a court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 13.09.132 Penalties
(a) Definition of offense. A person commits an offense if the person intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or by criminal
negligence violates any provision of this article or any other order or permit issued hereunder and, upon conviction, shall be
deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Liability of offenders. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any
expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the
city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate
suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules and regulations issued hereunder.
(c) Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that
restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of
which shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
(d) The control authority is further authorized to prosecute and seek all criminal and civil remedies in the various courts as
set forth by the Texas Water Code and other applicable federal, state, and local criteria.
(Ordinance 2016-01, ex. A, adopted 1/12/16)
ARTICLE 13.10 UTILITY USER FEE POLICY
Sec. 13.10.001 Adoption
The city hereby adopts the utility user fee policy and provisions as policy for the city.
Sec. 13.10.002 Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to establish policies and provisions and set fees to be charged for water and wastewater
services within and outside the city, to residential, multifamily, commercial and industrial customers.
Sec. 13.10.003 Applicability
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/598
This policy applies to all direct connections to the city's water and wastewater system, and to all initial installations of utility
connections that fall under the city's regulatory jurisdiction, regardless of whether the connection is located within the city's
certificated water service area, and regardless of whether the connection is for a residential, multifamily, commercial,
industrial or other customer or user of the city's water and/or wastewater system. If there is a conflict between any of the
provisions contained within these documents or codes, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
Sec. 13.10.004 Definitions
For the purpose of this policy, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Words or phrases not expressly prescribed herein are to be defined in accordance with other applicable ordinances
of the city. In the absence of such ordinances, such words or phrases shall be in accordance with their customary usage in
municipal government. For the purposes of this policy, wastewater and sanitary sewer have the same intended meaning and
are thereby interchangeable.
Commercial customers. Generally defined as customers whose business is primarily engaged in the sale of goods,
commodities or services to consumers.
Customer. Any person who receives water, wastewater or garbage pickup service from the city under either an express or
implied contract requiring such person to pay the city of such service.
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Fiscal year. City annual operating budget year (October 1st through September 30th).
Industrial customers. Generally defined as customers whose business is primarily engaged in manufacturing, processing,
assembling or storing/distributing products or goods.
Inside customers. Generally defined as customers who are connected to the water/wastewater system within the corporate
limits of the city.
Multifamily customers. Generally defined as customers with two (2) or more dwelling units served by a single meter.
Outside customers. Generally defined as customers who are connected to the water/wastewater system outside of the
corporate limits of the city.
Public facility. A facility owned, leased or under the responsibility of the city.
Residential customers. Generally defined as customers that are single-family or separately metered duplex dwelling units, or
other premises containing dwelling units for which each unit is individually metered.
Sec. 13.10.005 Separate metering required
(a) Except as otherwise set forth, each individual residence must have its own meter. Sub-service from a metered line is
not permitted. Metered water lines may not be extended to serve another separate residence or place of business.
(b) A secondary residence served by a water meter through the primary residence as of the effective date of this article
may continue in this manner as long as both are on the same lot and under the same ownership regardless of any major
repairs to the service line for the primary residence. The main water service shall not be branched. If the secondary
residence is sold, replaced, or the property is divided, a new direct service line with separate meter shall be installed in
accordance with these requirements.
Sec. 13.10.006 Application and deposit fees; utility user fee schedule
(a) Application and deposit fees. An application and deposit shall be required before water and/or wastewater service is
provided on a new account. A nonrefundable service application fee and deposit shall be paid in accordance with the utility
user fee schedule on file in the city secretary's office. The deposit shall be held in a noninterest bearing account and applied
to the final bill when the account is finalized. Any deposit balance remaining shall be refunded to the customer.
(b) Utility user fee schedule.
(1) Fees and other billing and operational charges shall be as provided for in the utility user fee schedule (on
file in the city secretary's office).
(2) All fees referenced in the following sections are specified on file in the city secretary's office.
Sec. 13.10.007 Billing; late fees; reconnect fees; return check fee
(a) Billing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/598
(1) All bills for utility services shall be rendered monthly in accordance with a schedule established by the city.
The city shall exercise care in the delivery of utility bills, but is not responsible for the service provided by the
United States Postal Service.
(2) Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve the customer for payment of services received and/or penalties
assessed.
(b) Late fees. All utility accounts shall be due upon receipt. Accounts shall be past due after the 15th day of the month. All
accounts paid after the 15th day of the month will be assessed a late fee penalty.
(c) Reconnect fees. Accounts not paid before the 25th day of the month following the due date shall be subject to having
services discontinued and shall be charged a reconnect fee after payment is received by the city.
(d) Return check fee. In the event that a customer's check is not honored by the bank, a return check fee will be charged.
Sec. 13.10.008 Tampering
(a) Removal of water meters.
(1) The city water department shall have the authority to remove water meters for nonpayment of delinquent
water bills when:
(A) The water meter has been turned off by the city water department;
(B) The meter subsequently is found to be turned on; and
(C) The meter has not been turned on by the city water department.
(2) Water service will not be reconnected until payment is made for the full amount of the delinquent bill or bills
plus reconnect fee.
(b) Unlawful to open fire hydrant or tamper with any utility service. It shall be unlawful for any person, not having the
authority to do so, to open any fire hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or, in any
other way to tamper, damage or trespass upon any equipment, facilities or premises belonging to the city that are connected
with any utility service.
(c) Tampering fee.
(1) A tampering fee, plus costs incurred by the city for the repair or replacement of its equipment, shall be made
to reconnect any meter that has been removed or otherwise illegally tampered with.
(2) For the purpose of this section, it shall be presumed that a person in whose name the water account is, or
was, last billed, and who is receiving economic benefit of the water service, has knowingly tampered with city
property if the water supply has been:
(A) Diverted from passing through a metering device;
(B) Prevented from being correctly registered by a metering device; and/or
(C) Activated by any device installed to obtain public water supply without a metering device.
Sec. 13.10.009 Meter testing
A customer may request that their meter be tested for reading accuracy. If the meter is found to be reading within a tolerance
of plus or minus two percent (± 2%), the meter will be deemed to be in satisfactory working condition. In such cases, the
customer shall pay the city for the cost of the third party testing of the meter.
(Ordinance 2016-28, ex. A, adopted 10/11/16)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/598
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD*
Sec. 14.02.001 Created
Subject to like provisions being made by the commissioners court of Ellis County, Texas, by proper order, duly promulgated
and entered on their minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of the Airport Zoning Act, Texas Local Government Code,
section 241.001 et seq., there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Mid-Way Airport Joint Zoning
Board, which board shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in Texas Local Government Code, section
241.014.
Sec. 14.02.002 Membership
The Mid-Way Airport Joint Zoning Board shall be composed of seven (7) members; two (2) members to be appointed by the
Midlothian city council, two (2) members to be appointed by the Waxahachie city council, and two (2) members to be
appointed by the commissioners court of Ellis County, Texas; the seventh (7th) member shall be elected by a majority of the
members so appointed, and said seventh (7th) member shall serve as chairman of the Mid-Way Joint Airport Zoning Board.
(Ordinance 2009-002 adopted 1/13/09)
City of Midlothian
Planning and Development Regulations
Including Supplement No. 3
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed advisable to be included as enacted through Ordinance 2019-09
adopted 3/12/19.
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 88-14
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND REQUIREMENTS*
SECTION 1.11 Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including the Texas
Local Government Code, Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated (Vernon), as amended, and Sections 12.001 (what may be
recorded) and 12.002 (filing of Subdivision Plat), Texas Property Code Annotated (Vernon) V.A.T.S., as amended. (Ordinance
88-14, sec. 1.11, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(A), adopted 2/10/98)
SECTION 1.12 Jurisdiction
From and after the date of its adoption, this ordinance shall govern all subdivision of land within and outside of the corporate
limits and the ETJ of the City as provided by law. The provisions of this ordinance shall have the same force and effect within
said area of ETJ as within the corporate limits of the city, except as provided in Section 7.12 Penalty. (Ordinance 88-14, sec.
1.12, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(A), adopted 2/10/98)
SECTION 1.13 Consistency with the Comprehensive Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance
1. It is the intent of the City of Midlothian that these Subdivision Regulations shall be consistent with the adopted
Comprehensive Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance and any supplemental land use and community development policies that
may be adopted by the City Council. No plat or subdivision of land within the City or outside the City boundaries as provided
by law shall be approved unless it conforms to such Plans, Policies and Ordinances.
2. Except in cases where the subdivision of land requires the construction of new additional public facilities, including, but
not limited to, new streets, extensions of water or sewer facilities, or drainage structures, the requirements of the ordinance
regarding public improvements shall not apply to subdivisions of land within the ETJ of the City. All other requirements of this
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/598
ordinance, including, but not limited to, right-of-way dedications and other easements shall apply to subdivisions within the
[sic]
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 1.13, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 92-14 adopted 6/9/92; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(A), adopted
2/10/98)
Editor's note–Subsection 1.13(2) is as set out in the amendment by Ordinance 98-11. The following words at the end of subsection 2
were in strike-out formatting in the ordinance: “ETJ the same as prescribed for within the corporate limits of the City.”
SECTION 1.14 Requirements
All specifications, design requirements, improvements and standards, listed herein shall be required for all development
unless otherwise specifically designated herein. (Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(A), adopted 2/10/98)
SECTION 1.15 Conflict with Other Ordinances
This ordinance shall be cumulative of all other ordinances of the City of Midlothian, Texas and shall repeal any of the
provisions of said ordinances. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 1.14, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(A), adopted 2/10/98)
SECTION 1.16 Severability Clause
If any section, article, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word in this ordinance, or application thereto any person or
circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this ordinance; and the City Council hereby declares it would have passed such remaining
portions of the ordinance despite such invalidity, which remaining portions shall remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance 88-
14, sec. 1.15, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(A), adopted 2/10/98)
SECTION 1.17 Amendments
For the purpose of providing the public health, safety, and general welfare, the City Council may from time to time amend the
provisions imposed by these Subdivision Regulations. Public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by the City
Council in the manner prescribed by law. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 1.16, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(A), adopted
2/10/98)
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
SECTION 2.11 General
For the purposes of these Regulations, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this Section. Any office referred to in these Regulations by title means the person employed or appointed
by the City in that position, or his duly authorized representative. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 2.11, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance
98-11, sec. 1(B), adopted 2/10/98)
SECTION 2.12 Definitions
Those words or phrases not expressly prescribed herein are to be defined in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance or other
applicable Ordinances of the City, or in the absence of such Ordinances, then in accordance with customary usage in
municipal planning and engineering practices.
1. Acreage, Gross: The total acreage of a subdivision, including areas dedicated to the public use such as streets and
alley rights-of-way, floodplains, and any areas that are nonresidential in use.
2. Acreage, Net: The total acreage of a subdivision less those areas dedicated to public use such as street and alley
rights-of-way, floodplains, and any areas that are nonresidential in use. Easements, however, shall be included in net
acreage calculations.
3. Alleys: A Minor public right-of-way which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of
properties otherwise abutting on a street. (Alleys will generally be discouraged in all future subdivisions in Midlothian.)
4. Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-ofway,
shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.
5. Building Setback Line: A line defining an area on the building lot between the street right-of-way or property line and the
building line within which no building shall be constructed, encroach or project except as specifically authorized in an adopted
ordinance of the City of Midlothian, as shown in Appendix C.
a) Front Building Setback Line: A line parallel to the street right-of-way line which the building faces.
b) Side Building Setback Line: A line parallel to the side property line, or street right-of-way on a corner lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/598
c) Rear Building Setback Line: A line parallel to the rear lot line, alley, or rear street right-of-way line in the case
of double frontage lots.
6. Capacity: The capacity of a sewer facility means the measurement of the ability to accommodate sewage flow.
7. Carrying capacity: The carrying capacity of a sewer facility means the ability to accommodate sewage flow without
overflow.
8. City: The word “City” shall be the City of Midlothian, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies.
9. City Planner: The duly authorized employee or representative of the City in charge of the planning function for the City
and charged with implementation and enforcement of the subdivision, zoning and other growth-related ordinances.
10. City Engineer: The duly authorized person in charge of engineering and construction inspection for the City, or his
designated representative.
11. City Standards: As referred to in these Regulations, shall mean the City's standards and specifications, together with
all tables, drawings, and other attachments hereinafter approved by the Council, and those standards so approved shall
become a part of these Regulations.
12. Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Midlothian, Texas.
13. Comprehensive Master Plan: The phrase “Comprehensive Master Plan” shall be the Comprehensive Plan of the City
and adjoining areas adopted by the City Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, including all its revisions. The
Plan indicates the general locations recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings,
streets, parks and other public and private developments and improvements.
14. Construction Plans: The drawings and technical specifications including bid documents and contract conditions, where
applicable, providing a graphic and written description of the character and scope of the work to be performed in construction
of a subdivision.
15. Council: The word “Council” or “City Council” shall be the duly elected governing body of the City of Midlothian.
16. Cul-de-Sac: A short, minor street having but one outlet to another street and terminating on the opposite end by an
appropriate vehicular turnaround as shown in Appendix C.
17. Dead-End Street: A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet, as shown in Appendix C.
18. Dedication: A gift or donation of property by the owner to the City of Midlothian.
19. Density: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of subdivision including public or private streets, floodplains and
any areas that are nonresidential in use.
20. Developer: An individual, partnership, corporation, or governmental entity undertaking the subdivision or improvement
of land and other activities covered by these regulations, including the preparation of a subdivision plat showing the layout of
the land and the public improvements involved therein. The term “developer” is intended to include the term “subdivider” even
though personnel in successive stages of a project may vary.
21. Development: The construction of one or more new buildings or structures on one or more building lots, or the use of
open land for a new use. “To Develop” shall mean to create development.
22. Development Plan: The first or introductory plan of a proposed subdivision, in such case where the developer intends
to develop and record only an individual portion of said subdivision, and which exhibits the proposed successive order of
development of the balance of the subdivision.
23. Easement: An interest in land granted to the City or other governmental entity, to the public generally, and/or to a
private utility corporation.
24. Engineer: A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or
hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering.
25. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ): The unincorporated area, not a part of any other city, which is contiguous to the
corporate limits of the City of Midlothian, the outer limits of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of
the City outward for such distances as may be stipulated in the Texas Municipal Annexation Act in accordance with the total
population of the incorporated City.
26. Floodplain: Any and all land area adjoining the channel of a river, stream, lake, watercourse, marshy area, or other
drainage element, which has been or may be inundated by stormwater runoff. The extent of the floodplain shall be
determined by the crest of a flood having an average frequency of occurrence of once in one hundred (100) years, as
established by FEMA.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/598
27. Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood, as defined by the Corps of Engineers or FEMA, without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot.
28. Lot: An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street or an approved open space having direct
street access, and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer, or improvement, which is
designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract, or lot number, or symbol in a duly approved
subdivision Plat which has been properly filed or recorded, as shown in Appendix C.
a) Lot Depth: The length of a line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines.
b) Lot, Double Frontage or Through: Any lot, not a corner lot, with frontage on two streets which are parallel to
each other or within forty-five degrees of being parallel to each other.
c) Lot, Frontage: The length of street frontage between property lines.
d) Lot, Irregular: Any lot not having equal front and rear lot lines, or equal side lot lines; a lot, the opposite lot
lines of which vary in dimension and the corners of which have an angle of either more or less than ninety (90)
degrees.
e) Lot Width: The average distance between the side lot lines.
29. Non-reserved status: Non-reserved status means that a lot for which final plat approval has been granted cannot be
served by one or more sewer facilities due to overcapacity of such facilities.
30. Open Space: Private property under common ownership designated for recreational area, private park (for use of
property owners within the subdivision), play lot area, plaza area, building setbacks (other than those normally required), and
ornamental areas open to the general view within the subdivision. Open space does not include streets, alleys, utility
easements, public parks or required setbacks.
31. Overcapacity: Overcapacity of a sewer facility means the facility is operating or will operate beyond its carrying
capacity based upon existing connections to the facility, and approved or proposed finally platted lots.
32. Park: Land dedicated to, or purchased by, the City for the purpose of providing public recreational and/or open areas.
33. Pavement Width: The portion of street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the
face of curbs.
34. Person: Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency, or political subdivision.
35. Planned Development: A subdivision that consists of commercial and/or residential land uses, public land uses, and
common open space and recreational areas, adequate to service the needs of the tract when fully developed and populated,
which is to be developed as a single entity, under unified control.
36. Plat: A map, drawing, chart, or plan showing the exact layout and proposed construction of a proposed subdivision into
lots, blocks, streets, parks, school sites, commercial or industrial sites, drainageways, easements, and/or any other elements
as required by these Regulations, and which a subdivider shall submit for approval in accordance with these Regulations.
37. Plat, Amended: A minor change of an existing subdivision to a lot line or setback contained within. No new lots are
created, existing lots are not combined and the size of any one lot is not substantially increased or decreased.
38. Plat, Final: A Plat that has been submitted and approved in preliminary form, has been corrected by the applicant, has
conformed to all of the provisions of these Regulations, and has been submitted for final approval of the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
39. Plat, Preliminary: A Plat that is submitted to the City for its review of the concept and performance of the subdivision as
related to the provisions of these Regulations. The preliminary plan and the review thereof are intended to produce a
subdivision design in which all planning factors are recognized and reconciled, prior to submission of the Final Plat.
40. Potential overcapacity: Potential overcapacity of a sewer facility means the facility is operating or will operate beyond
its carrying capacity based upon existing connections and approved or proposed lots for which preliminary plat approval has
been granted.
41. Preliminary Approval: Approval expressed by the City as to the arrangement and approximate size of streets, parks,
reserves, easements, blocks, and lots indicated on a Preliminary Plat.
42. Public Right-of-Way: A strip of land used or intended to be used, who y [wholly] or in part, as a public street, alley,
crosswalk, sidewalk, drainageway or other public way.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/598
43. Replat: A Plat vacating an existing subdivision in lieu of a new pattern of development; the subdivision of an existing or
duly recorded lot or lots, the combining of two or more lots to create one lot, or the subdividing of an existing platted but
undeveloped subdivision into a new pattern of lots and blocks.
44. Reserve Strip: A privately owned strip of land, normally one foot in depth, adjacent to a public right-of-way or easement
preventing the extension of said right-of-way or easement without the expressed consent of the owner.
45. Reserved capacity: Reserved capacity means the estimate of capacity in a sewer facility that equals the capacity
attributable to existing connections to the facility together with the capacity associated with lots in approved final plats having
reserved status.
46. Reserved status: Reserved status means that a lot for which final plat approval has been granted can be served by
sewer facilities with adequate carrying capacity.
47. Sewer facility: Sewer facility means a sanitary sewer collection line, a segment thereof or any appurtenance thereto.
48. Shall/May: The word “shall” is always mandatory, while the word “may” is merely permissive.
49. Sidewalk: A paved pedestrian way generally located within public street right-of-way, but outside of the roadway, and
built in accordance with City specifications.
50. Site Plan: A map, drawing or chart showing the location of all existing and planned structures, landscaping, design
ingress and egress, parking, height of structures and/or any other elements as required by these Regulations, and which a
subdivider shall submit for approval in accordance with these Regulations.
51. Steep Slope: Areas that contain slopes over fifteen (15) percent grade and are characterized by increased runoff, and
erosion.
52. Street: A public right-of-way which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent land, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, avenue, lane, boulevard, road, place, drive, or however otherwise designated.
a) Street, Major Arterial: A street whose primary function is to provide traffic movement between major traffic
generators such as principal neighborhoods, commercial centers, and industrial areas, and to connect with
surrounding municipalities.
b) Street, Minor Arterial: A street whose primary function is to serve secondary traffic generation, such as
community shopping areas, office complexes, high schools, and larger parks and recreation areas. They also
serve to collect and distribute traffic from streets of lower classification to major arterials.
c) Street, Major Collector: The function of a collector street is to collect and distribute traffic from local access
streets and to convey it to the arterial system. Major collectors provide limited access to abutting property and
parking is generally limited or restricted.
d) Street, Minor Collector: Minor collectors in residential areas collect traffic from local streets within a
residential district and are not intended to continue through several districts. In commercial/industrial areas minor
collectors generally serve one district providing access for abutting property and providing the most direct access
to other collectors and arterials.
e) Street, Local: A street that is used primarily for access to abutting residential property and circulation of traffic
within residential neighborhoods. It is of a width and design to discourage through traffic, thereby protecting the
residential area.
f) Street, Private or Service Drive: A vehicular access way under private ownership and maintenance, that has
not been dedicated to the City and accepted by the City.
53. Structure: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work built up or
composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
54. Subdivider: Any person or any agent thereof dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as
that term is defined herein. In any event, the term subdivider shall be restricted to include only the owner, equity owner, or
authorized agent of such owner or equity owner, of land to be subdivided.
55. Subdivision: The term subdivision shall mean a division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more parts, lots
or sites or combination of the same for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership or
development. Subdivision includes the division or development of residentially and non-residentially zoned land, whether by
deed, metes and bounds description, devise, map, plat or other recorded instrument, but shall exclude any division resulting
from inheritance (by intestacy, will, or trust distribution), dissolution of marriage, condemnation or agreement in lieu thereof,
or the granting of any rights other than ownership of land (such as licenses, easements, and rights-of-way). Subdivision
includes resubdivision of land or lots, which are part of a previously recorded subdivision. All transfers of ownership, division,
or development of land shall be governed by this ordinance. This definition shall exclude divisions of land that result in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/598
parcels that each contain an area greater than 5.00 acres, provided that each resulting parcel has access and no public
improvement is being dedicated.
56. Surveyor: A Registered Public Surveyor as authorized by the State Statutes to practice the profession of surveying.
57. Thoroughfare Plan: Street plan which is part of the Comprehensive Master Plan of the City of Midlothian.
58. Vacation: To cancel, rescind, or render an act that has the effect of voiding a subdivision Plat as recorded in the County
Clerk's office.
59. Wastewater Service: The collection of waste-bearing water that requires treatment prior to its return to nature and the
system of pipes and equipment used to collect and transmit this water to treatment facilities; also called Sanitary Sewer
Service.
a) Sewerage System, Public: A system designed for the wastewater collection, treatment and disposal that is
wholly owned and operated by the City of Midlothian, its successors and assigns, or other governmental entity
authorized and empowered to own and operate such a system.
b) Sewerage Disposal System, Individual Private: Any system designed to provide on-site treatment and
disposal of sewage flows from individual residences, duplexes, businesses, or any other buildings. The system
may be anaerobic, e.g. a septic transpiration bed, or other. The system must not require a permit from the Texas
Department of Water Resources.
60. Water System, Public: A system designed for the distribution and treatment of potable water that is wholly owned and
operated by the City of Midlothian, its successors and assigns, or other governmental entity authorized and empowered to
own and operate such a system.
61. Yard: A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a
structure form the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts, and
other customary yard accessories, ornaments, and furniture are not deemed to be obstructions if height limitations and
requirements limiting obstruction of visibility are observed.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 2.12, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(B), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2001-34, sec. 1(A),
adopted 8/14/01; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
ARTICLE III
GENERAL PLATTING PROCEDURE REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 3.11 Compliance Required
Unless the land proposed to be subdivided meets the requirements and conditions set forth in Section 4.16 for the short form
procedure, then any person seeking to subdivide land shall comply with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 88-14, sec.
3.11, adopted 7/26/88)
SECTION 3.12 Application Processing
1. Definition. For purposes of this section the term “plat application” means an application for any the following: preliminary
plat, final plat, minor plat, conceptual site plan or building site plan.
2. Complete Application Determination. Every plat application shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the
planning director. No plat application shall be accepted for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by
and prepared in accordance with the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations. The director from time to time may
identify additional requirements for a complete plat application that are not contained within but are consistent with the
application contents and standards set forth in the Subdivision Regulations. The director also may promulgate a fee for
review of the application for completeness.
3. Development Review Committee. For the purposes of assisting the planning director in the review of plats, conceptual
site plans and building site plans, there is hereby established a Development Review Committee, chaired by the planning
director and composed of those City employees, county employees and utility company representatives elected by the city
manager to serve because of their specialized or technical knowledge of urban development issues.
4. Incompleteness as Grounds for Denial. The processing of a plat application by any City official or employee prior to the
time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the City as the official acceptance of the application
for filing, and the incompleteness of the plat application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the application. A
determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of these
Subdivision Regulations.
5. Pre-application Conference. A property owner may request a pre-application conference with the director for purposes
of identifying requirements that apply to a proposed plat application. The request shall be made in writing on a form prepared
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/598
by the director and shall state that any proposed development concept discussed at the pre-application conference is not
intended as a plan of development or plat application.
6. Time for Making Determination. Following submission of a plan of development or plat application, the planning director
shall make a determination in writing whether the plan or plat application is complete not later than the tenth business day
after the date the application is submitted. The determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to
complete the plat application and shall state the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not
provided.
7. When Deemed Complete. An application for approval of a preliminary plat or conceptual site plan that is filed on or after
April 28, 2005, or any subsequent plat application filed after approval of such preliminary plat or conceptual site plan, shall be
deemed complete on the 11th business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been
notified that the application is incomplete.
8. Time for Completing Application. If a plat application is not completed on or before the 45th calendar day after the
application is submitted to the planning director for processing the application in accordance with his or her written
notification, the plat application will be deemed to have expired and it will be returned to the applicant together with any
accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new plat application must be submitted. The City may retain any fee paid for
reviewing the application for completeness.
9. Sequence of Applications. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subdivision Ordinance to the contrary, a plat
application shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a copy of the zoning ordinance or other certification
verifying that the proposed use, lots sizes and lot dimensions for which the application is submitted is authorized by the
zoning district in which the property is located.
10. Vested Rights. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of a plat application that has expired pursuant to this
section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied.
11. Official Filing Date. The time period established by state law or these subdivision regulations for processing or deciding
a plat application shall commence on the date that a complete application has been accepted for filing, which date shall be
deemed the official filing date.
(Ordinance 2005-42, sec. 1, adopted 8/23/05)
Editor's note–Ordinance 2005-42 replaced and re-titled section 3.12. Prior to such amendment, the section was titled “Preliminary
Conference” and derived from Ordinance 88-14, adopted 7/26/88, as amended by Ordinance 99-58, sec. 1(1), adopted 10/26/99.
SECTION 3.13 Site Plan Requirement
A Conceptual Site Plan meeting the requirements of Section 4.12(1) shall be submitted to the Planning Department along
with the preliminary plat for all properties intended to be developed with a non-single-family use. Review and approval of the
Conceptual Site Plan shall be the responsibility of the Development Review Committee. The sole purpose of the Conceptual
Site Plan is to assist the City in determining whether the infrastructure proposed for the site is adequate to serve the intended
use. Because such a plan is conceptual only it shall not be used as the basis for issuance of any building permit.
A more detailed Building Site Plan, generally conforming to the Conceptual Site Plan and meeting the requirements of
Section 4.12(2), shall be submitted prior to an application for any building permit, and no building permit shall be issued until
such Building Site Plan has been approved by the Planning Director.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 3.13, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 99-58, sec. 1(1), adopted 10/26/99; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted
4/6/04)
SECTION 3.14 Combination of Lots
Any person desirous of combining two or more contiguous and previously platted lots into one single lot for the purpose of
removing interior lot lines to create more buildable lot area shall submit a “Replat” thereof; obtain approval from the City
Planning and Zoning Commission; and have same filed on record in the Plat Records of the county where the real property is
located. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 3.14, adopted 7/26/88)
SECTION 3.15 Vacation Instrument, Replatting, Amended Plats, and Minor Plats
1. Vacation of a Plat
a. Prior to the sale of any lot. In cases where lots have not been sold, any Plan, Plat or Replat may be vacated
by the proprietors of the land covered thereby, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written
instrument declaring the same to be vacated, duly executed, acknowledged and recorded in the same office as
the Plat to be vacated, provided the approval of the City Planning and Zoning Commission shall have been
obtained, and the execution and recordation of the instrument shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the
recording of the Plan, Plat or Replat so vacated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/598
b. After the sale of any lot. In cases where lots have been sold, the Plan, Plat or Replat, or any part thereof,
may be vacated upon the application of all the owners of lots in said plat and with the approval of the City
Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Replat: A replat of a plat or a resubdivision of a plat, but without vacation of the immediate previous plat, shall be
authorized to be recorded and shall be deemed valid and controlling when approved by the City Planning and Zoning
Commission under the following conditions:
a. It has been signed and acknowledged by all of the owners of the particular property which is being replatted;
b. It has been approved by the City Planning and Zoning Commission after a public hearing in relation thereto
at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard;
c. It does not attempt to alter, amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
d. There is compliance, when applicable, with subsections 3 and 4 of this section.
3. Additional Requirements: The following additional requirements for approval shall apply, in any resubdivision or
replatting of a subdivision, without vacating the immediate previous plat if any of the proposed area to be resubdivided or
replatted was within the immediate preceding five (5) years limited by any interim or permanent zoning classification to
residential use for not more than two residential units per lot, or if any lot in the immediate previous subdivision was limited by
deed restriction to residential use for not more than two residential units per lot:
a. Notice of such City Planning and Zoning Commission hearing shall be given in advance in the following
manner:
1) Publication at least fifteen (15) days in advance of hearing being published in the City's official
newspaper; and
2) Written notice, with a copy of subdivision (b) of this subsection attached thereto, of such public hearing
forwarded by the City Planning and Zoning Commission to owners (as the ownerships appear on the last
approved ad valorem tax roll of the City) of all lots in the immediate preceding subdivision plat not less than
fifteen (15) days prior to the date of such hearing; such notice may be served by depositing the same,
properly addressed and postage paid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the City;
provided, however, if such immediate preceding subdivision plat shall contain more than 100 lots, such
notice shall be mailed only to those owners of lots which are located within 500 feet of the lot or lots which
are sought to be replatted or subdivided.
b. The City Planning and Zoning Commission shall require in any resubdivision or replatting to which this
subsection applies written approval of 66-2/3% of:
1) the owners of all lots in such plat; or
2) the owners of all lots in such plat within 500 feet of the property sought to be replatted or resubdivided
if such immediate preceding plat contains more than 100 lots.
The provisions of subdivision (b) of this subsection shall, however, apply only if 20%, or more, of the
owners, to whom notice is required to be given, of the lots in such plat, a portion of which is sought to
be replatted or resubdivided file with the City Planning and Zoning Commission written protest of such
replatting or resubdivision prior to or at the hearing referred to in the notice of the proposed replatting
or resubdivision. In computing the percentages of ownership, each lot in such subdivision shall be
considered equal to all other lots regardless of size or number of owners, and the owners of each lot
shall be entitled to cast only one vote per lot.
c. Provided, however, compliance with subdivision (a) or (b), of this subsection shall not be required for
approval of a replatting or resubdividing of a portion of a prior plat if all of the proposed area sought to be replatted
or resubdivided was designated or reserved for usage other than for single or duplex family residential usage by
notation on the last legally recorded plat or in the legally recorded restrictions applicable to such plat.
4. Amended Plat. The City Planning Director is authorized to issue an Amended Plat which is signed by the applicants only
and which is for one or more of the purposes set forth below. Approval and issuance of such an Amended Plat shall not
require notice, hearing, or approval of other lot owners, only, if the sole purpose of the Amending Plat is:
a. to correct an error in any course or distance shown on the prior Plat;
b. to add any course or distance that was omitted on the prior Plat;
c. to correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the prior Plat;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/598
d. to indicate monuments set after death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor
charged with responsibilities for setting monuments;
e. to show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location or character
or which originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character on the prior Plat;
f. to correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission as previously approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission; such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street
names, and identification of adjacent recorded Plats;
g. to correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots where both lot owners join
in the application for plat amendment and neither lot is abolished, provided that such amendment does not
attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a materially adverse effect on the
property rights of the other owners in the Plat;
h. to replace a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent encroachment of a building or improvement on a lot line or
on an easement; or
i. to relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots where the owner or owners of all such lots
join in the application for the plat amendment, provided that such amendment does not:
1) attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; or
2) increase the number of lots.
5. Minor Plats. The Planning Director is authorized to issue a Minor Plat, which must be signed by the property owner and
is subject to the conditions set forth below. Approval and issuance of such a Minor Plat shall not require notice, hearing, or
approval of other lot owners, only, if the Minor Plat meets the following conditions:
a. the proposed Minor Plat involves four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street,
b. the proposed Minor Plat does not require the creation of any new street, and
c. the proposed Minor Plat does not require the extension of municipal facilities.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 3.15, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 97-05, sec. 1, adopted 3/25/97; Ordinance 2002-45 adopted
10/8/02)
SECTION 3.16 Dedication
1. Division of Property: Every owner of property to be divided, for which a Plat has been submitted for approval, shall be
required to dedicate to the City that portion of such property as is necessary for the orderly development of streets,
roadways, thoroughfares, utilities or other public purposes, and such dedication requirements, as imposed, shall be a
prerequisite to Plat approval.
2. Amended Plats:
a. No dedication for streets, utilities or other public purposes may be required as a prerequisite to approval of a
Plat combining two or more existing platted lots for the purpose of removing interior lot lines, or for the purpose of
correction of error as permitted in Section 3.15.4.
b. No dedication of right-of-way or easements except for the provision of utilities may be required as a
prerequisite to approval of a Plat revision submitted for the purpose of moving an interior lot line to create an
enhanced building site.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 3.16, adopted 7/26/88)
ARTICLE IV
REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT SUBMITTAL
SECTION 4.11 Plat Submittal
1. Submittal Requirements. All plats to be considered for approval under these Regulations shall be submitted to the
Planning Director or his designee along with a completed application and fees in accordance with section 3.12.
2. Scale and Sheet Size: All Plats shall be drawn to a scale of one inch (1") = one hundred feet (100'), unless permission is
obtained from the City Planning Director for a larger or smaller scale prior to submittal. All sheet sizes shall be 24" x 36" and
shall be drawn in ink on a reproducible film material.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 4.11, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 2005-42, sec. 2, adopted 8/23/05)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/598
SECTION 4.12 Site Plans
1. Conceptual Site Plans: A Conceptual Site Plan shall be submitted concurrently with the Preliminary Plat of a property
intended to be developed with a non-single-family use.
The Conceptual Site Plan shall contain the following information unless certain elements are specifically determined by the
Development Review Committee to be not applicable.
a) The approximate location of all existing and planned structures on the subject property and approximate
locations of structures on adjoining property within 200 feet.
b) The approximate location of landscaped and other open space areas with a chart showing the quantities
provided and the quantities required by the zoning ordinance.
c) Driveway locations showing approximate distance to the nearest street intersections and other drives
adjacent to the site or opposite the site on perimeter streets.
d) Off-street parking and loading facilities, with a chart showing the quantities provided and the quantities
required by the zoning ordinance.
e) Preliminary drainage area calculations and grading plan showing points of runoff.
f) Proposed uses.
g) Street names on proposed streets.
h) Schematic layout of on-site water and sanitary sewer connections to City main lines.
i) Utility and drainage easements for dedicated infrastructures if required.
j) Such additional data requested by the Development Review Committee in order to perform a reasonably
thorough review within the best standards of practice of Urban Planning and Civil Engineering.
2. Building Site Plans: A Building Site Plan generally conforming to the approved Conceptual Site Plan shall be submitted
prior to an application for any non-single-family building permit.
The Building Site Plan shall contain the following information unless certain elements are specifically determined by the
Development Review committee to be not applicable.
a) The location, dimensions and calculated floor area of all existing and Planned structures on the subject
property and approximate locations of structures on adjoining property within 200 feet.
b) A detailed landscape and irrigation plan with a chart showing quantities of open space and plant materials
provided and quantities required by the Zoning Ordinance.
c) The location and width of all driveways with distance measurements to the nearest street intersections and
other drives adjacent to the site or opposite the site on perimeter streets.
d) Off-street parking and loading facilities, with a chart showing the quantities provided and the quantities
required by the zoning ordinance.
e) Engineering design of stormwater facilities, showing drainage area calculations and final grading plan.
f) Proposed uses.
g) Street names on proposed streets.
[h–j Reserved]
k) Engineering design of proposed on-site water and sanitary sewer connections to City main lines and design
of any off-site utilities required.
l) Utility and drainage easements for dedicated infrastructures if required.
m) Such additional data requested by the Development Review Committee in order to perform a reasonably
thorough review within the best standards of practice of Urban Planning and Civil Engineering.
n) Location and dimension of all signs, fences and lighting standards.
o) Dimensioned elevation drawings stating proposed exterior finish materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/598
p) Such additional data requested by the Development Review Committee in order to perform a reasonably
thorough review within the best standards of practice of Urban Planning and Civil Engineering.
3. Site Plan Application Materials: The Planning Director is authorized to amend Appendix A from time to time to provide
Site Plan Applicants with the checklists, instructions and other information needed for better understanding of the application
process.
4. Building Site Plan Review Fee: A Building Site Plan review fee shall be paid the City upon submission of a Site Plan in
accordance with the adopted fee schedule ordinance, as shown in Appendix D.
5. Effective Period of Site Plans:
a) A Conceptual Site Plan expires if the preliminary plat with which it is associated expires. Following such
expiration, no application for a Building Site Plan shall be considered complete or shall be approved until a new
Conceptual Site Plan has been approved.
b) The approval of a Building Site Plan shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) months. In the event that a
request for a building permit has not been initiated by the developer within twelve (12) months from the date of
approval of the Building Site Plan, the Site Plan shall require re-approval. The entire approval process including
payment of fees shall be required.
c) The applicant may receive one (1) extension of the Building Site Plan. The Planning Director shall consider
such an extension upon written request by the property owner, at least thirty (30) days prior to the end of the one
(1) year period.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 4.12, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 97-01 adopted 1/14/97; Ordinance 99-58, sec. 1(2), adopted
10/26/99; Ordinance 2005-42, sec. 3, adopted 8/23/05)
SECTION 4.13 Preliminary Plats
1. A Preliminary Plat shall be required for all parcels of land on which the filing of a plat is required by State law or City
Regulations and Ordinances. If property to be subdivided is part of a tract that is less than 640 acres, a preliminary plat must
include the entire tract.
2. The Preliminary Plat must meet all the criteria of Preliminary Plat submission as required in Regulations and Ordinances
of the City and procedures as listed in these Regulations.
3. The Preliminary Plat shall be prepared by a licensed Professional Engineer, Registered Public Surveyor or Certified
Planner trained and experienced in subdivision design.
4. The Preliminary Plat shall contain the following information:
a) Names and addresses of the subdivider, record owner, land planner, engineer and/or surveyor.
b) Proposed name of the subdivision (which shall not be so similar to that of an existing subdivision as to cause
confusion).
c) Names and lot patterns of contiguous platted subdivisions within 200' of the proposed subdivision.
d) Vicinity map showing location of tract by reference to existing streets or highways.
e) Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy lines, and the approximate area expressed in acres.
f) Location of City limit lines, if they either traverse the subdivision, form part of the subdivision, or are
contiguous to the subdivision boundary.
g) Dimensions, names and descriptions of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or
other public rights-of-way within the subdivision, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such
boundaries, as determined from existing records, for a distance of two hundred (200) feet from the proposed
subdivision. If there are no adjacent existing or dedicated streets and alleys within two hundred (200) feet of the
proposed subdivision on any side, then a map on a smaller scale must accompany the Preliminary Plat showing
the outline and ownership of adjacent properties, locations of the nearest subdivisions and existing or dedicated
streets and alleys.
h. The locations, dimensions, names and descriptions of all existing or recorded lots and blocks, parks, public
areas and permanent structures within or contiguous to the subdivision.
i. The locations, sizes, and descriptions of existing and proposed utilities (above and/or below grade), within the
subdivision or adjacent thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/598
j. The approximate location, dimensions, descriptions and names of all proposed streets, drainage structures,
parks, open spaces, natural features to be preserved, improvements to be installed for beautification, other public
areas; reservations, easements or other rights-of-way; blocks, lots and other sites within the subdivision
specifically indicating the connection of improvements in adjacent subdivisions.
k. Identification and location of proposed uses within the subdivision to include tracts intended for residential,
commercial, churches, parks, governmental or other uses and also indicating existing and proposed zoning
classifications for each use.
1. Topographical information based on 2-foot vertical contour intervals except where excessive steep grade
prohibits graphical representation, in which case 5-foot vertical intervals may be used.
m. Centerline of watercourses, creeks and ravines, existing drainage structures and other pertinent data shall
be shown.
n. Areas subject to flooding shall be shown, delineating the 100-year flood limits if applicable.
o. A drainage study shall be required to provide the information as recorded in Article VI.
p. A number or letter to identify each lot and each block; an indication of the typical lot size; the approximate
area of the smallest lot; and the total number of lots proposed.
q. Building setback lines on all lots and sites adjacent to streets.
r. Title, date of preparation, scale and north arrow.
s. Current description of the property to be subdivided that includes survey name and tract numbers from City
or County records.
t. If the proposed subdivision is a portion of a tract which is later to be subdivided in its entirety, then a tentative
Master Plat of the entire subdivision shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plat of the portion first to be
subdivided. The Master Plat shall conform in all respects to the requirements of the Preliminary Plat; except, it
may be on a scale of not more than one inch (1") to four hundred feet (400').
u. A detailed explanation of how the subdivision will be served by sanitary sewer and water facilities, including
identification of the sanitary sewer and water mains to which the subdivision will be connected and the treatment
facilities that will be utilized by the subdivision, the sanitary sewer and water demands generated by the
subdivision, and the amount or capacity existing and planned for such main treatment facilities.
5. Deadlines and Submitted Material
a. The applicant shall submit the number of copies of the plat as required on the application form and one (1)
digital copy of the Preliminary Plat to the Planning Director or his designee by the formal application deadline
listed on the current calendar to be heard at the next Planning and Zoning Commission meeting.
b. The applicant shall submit an 8-1/2" x 11" and an 11" x 17" reduction of all maps included in the submittal
material. The applicant shall submit an 8-1/2" x 11" and an 11" x 17" reduction of all maps included in the submittal
material. [sic]
c. The applicant shall submit the completed application shown in Appendix A, and pay all fees required for
preliminary platting as specified in Section 4.13.8 of this document.
d. At the time of submittal, the Planning Director or his designee will check all materials against the Preliminary
Plat checklist for completeness before accepting any fees. Failure to submit all materials required for Preliminary
Plat approval will constitute an incomplete submittal and the application and fees shall not be accepted by the City
for processing.
6. Duties of the City
a. Review the Preliminary Plat for completeness, noticing application of generally accepted engineering and
planning design principles and standards.
b. Distribute the Preliminary Plat to the development review committee for review.
c. Summarize the recommendations of the reviewing authorities and prepare a report to be presented to the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
7. Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission: The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the Preliminary Plat. A majority vote of the Commission shall be required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/598
a. Approval shall not constitute acceptance of the subdivision, but is only authorization to proceed with the
preparations of engineering plans and Final Plat.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission may attach such conditions to approval of the preliminary plat as are
necessary to assure compliance with these subdivision regulations, including conditions related to assuring the
adequacy of the sanitary sewer collection and treatment facilities serving the subdivision. Conditional approval
shall subject the subdivision to compliance with prescribed conditions and shall constitute disapproval until such
conditions are met. The conditions attached to preliminary plat shall be met upon the filing of the Final Plat.
c. Disapproval signifies rejection completely of the Preliminary Plat as submitted. The applicant may then
choose to reinstate the subdivision approval procedure, including all fees required in the process.
8. Preliminary Plat Review Fee: A Preliminary Plat review fee shall be paid the City upon submission of the Preliminary
Plat in accordance with the adopted fee schedule ordinance, as shown in Appendix D.
9. Effective Period
a) Preliminary Plat Expiration. An approved preliminary plat application shall expire and shall thereafter be
deemed null and void, together with any Conceptual Site Plan approved with the preliminary plat, if a final plat
application for all the land subject to the preliminary plat has not been approved within twelve (12) months from
the date of the Commission's approval of the preliminary plat. Subsequent expiration of the final plat shall also
result in expiration of the preliminary plat for the same land. Upon expiration, or upon denial of a timely submitted
request for extension of plat approval, a new plat application shall be submitted, subject to requirements in effect
at the time the application is filed with the City.
b) Expiration of Phased Preliminary Plats. The subdivider shall submit and receive approval for a final plat for
the first and all subsequent phases of the phased preliminary plat within the time limits prescribed in this section
or in an approved phasing schedule. The phased preliminary plat shall expire within twelve (12) months of the
date the Planning and Zoning Commission approves the phased preliminary plat application, unless a final plat
has been submitted and approved within such period. Within twelve (12) months of approval of the final plat for
the first phase of the development, or within such other period as may be provided in an approved phasing
schedule, a complete application for a final plat must be approved for the next phase of the development,
continuing with each successive phase, until final plats have been approved for all the land subject to the original
phased preliminary plat. Failure to meet a platting deadline as prescribed in this section or as included in the
phasing schedule shall result in the expiration of the phased preliminary plat for that and all subsequent phases of
the development. If an approved final plat subsequently expires, the phased preliminary plat for that phase shall
expire, and for all other phases for which a final plat has not been approved, is not pending for approval or no
longer remains in effect. For purposes of this subsection, the term “phased preliminary plat” includes any
preliminary plat for which the subdivider proposes to obtain final plat approval for only a portion of the approved
preliminary plat.
c) Extension of Preliminary Plat. The expiration date for a preliminary plat or any phase of a phased preliminary
plat may be extended by the Planning and Zoning Commission for a period of not more than one (1) year,
provided that a request for extension is made in writing by the subdivider at least thirty (30) days before the
approved plat expires. Extension of the expiration date for a phase of a phased master plat extends the expiration
date for the phased preliminary plat for a like period. Every request for extension shall include a statement of the
reasons why the expiration date should be extended. The Commission shall take into account the reasons for the
requested extension, the ability of the applicant to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval,
whether extension is likely to result in timely completion of the project, and the extent to which newly adopted
regulations should be applied to the original application. The Commission may attach conditions to approval of an
extension request such as are needed to assure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the
public interest is served, including a requirement that one or more current development standards be applied to
subsequent plat applications within the area subject to the plat.
10. Effect of Approval.
a. Approval of a preliminary plat shall authorize the owner to file an application for approval of engineering plans
that conform to the preliminary plat and any conditions attached thereto, upon approval of
construction/engineering plans, owner may file for approval of final plat.
b. The approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute authorization or approval for connection to the City of
Midlothian's water or sanitary sewer systems.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 4.13, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 99-58, sec. 1(3), adopted 10/26/99; Ordinance 2001-20, secs. 1–3,
adopted 4/24/01; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04; Ordinance 2005-42, sec. 4, adopted 8/23/05)
SECTION 4.14 Final Plats
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/598
1. No subdivision of land located within the City's corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction shall occur prior to (a) the
approval of a Final Plat in accordance with these Subdivision Regulations and applicable state law and (b) recording of the
approved Final Plat in the Official Public Records or Plat Records of Ellis County, Texas. The Final Plat shall comply in all
respects with the approved Preliminary Plat for the land described in the Final Plat. A Final Plat may be approved for all or a
portion of land described in an approved Preliminary Plat. Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision ordinance, no
building permit shall be issued to construct a building on property which has not been previously the subject of an approved
and recorded Final Plat.
2. After obtaining approval of a Preliminary Plat or Site Plan and compliance with all necessary fiscal agreements including
fees, assessments, and delinquent taxes, the applicant may, if wishing to proceed with the subdivision, submit a Final Plat.
The Final Plat shall be submitted with a completed application and shall be in accordance with all regulation requirements.
The Final Plat application shall be accompanied by a list of changes between the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat (a written list
of any and all changes made to the Final Plat that is different form [from] the Preliminary Plat).
3. The Final Plat shall be prepared by a licensed Professional Engineer and/or Registered Public Surveyor, trained in
subdivision design.
4. The Final Plat shall contain the following information also shown in Appendix A.
a) Title or name of development and graphic scale, north point, date of Plat and key map.
b) Location of the development by City, County and State.
c) Accurate boundary survey and property description with tract boundary lines indicated by heavy lines.
d) Accurate Plat dimensions with all surveying information necessary to reproduce the Plat on the ground.
e) Approved name and right-of-way width of each street, both within and adjacent to the development.
f) Locations, dimensions and purposes of any easements or other rights-of-way and all building lines.
g) Identification of each lot or site and block by number or letter.
h) Record owners of contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land, names and lot patterns of contiguous
subdivisions within 200 feet of the proposed subdivision.
i) Boundary lines, dimensions and descriptions of open spaces to be dedicated for public use.
j) Certificate of dedication of all streets, parks and other public uses signed by the owner or owners.
k) Designation of the entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of any commonly held property and
a waiver releasing the City of such responsibility.
1) Space for signatures attesting approval of the Plat by the Planning Director and Planning Assistant, as
shown in Appendix B.
m) Seal and signature of the surveyor responsible for surveying the development and/or the preparation of the
Plat, as shown in Appendix B.
n) All deed restrictions that are to be filed with the Plat shall be shown on or filed separately with the Plat.
o) Compliance with all special requirements developed in Preliminary [Plat review.]
p) Statement regarding the adequacy of the sanitary sewer treatment or collection facilities serving the
subdivision.
5. Prior to the filing of the Final Plats, the subdivider shall submit to the City the engineering plans prepared, signed and
sealed by a registered professional engineer. These plans shall make adequate provisions for all surface and storm drainage
within and across the subdivision; shall provide for the construction of a water distribution system, including fire hydrants,
adequate to serve the subdivision with water with adequate pressure for fire protection, domestic consumption and/or light
commercial use together with such mains as may be required to connect with the existing system; shall provide for a sanitary
sewer system adequate to serve each lot or building site within the subdivision and shall provide for the construction of such
other improvements as may be required. The subdivider shall pay the full cost of all public improvements. Detailed
construction plans which shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance and all other ordinances of the City relating to
construction standards shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to the acceptance of a Final Plat application. A Final Plat
application may be accepted prior to construction plan approval only if it is accompanied by a 30-day waiver, in which case
the Final Plat will be placed on the next available Planning & Zoning Commission meeting after the final construction plan
approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/598
6. If the final plat meets all requirements of the Subdivision Regulations without any waivers or exemptions, the Planning
Director may approve the final plat with formal ratification from the Planning & Zoning Commission approval at the next
available meeting.
6. [sic] A receipt shall be noted on the Final Plat or shall accompany the Final Plat indicating that all taxes have been paid.
7. The Final Plat shall be filed on record by the City in the plat records of the county where the real property is located, but
only after the Planning Director has officially acted upon the Final Plat with reference to improvements, dedications and
utilities. Filing fees for recording the Final Plat shall be paid by the subdivider.
8. Approval of the Final Plat shall expire unless the Plat is recorded in the office of the County Clerk where the real
property is located within a period of ninety (90) days after the date of final approval by the Planning Director.
9. Deadlines and Submitted Materials
a) The applicant shall submit the number of copies of the plat as required on the application form and one (1)
digital copy of the Final Plat to the Planning Director or his designee by the formal application deadline listed on
the current calendar to be heard at the next Planning and Zoning Commission meeting[.]
b) The applicant shall submit an 8-1/2" x 11" and an 11" x 17" reduction of the Final Plat.
c) The applicant shall also submit the completed application, as shown in Appendix A, and pay all fees required
for Final Platting in accordance with Section 4.14.12 of this document.
d) At the time of submittal, the Planning Director or his designee will check all materials against the Final Plat
checklist for completeness before accepting any fees. Failure to submit all materials required for Final Plat
approval will constitute an incomplete submittal and shall cause the application to not be accepted for processing.
10. Duties of the City
a) Review the Final Plat for completeness, noting application of design principles and standards and
compliance with approved Preliminary Plat or Site Plan and City Ordinances and Regulations.
b) Distribute a copy of the Final Plat to the City development review committee for review.
c) Summarize the recommendations of the reviewing authorities and prepare a report to be presented to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for formal ratification.
11. Action by the Planning Director: The decision of the Planning Director shall be approval or disapproval of the Final Plat.
a) Approval shall constitute acceptance of the Final Plat, and the subdivider shall proceed with the filing of the
Final Plat.
b) Disapproval constitutes complete rejection of the Final Plat. The applicant may then choose to reinstate the
subdivision approval procedure, including all fees required in the process.
c) The approval of a final plat does not constitute authorization or approval for connection to the City of
Midlothian's water or sanitary sewer systems.
12. Final Plat Review Fee. A Final Plat review fee shall be paid to the City upon submission of the Final Plat in accordance
with the adopted fee schedule ordinance, as shown in Appendix D.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 4.14, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 99-58, sec. 1(4), adopted 10/26/99; Ordinance 2001-20, sec. 1(5),
adopted 4/24/01; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04; Ordinance 2011-08, sec. 1, adopted 3/22/11; Ordinance 2016-43, sec.
1(A), adopted 11/8/16)
SECTION 4.15 Planning and Zoning Commission Acceptance of Final Plat by Sections
An owner or subdivider, at his option, may obtain approval of a portion or section of a subdivision provided he meets all the
requirements of all Subdivision Ordinances with reference to such portion or section in the same manner as is required for a
complete subdivision. Expiration of a preliminary plat for which final plats are approved in sections shall be as provided in
section 4.13(9). In the event a subdivision and the Final Plat thereof is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in
sections, each Final Plat of each section is to carry the name of the entire subdivision, but is to bear a distinguishing letter,
number or subtitle. Block numbers shall run consecutively throughout the entire subdivision, even though such subdivision
may be finally approved in sections. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 4.15, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 2005-42, sec. 5, adopted
8/23/05)
SECTION 4.16 Minor Plats
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/598
1. The Minor Plat shall be prepared by a licensed Professional Engineer and/or Registered Public Surveyor, trained in
subdivision design.
2. The Minor Plat shall contain the following information:
a. Title or name of development and graphic scale, north point, date of Plat, and key map.
b. Location of the development by City, County, and State.
c. Accurate boundary survey and property description with tract boundary lines indicated by heavy lines.
d. Accurate Plat dimensions with all surveying information necessary to reproduce the Plat on the ground.
e. Approved name and right-of-way width of each street, both within and adjacent to the development.
f. Locations, dimensions and purposes of any easements or other rights-of-way and all building lines.
g. Identification of each lot or site and block by number or letter.
h. Record owners of contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land, names, and lot patterns of contiguous
subdivisions within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision.
i. Boundary lines, dimensions, and descriptions of open spaces to be dedicated for public use.
j. Certificate of dedication of all streets, parks, and other public uses signed by the owner or owners.
k. Designation of the entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of any commonly held property and
a waiver releasing the City of such responsibility.
l. Space for signatures attesting approval of the Plat by the Planning Director and City Secretary.
m. Seal and signature of the surveyor responsible for surveying the development and/or the preparation of the
Plat, as shown in Appendix B.
n. All deed restrictions that are to be filed with the Plat shall be shown on or filed separately with the plat.
o. Compliance with all special requirements developed in the Pre-submittal review.
3. A receipt shall be noted on the Minor Plat or shall accompany the Minor Plat indicating that all taxes have been paid.
4. The Minor Plat shall be filed on record by the City in the plat records of the county where the real property is located, but
only after the Planning Director has officially acted upon the Minor Plat with reference to dedications. Filing fees for recording
the Minor Plat shall be paid by the subdivider.
5. Approval of the Minor Plat shall expire unless the Minor Plat is recorded in the office of the County Clerk where the real
property is located within a period of ninety (90) days after the date of final approval.
6. Submitted Material:
a, The applicant shall submit the number of copies of the plat as required on the application form and one (1)
digital copy of the Minor Plat.
b. The applicant shall also submit a completed application and pay all fees required for Final Platting in
accordance with Section 4.14.12 of this document.
c. At the time of submittal, the Planning Director or their designee will check all materials against the Minor Plat
checklist for completeness before accepting any fees. Failure to submit all materials required for Minor Plat
approval will constitute and incomplete submittal and shall cause the application not to be accepted for
processing.
7. Duties of the City
a. Summarize the recommendations of the reviewing authorities.
b. Take action on the Plat. The Planning Director may, for any reason, elect to present the Minor Plat to the
Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council, or both, to approve the Minor Plat.
8. Action by the City for Minor Plats
a. The decision of the Planning Director shall be approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/598
b. Any Minor Plat the Planning Director refuses to approve shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning
Commission or City Council, or both, within the time period required by State law.
9. Minor Plat Review Fee: A Final Plat review fee shall be paid to the City upon submission of the Minor Plat in accordance
with the adopted fee schedule ordinance.
(Ordinance 97-05, sec. 2, adopted 3/25/97; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
Editor's note–Ordinance 2004-17, adopted 4/6/04, deleted former section 4.16, “Platting or Replatting–Short Form,” which derived from
Ordinance 88-14, adopted 7/26/88, and renumbered section 4.17 as 4.16.
SECTION 4.17 Expiration of Plats
1. Preliminary Plat: A Preliminary Plat and a Phased Preliminary Plat shall expire in accordance with section 4.13(9).
2. All other plats: A Final Plat, Replat, Amended Plat, or a Minor Plat, which has not been recorded in the County Plat
Records shall expire within 120 days from the date of approval of the Planning & Zoning Commission and/or City Council.
3. Extensions: The Planning & Zoning Commission may extend the expiration date of an approved preliminary plat or
phased preliminary plat in accordance with section 4.13(9). For all other approved plats, the Commission may extend the
expiration date upon written petition for such extension by the owner prior to the expiration of the plat, but not to exceed one
(1) year.
4. Resubmittal: Upon the expiration of a plat, the applicant must proceed through the applicable process in its entirety, to
include fee submittal and the review process.
5. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to monitor the timing of the plat and the potential for expiration.
(Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04; Ordinance 2005-42, sec. 6, adopted 8/23/05)
SECTION 4.18 Dormant Plats
1. Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following terms apply:
a) “Final plat” means the final stage of approval of a subdivision or addition required by Prior Subdivision
Regulations as a condition of recording a division of land in the deed records of Ellis County and that was
approved or filed for approval pursuant to such Prior Subdivision Regulations.
b) “Prior Plat” means a land study, conceptual site plan, sketch plat, preliminary plat, building site plan or other
similar representation showing a division of land into lots or tracts approved or filed for approval pursuant to Prior
Subdivision Regulations, other than a final plat.
c) “Prior Subdivision Regulations” means any subdivision regulation or rule incorporated within a subdivision
ordinance of the City of Midlothian that was in effect prior to May 11, 2000.
2. Expiration of Dormant Plat. Any prior plat or portion thereof, or any final plat or portion thereof that has not been
recorded, which prior plat or final plat was approved or filed for approval before, but that was not subject to an expiration date
under Prior Subdivision Regulations on, May 11, 2000, shall expire at 5:00 p.m. on August 31, 2005.
3. Appeal. The owner of the land subject to the prior plat or final plat that expires under subsection (2) may petition the City
Council to reinstate such prior plat or final plat by filing a vested rights petition within six (6) months of the expiration. The
petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation of one of the following:
(A) As of May 11, 2000, one of the following events had occurred:
(1) In the case of an approved prior plat:
(a) a final plat application for all or part of the land subject to the approved prior plat was approved,
or was filed and was subsequently approved, or an application for a final plat was submitted for all or
part of the land subject to the approved prior plat, but such application was rejected on grounds of
incompleteness;
(b) Costs for development of the land subject to the prior plat, including but not limited to costs
associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or
in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent
(5%) of the most recent appraised market value of the land subject to the prior plat;
(c) Fiscal security was posted to ensure performance of an obligation required for development of all
or a part of the land subject to the approved prior plat; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/598
(2) In the case of an approved, unrecorded final plat:
(a) Costs for development of the land subject to the final plat, including but not limited to costs
associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or
in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent
(5%) of the most recent appraised market value of the land subject to such final plat;
(b) Fiscal security was posted after approval of the final plat to ensure performance of an obligation
required for all or a part of the land subject to the approved final plat; or
(c) Utility connection fees or impact fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved final plat
were paid.
(B) For an approved prior plat, one of the following events occurred after May 11, 2000, but before the
expiration date specified in subsection (2):
(1) A final plat was approved for all or part of the land subject to the approved prior plat and remained in
effect for such land on August 31, 2005; or
(2) A complete application for approval of all or part of the land subject to the approved prior plat was
pending for decision on August 31, 2005.
4. Council Action. The City Council may take one of the following actions:
(A) Reinstate the expired prior or final plat subject to such expiration dates as may be authorized by law, if it
finds that the petitioner has met any one of the criteria listed in subsection (3)(A).
(B) Reinstate the expired prior plat for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the petitioner has met
any one of the criteria listed in subsection (3)(B), subject to such expiration dates or other conditions that assure
that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending final plat application will be developed in a
timely fashion. In granting relief under this provision, the Council may require that development of such remaining
land is subject to standards enacted after initial approval of the expired prior plat.
(C) Deny the petition, if it finds that the petitioner has failed to meet any of the criteria in subsection (3)
(D) Reinstate the prior plat for only that part of the land subject to a pending final plat application, if it finds that
the petitioner has met the criteria in subsection (3)(B)(2) and the pending plat application subsequently was
approved, and deny the petition for the remaining land within the expired prior plat.
(Ordinance 2005-42, sec. 7, adopted 8/23/05)
SECTION 4.19 Conveyance Plat
1. A conveyance plat may be used to transfer ownership of a parcel or portion of a parcel of land in order to record the
transfer of ownership without requiring construction or design of public improvements or collection of development fees.
2. The property must have access to private or public street.
3. The conveyance plat shall contain a certification note on the plat face, as follows:
This Conveyance Plat shall not convey any rights to development or guarantee of public utilities, public or
private access, or issuance of addressing and permits, without compliance with all subdivision rules and
regulations and the approval and recording of a Final Plat.
4. A Conveyance Plat is filed for record in the county of jurisdiction upon administrative approval by the Planning Director.
5. The Conveyance Plat shall contain the following information also shown in Appendix A.
a) Title or name of development and graphic scale, north point, date of Plat and key map.
b) Location of the development by City, County and State.
c) Accurate boundary survey and property description with tract boundary lines indicated by heavy lines.
d) Accurate Plat dimensions with all surveying information necessary to reproduce the Plat on the ground.
e) Approved name and right-of-way width of each street, both within and adjacent to the development.
f) Locations, dimensions and purposes of any easements or other rights-of-way and all building lines.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/598
g) Identification of each lot or site and block by number or letter.
h) Record owners of contiguous parcels of unsubdivided land, names and lot patterns of contiguous
subdivisions within 200 feet of the proposed subdivision.
i) Boundary lines, dimensions and descriptions of open spaces to be dedicated for public use.
j) Designation of the entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of any commonly held property and a
waiver releasing the City of such responsibility.
k) Space for signatures attesting approval of the Plat by Planning Director and Planning Assistant, as shown in
Appendix B.
1) Seal and signature of the surveyor responsible for surveying the development and/or the preparation of the
Plat, as shown in Appendix B.
m) All deed restrictions that are to be filed with the Plat shall be shown on or filed separately with the Plat.
(Ordinance 2011-08, sec. 2, adopted 3/22/11)
ARTICLE V
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 5.10 Inspection
1. Except as provided in Subsection 3, below, no final plat shall be recorded and no building permit shall be issued for
construction on a lot located within a subdivision until construction of all public improvements required to be constructed
within the subdivision have been completed and accepted by the City.
2. All construction work, including but not limited to street grading, street paving, storm sewers, curb and/or gutter work,
sanitary sewers and water mains performed by the subdivider, developer, owner or contractor shall be:
a. subject to inspection by the proper authorities of the City; and
b. constructed in accordance with the standard specifications approved by the City and other applicable City
ordinances.
Notification must be made in accordance with City policies and procedures prior to City inspection of public
improvements under construction.
3. A Final Plat may be recorded prior to the completion and acceptance by the City of all public improvements required to
be constructed in association with the subdivision of land subject to the following:
(a) The owner and/or developer provide to the City an itemized list of the work remaining to be completed on
the required public improvements and the estimated time to complete such work;
(b) The City Engineer approves and agrees to the deadline for completion of the required public improvements
provided such deadline does not exceed six (6) months after the date the Final Plat is recorded unless a longer
period is approved by the City Council;
(c) The owner and/or developer provide to the City sufficient security to ensure completion of the required
public improvements in the form of either:
(1) A cash escrow; or
(2) A irrevocable letter of credit drawn upon a state or national bank in Ellis, Dallas, or Tarrant County with
a term sufficient to cover the completion period plus 60 days, and require only that the City present the
issuer with a sight draft and a certificate signed by an authorized representative of the City certifying to the
City's right to draw funds under the letter of credit based on the developer's failure to complete the required
public improvements by the agreed deadline; or
(3) A performance bond or surety bond for the same time period in a form approved by the City attorney
securing performance of the provisions of the development agreement by the developer.
Said security for completion of all public improvements shall be issued in the amount of 100 percent of the
funds estimated by the City Engineer to be necessary to pay for all required public improvements.
(d) The contractor(s) constructing the required public improvements provide(s) a performance bond and
payment bond naming the City as a co-obligee. Such performance and payment bonds shall be equal to the total
amount set forth in the contractor's contract.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/598
(e) The issuer and form of any payment and/or performance bond and/or letter of credit shall be subject to the
approval of the City Attorney. The performance and payment bonds must be executed by a corporate surety in
compliance with V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 2253, as amended.
4. The City Inspector or designated representative may issue red and green tags on inspected work. All “red tagged” work
must be corrected, re-inspected, and issued a green tag prior to proceeding with any associated work. Additionally, the City
inspector or designated representative shall have the authority to issue a stop work order on any construction work that is not
in accordance with City requirements. Failure to take corrective action may result in a fine [in] accordance with Article VII.
5. Notwithstanding the recording of the Final Plat prior to completion and acceptance of all required public improvements
associated with a subdivision, no building permit shall be granted for any lot unless and until the City Engineer determines
that the required public improvements are sufficiently complete to allow fully paved access by police, fire, and emergency
medical services, and the lot is being served by water, sanitary sewer, and electric utility services.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 5.11, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(C), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted
4/6/04; Ordinance 2016-43, sec. 1(B), adopted 11/8/16)
Editor's note–Ordinance 98-11, adopted 2/10/98, renumbered section 5.11 as 5.10.
SECTION 5.11 Street Lighting and Lighting Plan
Street lighting will be required in all subdivisions in accordance with City and local electric franchise provider requirements.
Streetlights shall be located such that they do not conflict with the placement and/or maintenance of utilities and shall remain
clear of sidewalks and handicap ramps. All electric utilities shall be placed underground when possible, as determined by the
City Engineer.
A street lighting layout plan shall be included as a part of the engineering plans and shall include the type of streetlights and
proposed locations in relation to easements, other utilities, sidewalks and handicap ramps. Street lighting to be maintained by
the City shall be of the type covered under local electric franchise provider requirements.
(Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(C), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
SECTION 5.12 Street Signs and Traffic-Control Devices
All street signs and traffic-control devices shall conform to the fundamental use and design requirements set forth in the
Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD).
1. The subdivider shall pay for the costs of purchasing and installing street posts and signs at each street
intersection. Street signs shall be comprised of 9-inch-tall blades with 6-inch-high letters. Posts and bases shall be
perforated square metal tubing.
2. The subdivider or developer shall pay for the costs of purchasing and installing posts and traffic signs along
each street and at each street intersection within the subdivision, which signs shall be of the same type as used
by the City. Posts and bases shall be perforated square metal tubing.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 5.12, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(C), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted
4/6/04)
SECTION 5.13 Perimeter Streets
Where the proposed subdivision is located adjacent to a substandard road or street within the City and it is deemed not
feasible to improve said road or street at the time of development of the subdivision, the subdivider or developer shall pay to
the City a fee equal to one-half (1/2) the cost of improvements required to meet City standards (including, but not limited to,
excavation, subgrade preparation, paving, drainage facilities, utility adjustments and engineering) and dedicate the
necessary right-of-way for said road or street as a condition precedent to the acceptance of the subdivision improvements by
the City for maintenance purposes. No building permits shall be issued until all fees have been paid. The estimate of the cost
of said improvement shall be determined by the City Engineer and made available to the subdivider. The fees shall be placed
by the City into a street improvement escrow fund, and shall be specifically reserved and used for the improvement of said
roads or street. When a thoroughfare is improved adjacent to the subdivision, there shall not be a curb and gutter
assessment levied by the City against the property for which the fee was collected. If the improvement to the road or street
does not occur within ten (10) years from the date the fee is placed on deposit with the City, the fee, including any interest
earned thereon, shall be returned to the property owners of record at that time. There shall be no refunds if the street is
constructed within the specified time. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 5.13, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(C), adopted
2/10/98)
SECTION 5.14 As-Built Plans / Record Drawings
Prior to the acceptance of a subdivision by the City, the engineer for the subdivider or developer shall submit to the City
Engineer a complete set of reproducible drawings of the paving, drainage, water and sewer improvements showing all
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/598
changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet an “As-Built” or “Record Drawings” stamp
bearing the signature of the engineer for the subdivider or developer and the date. In addition to the reproducible set, an
electronic file in .DXF, .DWG or .PDF format shall be furnished to the City on CD-ROM. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 5.14, adopted
7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(C), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
SECTION 5.15 Maintenance Bond
Prior to acceptance of a subdivision by the City, the subdivider or developer shall furnish a good and sufficient maintenance
bond in the amount of forty percent (40%) of the contract price with a reputable and solvent corporate surety, authorized to
do business in this State, in favor of the City, to indemnify the City against any repairs which many become necessary to any
part of the construction work performed in connection with the subdivision arising from defective workmanship or materials
used therein, for a full period of two (2) years from the date of final acceptance of the entire project.
In lieu of the above-referenced maintenance bond, the City will consider an irrevocable letter of credit, in a form approved by
the City Attorney, from a banking institution authorized to conduct business in the State of Texas.
A $100 fee to cover the City's review and possible approval of the letter of credit is required.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 5.15, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(C), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2001-39, sec. 1(1),
adopted 8/28/01; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
SECTION 5.16 Design and Field Changes
Any proposed design changes to the approved construction plans, based on field conditions or other circumstances, shall be
referred back to the professional engineer of record for redesign and submittal to the City Engineer's office for review and
approval. (Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
Editor's note–Former section 5.16, “Engineer's Certificate and Surveyor's Certificate,” which derived from Ordinance 88-14, adopted
7/26/88, and Ordinance 98-11, adopted 2/10/98, was deleted by Ordinance 2001-45, adopted 9/25/01. Ordinance 2004-17, adopted
4/6/04, added a new section 5.16 as set out above.
SECTION 5.17 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan and Erosion Control
A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) is required for all construction activities that disturb one (1) or more acres
by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). This plan shall show proposed measures to control pollutants in
stormwater discharge during and after construction operations. A section of the SWPPP shall contain an erosion control plan,
signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas. A notice of intent (N.O.I.) and a notice of
termination (N.O.T.) are required by TCEQ for all construction activities that disturb five (5) or more acres. A copy of the
N.O.I. shall be posted at the construction site prior to commencing construction and shall be maintained at a readily available
location until completion of the construction activities. The N.O.I. must be submitted and filed 48 hours prior to the start of
construction. The N.O.T. must be filed upon completion of construction.
The SWPPP shall be kept at the construction site for assessment by TCEQ inspectors at all times. The SWPPP shall be kept
up-to-date, and clearly indicate any and all changes made to the plan throughout construction. The TCEQ requires that
inspections of the stormwater pollution measures be done on a bi-weekly basis and within 24 hours of the end of a storm
event of 0.5 inches or greater. A record of all inspections shall be kept at the construction site. Erosion control measures
(curlex blanket, silt fence, etc.) must be placed behind the back of curb throughout construction. All ditches or swales that are
constructed shall be immediately hydromulched and maintained though the life of the maintenance bond period. Should any
pollution prevention measure fail, the failure shall be repaired immediately.
(Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
ARTICLE VI
SUBDIVISION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 6.11 Street Standards
Provisions shall be made in the subdivision, when appropriate, for the extension of major streets in accordance with the
Master Plan of the City of Midlothian. Collector streets shall be provided through residential and nonresidential subdivisions
bounded by arterial streets whereby adequate circulation of traffic flow is provided between the arterial streets and the
subdivisions. Adequate local streets shall be provided to accommodate traffic flow within the subdivision.
1. Where such is not shown in the Master Plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either:
a. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas,
or
b. Conform to a plan for a neighborhood, approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation
where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impractical.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/598
2. Boundary Streets: In cases where the land proposed to be subdivided is partially or totally bounded on one
or more sides by an existing street, way, or artery having width less than that specified in this Ordinance, the
subdivision shall be laid out so as to provide the street right-of-way width required.
A half-street along adjoining property which has not been subdivided may be approved; however, if it is
deemed necessary by the City that the full width of the street be obtained, then the developer of the
first tract to be subdivided may be required to obtain the additional or remaining right-of-way from the
adjacent tract, or dedicate sufficient right-of-way for the street paving and installation of utilities.
Boundary streets shall be improved as a part of the subdivision development.
3. Street Intersections: More than two (2) streets intersecting at a point shall be avoided.
Where several streets converge at one point, or acute intersection angles are present, setback lines,
special rounding or cutoff corners may be required to insure safety and facilitation of orderly traffic
movements.
For maximum traffic safety and ease of traffic operations, all street intersections should intersect at
ninety (90) degree angles.
No arterial street shall intersect any other arterial street at an angle that varies from a ninety (90)
degree angle of intersection by more than five (5) degrees.
An intersection of two collector streets shall not vary from a ninety (90) degree angle of intersection by
more than ten (10) degrees.
An intersection of local streets shall not vary from a ninety (90) degree angle of intersection by more
than fifteen (15) degrees.
Street intersections with arterial or collector streets shall have property line corner radii with a minimum
tangent distance of twenty-five (25) feet or a distance as determined by the City.
4. Dead-End Streets, Cul-de-Sacs and Courts: Dead-end streets shall not be approved unless:
a. Such streets are designed to connect with future streets in adjacent land not yet subdivided, in which
case the streets shall extend to the boundaries of the land being subdivided and a temporary turnaround
must be provided. Lots may not front on dead-end expansion streets.
b. Cul-de-Sacs, courts or places may be permitted where the form or contour of the land or the shape of
the property makes such street design appropriate. Such cul-de-sacs, courts or places shall provide proper
access to all lots and shall generally not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length from the centerline of the
intersection to the radius point and no more than 25 lots may be served by a cul-de-sac. A turnaround shall
be provided at the closed end which has a minimum right-of-way radius of sixty (60) feet, and an outside
roadway (pavement) radii of at least forty and one-half feet (40.5'), except that if an equally safe and
convenient form of paved space is approved by the Commission in place of a turning circle, such approved
space may be improved as agreed upon. Cul-de-sacs in industrial or commercial developments shall not
exceed a distance length of 600 feet and will have a right-of-way radius of 75 feet, and an outside roadway
(pavement) radii of sixty-five and one-half feet (65.5'), or other provisions as approved by the City.
c. The cul-de-sacs or courts are part of a Community Unit or Planned Development approved by the City
where such arrangements are part of the overall neighborhood design.
5. Relation of Adjoining Streets and Land: The system of streets designated for the subdivision, except in
unusual cases, must connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivisions, and where adjacent
connections are not platted, must, in general, be the reasonable projection of streets in the nearest subdivided
tracts, and must continue to the boundaries of the tract subdivided, so that other subdividers may connect
therewith. Reserve strips of land controlling access to or egress from other property, or to or from any street or
alley, or having the effect of restricting or damaging the adjoining property for subdivision purposes or which will
not be taxable or accessible for special improvements shall not be permitted in any subdivision.
6. Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Street jogs with
centerline offsets of less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) feet shall be prohibited unless otherwise approved
by the City Engineer.
7. Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed railroad or highway, the City may
require the developer to provide marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a
non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, landscaped berms, a noise
barrier fencing that is a solid masonry fence at least six (6) feet in height, or such other treatment as may be
deemed necessary by the Planning and Zoning Commission for adequate protection of residential properties and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/598
to afford separation of through and local traffic. Local street connections to arterial streets, highways or the
crossing of railroads shall be as few as practical and located opposite existing streets.
8. Curve Requirements (Other than Intersections): Arterial streets shall have a minimum radii at the centerline
of one thousand (1000) feet; collector streets shall have a minimum radii at the centerline of five hundred (500)
feet; and local streets and alleys shall have a minimum radii at the centerline of one hundred and fifty (150) feet.
9. Blocks: The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined regarding:
a. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use proposed.
b. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions.
c. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of traffic.
d. Limitations of topography.
Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks shall not exceed one thousand three hundred
twenty (1320) feet in length nor be less than six hundred (600) feet in length, except in certain
instances where topographical features warrant special consideration. These limits shall be exceeded
only upon specific approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Blocks longer than six hundred
(600) feet shall be avoided in business districts or as approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
10. Street Width and Paving Width
Table 6-1
Type
Design Speed
MPH
Street
Right-of-Way
Width (ft.)
No. Of Lanes
& Width (ft.)
Paving Width
(Back to Back
of Curb) (ft.)
Major Arterial 45 120 6 2 - 37
Minor Arterial 45 90 4 2 - 25
Major Collector 40 80 4 49
Minor Collector 35 60 or 70 3 or 4 37 or 45
Local Street 35 50 2 31
Local Street with > 1 acre
lots 35 50 2 28 (No Curb)
Figure 6-1. Design Controls for Vertical Curves
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/598
11. Street Grades: Arterial streets may have a maximum grade of six (6) percent for a maximum continuous distance of
two hundred (200) feet. Collector and local streets may have a maximum grade of eight (8) and ten (10) percent,
respectively. Streets located within areas that have general subsurface conditions meeting either the Group 1 or Group 2 soil
classification, as detailed in Section 6.16-2, must have a minimum grade of at least three-quarters (3/4) of one (1) percent. All
streets located in areas meeting the Group 3 soil classification. [sic] Centerline grade changes with an algebraic difference of
more than one (1) percent shall be connected with vertical curves to provide a minimum of four hundred (400) feet of
stopping sight distance on arterial streets; three hundred (300) feet of stopping sight distance on collector streets and one
hundred twenty-five (125) feet on local streets. All vertical curve lengths shall be established from Figure 6-1 for the various
design speeds with respect to algebraic differences in grade. Whenever a cross-slope is necessary or desirable from one
curb to the opposite curb, such cross-slopes shall not be less than one-eighth (1/8) inch in one (1) foot or more than one-half
(1/2) inch in one (1) foot. Variance from these criteria may be allowed upon findings of fact by the developer and upon
approval by the City Engineer.
12. Street Signs: Street name signs shall conform to Section 5.12.
13. Fire Hydrant Locators: Fire hydrant locators shall consist of four-inch by four-inch (4" x 4") blue reflector traffic buttons,
installed at the third point of paving and shall be installed opposite each fire hydrant on all streets.
14. Minimum Radius: Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer, the required radius for curb returns at intersections
shall be as follows:
Intersection
Classification
Min. Radius (ft.)
Arterial/Arterial 75
Arterial/Collector 75
Collector/Collector 50
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/598
Arterial/Local 35
Collector/Local 30
Local/Local 20
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.11, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2001-39, sec. 1(2),
adopted 8/28/01; Ordinance 2002-14, sec. 1(1), adopted 3/26/02; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
SECTION 6.12 Alleys
No alleys shall be permitted unless first approved by the City Council following receipt of a recommendation from the
Planning and Zoning Commission. If authorized, alleys shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following
minimum specifications:
1. The minimum width of an alley right-of-way shall be 20 feet in industrial and commercial areas and 15 feet in
residential areas. Alley turn-outs shall be paved to the property line, with a pavement width of at least 12 feet.
Paving radius shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet at intersections with all streets.
2. Alley intersections and sudden changes in alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, lot corners
shall be cut off at least 15 feet on each tangent to permit safe vehicular movement.
3. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround
facilities, as determined by the City.
4. All alleys shall be paved, and the paving shall be reinforced concrete conforming to Section 6.16 of this
Ordinance. Alley paving shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') wide in residential areas and sixteen feet (16')
wide in commercial and industrial areas.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.12, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2002-14, sec. 1(2),
adopted 3/26/02; Ordinance 2016-43, sec. 1(C), adopted 11/8/16)
SECTION 6.13 Easements
1. Easements across lots on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities when necessary and shall be at least 15 feet
wide, and as determined by City Engineer.
2. Where a subdivision is bounded by or contains a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided
a stormwater easement or drainage easement conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, or of such width to
provide for any future anticipated construction, plus 10 feet on each side.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.13, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98)
SECTION 6.14 Lots
1. All lots shall conform to the regulations as set forth in the City's Zoning Ordinance with the exception of lots located in
the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.
2. Corner lots in residential areas shall be wider than inside lots so as to allow an appropriate setback from both streets.
3. Each lot shall front onto a public street. Lots with street frontage at both front and rear shall be avoided when possible.
No driveway access shall be allowed to residentially zoned lots or to lots intended for residential uses to a Freeway, Highway,
Farm to Market Road, frontage or back roads serving a Highway, Major or Minor Arterials, and Major Collectors without the
prior approval of the City Council, following the review by and receipt of a recommendation made from the Planning & Zoning
Commission.
4. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines.
5. For subdivisions where sanitary sewer disposal is authorized to be provided by means of an on-site sewage facility
pursuant to Section 13.03 [Article 13.03] of the Code of Ordinances, as amended, such facility shall be designed, installed
and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws, orders, ordinances and regulations.
6. A lot or parcel served by an on-site sewage facility of any type must have an area of not less than one (1) acre located
outside of a designated floodplain; provided, however, if applicable state or county laws, orders, or regulations regulating onsite
sewage facilities require a minimum lot or parcel area larger than one (1) acre, in which case such other laws, orders, or
regulations shall control.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/598
7. Subdivisions containing forty (40) or more lots shall be designed to have more than one street for entry and exit and with
driveway access to interior streets only. Smaller subdivisions or individual lots with direct driveway access to arterial streets
must provide a minimum driveway spacing of 150 feet, and a minimum street spacing of 1,000 feet. All lots fronting on major
collectors or minor arterials shall be designed with sufficient turnaround room to prevent backing into high volume roads.
[8. Reserved]
9. A lot grading plan shall be submitted as a part of the construction plans. The plan shall be consistent with the drainage
area map and include proposed contours, spot elevations and flow arrows to clearly indicate where and how the flow from
each lot will be conveyed or intercepted. Type A, B or C drainage for each lot as described in HUD (FHA) Data Sheet 72, as
amended, shall be identified on the plan. Type 1 or 2 block grading shall be provided unless special provisions are made for
all Type 3 and 4 block grading and approved by the City Engineer.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.14, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2002-14, sec. 1(3),
adopted 3/26/02; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04; Ordinance 2016-43, sec. 1(D), adopted 11/8/16; Ordinance 2017-62
adopted 8/22/17)
SECTION 6.15 Survey
1. Accuracy: All survey work around the boundary area as well as within the subdivision shall have an error of closure of
one foot in fifteen thousand feet (1/15,000) or less.
2. The surveyor responsible for the Plat, shall place permanent monuments at each corner of the boundary survey of the
subdivision. These monuments shall be a concrete post, four (4) inches in diameter and four (4) feet long, or other such type
of monuments as shall be approved by the City. The precise point of intersection is to be indented on the top of the
monument. Block corners shall be referenced to these monuments and the bearing and distances of the reference lines filed
in written form with the City. Tops of monuments shall be set flush with existing ground level in non-paved areas. Elevations
and locations of monuments shall be shown on the Final Plat. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.15, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-
11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98)
SECTION 6.16 Improvement Standards and Requirements
1. Standard Specifications and Construction Details: All improvements shall be in accordance with these regulations and
the City of Midlothian Standard Construction Details, Sheets [sic] and as may be amended from time to time, and are added
to this ordinance a [as] Appendix E and are made a part hereof for all purposes as if fully copied herein, unless and until City
Council adopts a resolution or ordinance to adopt these Standard Specifications and Construction Details as a separate
regulatory document. (Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
Improvements not covered in the Standard Construction Details shall be in accordance with the Standard Specifications, as
issued by the North Central Texas Council of Governments (latest revision) 1997, hereinafter referred to as COG
specifications, and adopted and modified by the City of Midlothian, Texas. (Ordinance 2001-39, sec. 1(5), adopted 8/28/01)
2. Subgrade Stabilization: In the Midlothian area there are two geological formations, the Eagle Ford and the Austin Chalk.
The general subsurface soils conditions can be divided into the following groups:
Group 1: Highly plastic, expansive residual clay and shay clays of the Eagle Ford Geological Formation,
having plasticity indices ranging from approximately 40 to 48, and a raw California Bearing Ratio (CBR)
value ranging from 1 to 4. This group is generally located west of the ridge line running through town.
Group 2: Highly plastic expansive residual clays of the Austin Chalk Geological Formation, having plasticity
indices ranging from approximately 33 to 45 and a raw CBR value ranging from 2 to 5. This group is
generally located east of the ridge line running through town.
Group 3: Low to moderately plastic limey clays and severely weathered limestones of the Austin Chalk
Geological Formation, having plasticity indices ranging from approximately 10 to 22 and a raw CBR value
ranging from 6 to 10. This group is generally located along the ridge line.
If requested, the developer shall furnish the results of soils tests performed by an approved independent soils laboratory and
a pavement analysis design performed by the developer's engineer under specific loading conditions.
Soil samples to determine the Plasticity Index (PI) of the soil at the ultimate level of the pavement base course, shall be taken
at least once per block or every 500', whichever is less, with a minimum of two (2) samples per project.
Should the PI vary considerably from one sample to another, additional samples will be taken as determined by the City.
Soil stabilization under concrete pavements will not be required if the PI of the soil is 15 or less, or as approved by the City
Engineer.
If the P1 exceeds 15, soil stabilization to a depth of at least eight (8) inches will be required utilizing eight (8) percent by
weight of lime.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/598
If the PI exceeds 20, soil stabilization to a depth of at least eight (8) inches will be required utilizing either eight (8) percent by
weight of Portland Cement or eight (8) percent by weight of lime.
3. Paving
a. Concrete Strength Requirements:
1. Concrete Curb and Gutter: Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed of a concrete batch design,
having not less than 3600 psi compressive strength in 28 days, and shall be reinforced with #4 steel rebars.
2. Reinforced Concrete Pavement and Monolithic Curb: Concrete pavement and monolithic Curb properly
and continuously reinforced shall be constructed of a concrete batch design providing no less than 3600 psi
compressive strength in 28 days.
b. Pavement Thickness Requirements: All streets shall be designed and constructed with adequate thickness.
Pavement shall be reinforced concrete having not less than 3600 psi compressive strength in 28 days.
Reinforcing shall consist of #4 steel rebars on twenty-four (24) inch centers both ways and in accordance with the
City of Midlothian Standard Construction Details. Concrete compressive strength tests shall be performed by an
accredited testing lab as approved by the City Engineer. Table 6-2 indicates the pavement thickness requirements
for each street classification and each soil group.
Table 6-2. Design Pavement Thickness
Street Classification Pavement Thickness
Local Street with > 1 acre lots 6"
Local Street 6"
Minor Collector 7"
Major Collector 8"
Minor Arterial 8"
Major Arterial 8"
The above pavement thickness and subbase stabilization will be acceptable without performing design
calculations. Any proposed pavement section of lesser thickness or alternate materials or subbase
stabilization shall be fully documented by the design engineer and must be approved by the City
Engineer.
c. Concrete Curb And Gutter: All pavement sections shall include concrete integral or attached curbs, with
strength requirements listed in Section 6.16.3.a, and constructed in accordance with standard City of Midlothian
construction specifications.
d. Bar Ditches
1. Curbs are not required on single-family residential lots one (1) acre or greater in size. However, if any
lots within the overall subdivision are less than one (1) acre in size, then curb and gutter shall be required
throughout the entire subdivision.
2. When curbs are not constructed within the single-family residential subdivision, in accordance with
Section 6.16.3.d.1, the following shall apply:
a) Bar ditches shall be placed within the parkway area with a maximum slope of 4:1 and maximum
depth of twenty-four inches (24"), unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/598
b) After ditches are shaped, they shall be immediately hydromulched and maintained through the life
of the one-year maintenance bond period.
c) All driveways shall include reinforced concrete culvert pipe, type III, with concrete headwalls and
sloped-end treatment. All sizing and construction shall be in accordance with City of Midlothian
Standard Construction Details, and as directed by the City Engineer.
e. Paving Standards for Residential Parking, Loading, Drives, Vehicles, Sidewalks and Storage Areas Outside
of the Right-of-Way
1. Except as provided in Subparagraph 2 of this Paragraph e, all required off-street parking, loading,
drives, vehicle, sidewalk and/or storage areas outside of the right-of-way shall be paved with four (4) inches
of concrete, minimum 3000 psi with #3 rebar laid 18 inches on center each way or #4 rebar laid 24 inches on
center each way. No wire mesh shall be permitted in constructing the concrete areas described in the
Paragraph e.
2. If the distance from the public right-of-way to the main dwelling unit located on the Property is greater
than one hundred feet (100'); the City Engineer may approve an alternative driveway and parking area
surface in lieu of concrete subject to compliance with all of the following conditions:
a. A concrete approach complying with the requirements of subparagraph 1 of this paragraph is
constructed from the street toward the main dwelling unit for a distance of not less than the longer of (i)
25 feet commencing at the edge of the existing paved street adjacent to the property and (ii) the
distance from the edge of the existing paved street adjacent to the property to the boundary of the
existing street right-of-way;
b. A concrete parking area not less than 25 feet wide and extending not less than 20 feet from the
exterior wall of the main dwelling structure where the garage doors are located shall be constructed
adjacent to the garage entryway(s);
c. The plans and specifications for the alternative drive surface must be designed and sealed by a
professional engineer and certified to be an all-weather surface that will support vehicles with a gross
weight of up to 90,000 pounds and shall be subject to final review and approval of the City Engineer
prior to issuance of a building permit for the dwelling unit to be constructed on the property; and
d. No certificate of occupancy or approval of a final inspection for the dwelling unit constructed on
the property shall be granted until the City Engineering and Building Department has inspected the
alternative drive surface and determined that such surface has been constructed in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications.
3. Driveway approaches for all lots to be developed with single-family residential structures shall be not
less than twelve feet (12') wide with a radius of not less than ten feet (10').
4. Sidewalks
a. Concrete sidewalks having a width of not less than four (4) feet and thickness of not less than four (4) inches
shall be constructed of 3,000 psi concrete with #3 steel rebars on eighteen (18) inch centers, both ways and in
accordance with standard City of Midlothian construction specifications. Sidewalks shall be located on both sides
of all streets and thoroughfares within a single-family, multifamily, commercial or industrial subdivision. Sidewalks
shall be constructed one (1) foot from the property lines within the street right-of-way and shall extend along the
street frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends. Construction of sidewalks adjacent to curbs in
residential areas will be considered only where driveway entrances are constructed from the rear of lots on each
side of the street for the full length of the block. In these instances, the sidewalk shall be 5 feet wide.
b. Sidewalks shall be constructed in a manner that meets the American Disability Act (ADA) requirements for
handicap accessibility at street intersections and adjoining individual driveways. Sidewalks shall be constructed
without any encroachments of utility poles, trees, mailboxes, etc.
c. Sidewalks are not required on single-family residential lots one (1) acre or greater in size. If any lots within
the overall subdivision are less than one (1) acre in size, then sidewalks shall be constructed throughout the entire
subdivision.
d. Concrete compressive strength tests shall be performed by an accredited testing lab as approved by the City
Engineer.
5. Storm Sewers
a. General: The design of storm drainage improvements in the City of Midlothian shall be based on flood
discharges determined from the Modified Rational Formula. The formula for calculating storm flows in this manner
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/598
is:
Q = CACIA, where
Q is the storm flow at a given point;
C is a coefficient of runoff representing the ratio of runoff to rainfall. Coefficient values to be used are
listed below in Section 6.16, 5(b).
I is the average intensity of rainfall for a period equal to the time of flow from the farthest point of the
drainage area to the first inlet point on the storm sewer;
A is the area tributary to the design point;
CA is the antecedent precipitation factor, values to be used in this formula are shown in Table 6-3.
Table 6-3. Antecedent Precipitation Factor “CA”
Recurrence Interval
(Years) CA
2 to 10 1.0
25 1.1
50 1.2
100 1.25
NOTE: The product of (C)(CA) should not exceed 1.0
b. Runoff Coefficient: The runoff coefficient which considers the slope of the terrain, the character of the land
use, the length of overland flow, and the imperviousness of the drainage area shall be determined from the
ultimate land development as shown on the Master Plan of the City of Midlothian. The runoff coefficient for the
appropriate land uses shall be as follows:
Commercial Areas 0.95
Industrial Areas 0.75
Residential Areas 0.50
Apartment Areas 0.80
Park Areas 0.40
c. Rainfall Intensity-Frequency: The rainfall intensity-frequency curves which are shown on Plate 1 are plotted
from data by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Technical Memorandum NWS Hydro-35, and
Technical Paper 40.
The intensity, I, in the formula Q = CACIA is determined from these curves by arriving at a time of
concentration and adapting a storm frequency upon which to base the drainage improvements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/598
1) Time of Concentration: The time of concentration, which is the longest time that will be required for a
drop of water to flow from the furthest point of the drainage area to the point of concentration. Time of
concentration consists of the time required to flow overland plus the time required to flow in the storm
drainage facility. A minimum time of concentration of twenty (20) minutes shall be used for parks and open
spaces. A minimum time of concentration of fifteen (15) minutes shall be used for residential areas. A
minimum time of concentration of ten (10) minutes shall be used in industrial, commercial and mercantile
areas. A nomograph, shown on Plate 2, is attached for estimating the time of concentration.
PLATE NO. 1
PLATE NO. 2
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/598
2) Storm Frequency: Recommended design storm frequencies for the storm drainage improvements in
the City of Midlothian are shown in Table 6-4 as follows:
Table 6-4
Type of Facility Description of Area to be
Drained
Recommended
Maximum Time of
Concentration
(minutes)
Recommended
Design Frequency
(years)
Storm sewers with inlets on
grade and recessed
Residential 30 10
Storm sewers draining low
point inlets
Any type of area 30 25
Culverts, Bridges, Channels
and Creeks
Any type of area less than
100 acres
30 25
Culverts, Bridges, Channels
and Creeks
Any type of area greater than
100 acres but less than 1,000
acres
45 50
Culverts, Bridges, Channels
and Creeks
Any type of area greater than
1,000 acres
60 50
In connection with the design of facilities such as Low Point Inlets, Culverts, Bridges, Channels and
Creeks shown in Table 6-4, the discharge for a 100-year return frequency storm and the resulting
possible damages therefrom shall be evaluated to determine if said damages are sufficient to warrant
the enlargement of the planned facility. In any areas where stormwater runoff concentrates at low
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/598
points of grade or where discharge in excess of the design discharge flows across private property, the
following information shall be shown:
a) The 100-year design discharge.
b) The depth of inundation of this discharge.
c) An evaluation of the possible damages resulting from the above information.
d) Area: The area used in determining flows by the “Modified Rational Formula” shall be calculated
by subdividing a map into drainage areas within the basin contributing stormwater runoff to the system.
e) Spread of Water: During the design storm, the quantity of stormwater that is allowed to collect in
the streets before being intercepted by a storm drainage system is referred to as the “spread of water.”
In determining the limitations for carrying stormwater in the street, the ultimate development of the
street shall be considered. The use of the street for carrying stormwater shall be limited to the
following.
SPREAD OF WATER
Arterials - One traffic lane on each side to remain clear
Major Collectors - Two traffic lanes to remain clear
Minor Collectors - One traffic lane to remain clear
Local streets - Six (6) inch depth of flow at curb or no lanes completely clear
The capacity of straight crown streets can be determined from Plate 3. This plate applies to
all street widths having a straight cross-slope varying from 1/8 inch per foot to 1/2 inch per
foot. 1/4-inch [per] foot cross-slopes shall be used unless prior approval is granted by the
City.
Arterial or collector streets shall not be crossed with surface drainage. At any intersection,
only one street shall be crossed with surface drainage and this shall be the lower classified
street.
f) Storm Sewer Design: Stormwater in excess of that allowed to collect in the streets shall be
intercepted in inlets and carried away in a storm sewer system. Storm sewer capacity shall be
calculated by Manning's formula:
Q = 1.486/n AR 2/3S 1/2 where
Q is the discharge in cubic feet per second;
A is the cross-sectional area of flow in square feet;
R is the hydraulic radius in feet;
S is the slope of the hydraulic gradient in feet per foot;
n is the coefficient of roughness (n = .013 for new concrete pipe)
A storm drainage conduit must have sufficient capacity to discharge a design storm with a
minimum of interruption and inconvenience to the public using streets and thoroughfares.
The size of the conduit is determined by accumulating runoff from contributing inlets and
calculating the slope of a hydraulic gradient from Manning's Equation.
To determine the capacity of specific inlets, Plates 4 through 7 shall be used. In using the
plates for the selection of inlet sizes, care must be taken where the gutter flow exceeds the
capacity of the largest available inlet size. Inlets shall be sized to intercept all flow in the
approaching gutter, for the design storm, where possible.
Beginning at the uppermost inlet on the system, the hydraulic gradient for the selected
conduit size shall be plotted between each contributing inlet to insure that the selected
conduit will carry the design flow at an elevation below the gutter profile. At each point
where an inlet lateral enters the main conduit, the hydraulic gradient of the storm sewer
must be 1.5 feet below the gutter grade.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/598
At the discharge end of the conduit (generally a creek or stream) the hydraulic gradient of
the creek for the design storm must coincide with the gradient of the storm drainage
conduit. The hydraulic gradient of the creek or stream for the design storm can be
calculated by use of the HEC-2 Computer Program.
Concrete pipe conduit shall be used to carry the stormwater. Manning's Equation shall be
used to determine the various hydraulic elements including the pipe size, the hydraulic
gradient, capacity of the conduit and the velocity.
Storm sewer pipe sizes shall be so selected that the average velocity in the pipe will not
exceed fifteen (15) feet per second nor less than two and one-half (2.5) feet per second.
Storm sewer systems shall be installed in all areas when either of the following apply:
1. The runoff can be carried in a pipe of sixty inches (60") in diameter or smaller; or
2. where it is necessary for the protection of adjacent facilities that the stormwater be carried in
an enclosed facility.
PLATE NO. 3
PLATE NO. 4
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/598
PLATE NO. 5
PLATE NO. 6
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/598
PLATE NO. 7
g) Open Channel Design: Stormwater runoff in excess of that allowed to collect in the streets in
developed areas and runoff in undeveloped areas may be carried in open channels (not in the street
right-of-way). Open Channel capacity shall be calculated by Manning's Formula and roughness
coefficients shall be as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/598
Type of Lining Roughness Coefficient “n” Maximum Permissible
Mean Velocity
Earth (Bermuda Grass) 0.035 8 ft. per sec.
Concrete Lined 0.015 15 ft. per sec.
Weathered Rock 0.030 15 ft. per sec.
Open channels shall be constructed with a trapezoidal cross-section and shall have side
slopes no steeper than 4:1.
Should it be necessary to construct a channel with side slopes steeper than 4:1, security
fencing of a minimum of six feet (6') in height shall be constructed on both sides of the
channel.
Reinforced concrete lined channels shall conform to the following:
1. Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor of 250 or less shall be lined with reinforced
concrete in a manner which will contain the design frequency storm plus one foot (1') of freeboard
within the concrete lining.
2. Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor of more than 250 but less than 500 shall be
concrete lined to contain the runoff from a five (5) year return frequency storm with the balance of
the required design frequency storm contained within grassed slopes no steeper than three (3)
horizontal to one (1) vertical and with a minimum of one foot (1') freeboard.
3. Channels draining an area with a “CA” factor of more than 500 but less than 2,000 shall be
constructed with a reinforced concrete pilot channel not less than twelve feet (12') in width and
having at least six-inch (6") curbs, a four-inch (4") depressed invert, and an appropriate edge
protection as accepted by the City Engineer. The remainder of the channel shall consist of
earthen side slopes with proper vegetative cover on slopes not steeper than 3 to one.
Natural channels may be preserved when draining an area having a “CA” factor of more
than 2,000 or when the developer desires to preserve natural channels within his addition
for purposes of aesthetics and/or open space. The following criteria shall apply when
natural channels are to be preserved:
1. An application for preservation of a natural channel shall be submitted to and approved by
the City prior to approval of the preliminary plat. This application shall contain the following
information furnished by the developer's engineer.
a) Topographic, hydrologic and hydraulic information sufficient to properly evaluate the
proposal and showing that: (i) before any site work has begun, all land having an elevation
below the fifty (50) year return frequency flood elevation is contained within an easement
dedicated to the public for the purpose of providing drainage; (ii) the channel easement has
a minimum hydraulic capacity to accommodate a fifty (50) year return frequency storm
based on a fully developed watershed; (iii) that all minor channel improvements, such as
reshaping, realignment, etc., are protected with sodding, backsloping, cribbing, or other
bank protection that is designed and constructed to control erosion from the fifty (50) year
return frequency flood. An analysis shall also be made to determine the effects of the 100-
year flood.
b) When the natural channel to be preserved is one which has had Floodplain
Information developed the floodplain boundary limits of the 100-year return frequency storm
shall be as shown.
The subdivider shall dedicate a right-of-way on all open channels of sufficient width to
provide for excavation of the open channels of proper width, plus 10 feet on each side to
permit ingress and egress for maintenance.
h) Culvert Design: At locations of creek crossings with proposed roadway improvements, it is
sometimes necessary to receive and transport stormwater under the roadway in culverts. The quantity
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/598
of flow shall be determined by the Modified Rational Formula, and the capacity of the culvert shall be
calculated by Manning's Formula.
Design of culverts shall include the determination of upstream backwater conditions as well
as downstream velocities and flooding conditions. Consideration shall be given to the
discharge velocity from culverts, and the following limitations are allowed.
CULVERT DISCHARGE - VELOCITY LIMITATIONS
Culvert Discharging on to Maximum Allowable Velocity
(f.p.s.)
Earth (Bermuda Grass) 8
Paved or riprap apron 15
Shale 10
Rock 15
Generally, all culverts shall be designed with a free outfall and the following head losses
shall govern the design of the culvert:
1. Frictional Head Loss hf = sfL
hf = sfl where
sf = Slope of frictional gradient in feet per foot
L = Length of culvert in feet
2. Head Loss due to change in velocity
hv = v2
2/2g – v1
2/2g where
v2 = Velocity in culvert;
v1 = Velocity in channel above culvert;
g = Acceleration due to gravity
3. Head Loss at upstream entrance to culvert due to entrance and change in section
he/2g = v2
2 where v1 is equal to or less than six (6) feet per second
he = v2
2/2g – 0.5 v12/2g where v1 is greater than six (6) feet per second
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.16, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2001-39, sec. 1(5)–
(10), adopted 8/28/01; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04; Ordinance 2017-15 adopted 3/28/17)
SECTION 6.17 Water System
1. General: The design and construction of the water distribution system to serve the development shall be in accordance
with good engineering principles, with the Rules and Regulations for Public Water System as published by the Texas
Department of Health (TDH), with the requirements of the State Board of Insurance and the City of Midlothian's standards.
No construction shall commence prior to the approval of the plans and specifications by the City Engineer and the
appropriate state regulatory agency (when applicable).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/598
All facilities shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate capacity for ultimate development and in accordance with the City's
Water Master Plan. Pipelines shall be sized to meet the domestic requirements plus an appropriate allowance for fire
protection. The developer shall cause a hydraulic analysis to be performed on the development to ensure that minimum fire
flow requirements will be met, unless this requirement is waived by the City Engineer and the City Fire Chief based on the
availability of pertinent engineering-based data. For a residential subdivision, in addition to normal usage the minimum fire
flow requirement is 1,000 gallons per minute at a residual pressure of 20 psi for a minimum duration of 60 minutes.
Nonresidential developments shall meet the minimum requirements imposed by the current edition of the Fire Code for the
City of Midlothian. The City reserves the right to require larger pipelines than those required for the proposed development.
The design criteria for water demand shall be submitted to the City with the plans and specifications. (Ordinance 2004-17
adopted 4/6/04)
If the proposed subdivision is located beyond the area presently being served by the water distribution system, the developer
shall be required to provide the off-site improvements necessary to transport water to the area being developed. Individual
water wells for the lots will not be considered an acceptable method of serving the development.
2. Line Size: The minimum pipeline size to serve residential areas shall be six (6") inches in diameter and the minimum
pipeline size serving commercial, business, industrial, and multifamily shall be eight (8") inches. All water lines shall be
looped with no dead-ends, unless otherwise approved by City Engineer. Dead-end lines shall be provided with a flush valve
or fire hydrant at the end. Dead-end lines shall not exceed 1000 feet in length without prior approval of the City Engineer.
Pipelines shall be sized to provide sufficient supply for fire flows in accordance with the minimum criteria of the State Board
of Insurance and other governing authorities.
3. Pipe Material: Water pipelines shall be ductile iron (polywrapped), polyvinyl chloride (PVC) C-900, C-905, C-909 or
concrete steel cylinder. In general, all water pipelines shall be minimum Class 150. Class 200 shall be used when pressure
exceeds 125 psi. Ductile iron pipe shall be a minimum Class 50 with a cement mortar liner. All pipe shall be new and
approved by the Underwriters' Laboratory and shall be acceptable to the Texas State Fire Insurance Commission for use in
water distribution systems without penalty. PVC water pipe shall also bear the seal representing class of pipe.
4. Fittings: All fittings shall be cast iron or ductile iron (polywrapped) and shall comply with American Water Works
Association Standard Specification (AWWA) C110 or (AWWA) C111. Below grade fittings shall be either mechanical joint,
push-on joint or flanged joints. Adequate thrust blocking shall be provided at all fittings. Above grade fittings shall be flanged
joints. Concrete steel cylinder pipe fittings shall be of the same material as the pipe.
5. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be located at each street intersection and at intervals on the interior of each block.
Spacing of fire hydrants in single-family residential areas shall not be over 400 feet apart along the street. Spacing of fire
hydrants in the commercial, industrial or high density residential areas shall not be over 300 feet apart along the street. In all
cases, the fire hydrant shall be within 500 feet of any portion of a building. If special conditions exist, the Fire Chief may
require additional hydrants for fire protection.
All fire hydrants shall be installed with a minimum six (6) inch lead off a minimum six (6) inch main. There shall be a gate
valve installed between the main and hydrant. Fire hydrants shall be located between three (3) and five (5) feet back of the
curb, or if in a subdivision not requiring curbs, within 3-5 feet of right-of-way abutting property.
All fire hydrants shall be three-way feed with one pumper nozzle of 4.5 inches and two hose nozzles of 2.5 inches (NST
threads). The operating nut shall be a 1-1/2 inch pentagonal and shall open by turning to the left/counterclockwise.
Fire hydrants shall be painted to meet the City's requirement for color code. In general, the fire hydrant will have a bright
silver base (preferably “flynt aluminum”) with differing bonnet and cap color which corresponds to the main size it is located
on as shown in the table.
Fire Hydrant Color Code
Main Size Color of Bonnet and Cap
Private (All Sizes) Red
6 inch Silver
8 inch Green
12 inch or larger Blue
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/598
6. Gate Valves: All gate valves shall be resilient seat gate valves. All gate valves sixteen (16) inches and larger shall be
furnished with bypass valves. Valves shall open by turning counterclockwise and shall have a 2-inch operating nut.
Gate valves shall be located at intersections to allow the isolation of lines for repairs. Valves shall be placed so that not more
than 50 lots will be out of service while a line is shut down for repair. All valves shall be installed in the vertical position with a
valve box and cover centered over the stem. A two (2) foot square and six (6) inches thick concrete pad shall be constructed
around the top of the valve box.
7. Testing and Sterilization: All water pipelines shall be hydrostatically tested in accordance with the City's standard
specifications. The test shall include service lines, fire hydrants, flush valves, etc. and all testing shall be accomplished in the
presence of a representative of the City of Midlothian. The developer shall be responsible for all expenses required to
hydrostatically test the pipelines.
All facilities shall be flushed and sterilized. The developer will be required to submit samples to an approved laboratory for
certification as being free of bacteria. A sample is required for each 1000 feet of main. The developer shall be responsible for
sterilization and resterilization as necessary and all expenses associated with the sterilization. This shall be performed in the
presence of a representative of the City Engineer.
8. Location and Installation: All water mains shall be located under paving five feet from back of curb on the north/east side
of the street. Installation shall be at the line and grade as shown on the plans. The mains shall have a minimum of 42 inches
of cover in open areas. Water lines under existing streets and proposed streets shall have a minimum cover of 42 inches
from the finish grade. Special attention shall be given to water lines in unimproved streets in order to provide for the future
grading of those streets.
Water lines shall be embedded and backfilled as required by the City's standard construction details. For trenches located in
streets, the backfill shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% Standard Proctor Density. Jetting will not be allowed.
All bends, fittings, etc. shall have 2,000 psi concrete thrust blocking provided.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.17, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 99-11 adopted
2/23/99; Ordinance 2001-39, sec. 1(11)–(15), adopted 8/28/01; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
SECTION 6.18 Sewer System
1. General: The design and construction of the sewer collection system to serve the development shall be in accordance
with good engineering principles, with the Design Criteria for Sewerage Systems as published by the Texas Department of
Health (TDH) and with the City of Midlothian's standards. No construction shall commence prior to the approval of the plans
and specifications by the City Engineer and the appropriate State Regulatory agency.
All facilities shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate capacity for ultimate development. Sewer lines shall be sized to
meet the peak-day dry-weather flow plus an appropriate allowance for inflow/infiltration. The minimum sewer pipeline size
shall be six (6") inches in diameter. The City reserves the right to require a pipeline of a larger size than that required by the
development. The design criteria and calculations shall be submitted to the City Engineer with the plans and specifications.
If the proposed subdivision is located beyond the drainage area presently being served by the sewage collection system, the
developer shall be required to provide the off-site and on-site improvements necessary to transport the sewage from the area
being developed. Any lift station, force main and/or gravity sewer pipe improvements required as a result of the proposed
development shall be the developer's responsibility. Septic type systems will be considered in accordance with current city
ordinances and Ellis County regulations.
2. Pipe Size and Grades: The minimum line size shall be six inches (6") in diameter. Sanitary sewer lines shall be
designed to have a minimum mean velocity flowing full of 2.5 feet per second (fps). The minimum slope of the sewer lines
shall conform to the minimums recommend[ed] by the TDH and maximum velocity shall not exceed 10 fps.
3. Pipe Material: Sanitary sewer pipe shall be polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC-SDR 35), in accordance with the City's standard
specifications.
All pipe shall be new and approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. and the PVC pipe shall be colored green and bear
the seal representing class of pipe.
4. Manholes: Manholes shall be located at all intersections of sewer pipelines, changes in grade, changes in alignment
and at distances not to exceed 500 feet. Manholes shall be constructed of precast reinforced concrete pipe or cast-in-place
concrete. Brick manholes will not be allowed. Where PVC pipe enters manholes, a resilient pipe to manhole connector or
gasket shall be used to provide a watertight connection.
All manholes shall have 24-inch standard manhole rings and covers. All covers shall have pick bars and should be stamped
CITY OF MIDLOTHIAN SANITARY SEWER per the Standard Construction Details. Watertight rings and covers shall be
furnished in areas located within the 100-year floodplain, or as directed by the City Engineer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/598
5. Drop Manhole: Drop manholes shall be used at locations where the elevation of the incoming sewer line is 2.0 feet or
greater from the elevation of the outgoing line. Construction shall be the same as the standard manhole. The drop piping
shall be PVC-SDR 35 pipe.
6. Cleanouts: Cleanouts shall be constructed at the upper end of all sewer mains. Cleanouts shall be constructed of the
same material and same size as the sewer main. The top shall have a cast iron boot with cover. A two-foot square by 6-inch
thick, 2,000 psi concrete pad shall be placed around this boot.
7. Force Main: Force main materials and installation shall be in accordance with Section 6.15 [6.17], Water System, and as
directed by the City Engineer and a Regulatory Agency (when applicable).
8. Lift Stations: Lift stations shall be designed in accordance with the criteria of the Texas Department of Health. Design
data will be submitted and approved on a case-by-case basis by the City Engineer.
9. Testing: All sewer pipe shall have deflection tests performed on them. This test shall be conducted after the final backfill
has been in place at least 30 days. No pipe shall exceed a deflection of 5 percent. Test shall be performed using a “go - no
go” mandrel.
All sewer lines shall be tested for infiltration/exfiltration. The preferred method of testing the pipe would be by using the “Low-
Pressure Air Test” in accordance with City of Midlothian Standard Construction Details. All testing shall be conducted in the
presence of a representative of the City Engineer. All expenses for this work shall be the developer's responsibility.
10. Location and Installation: All sewer mains in local streets shall be constructed at the centerline of the street. In collector
and arterial streets, the sewer line shall be located a minimum of three (3) feet back of curb or as directed by the City
Engineer. Sewer mains shall be constructed to the line and grade as shown on the plans. Horizontal curves shall not be
accomplished by mechanical means and shall be achieved by pipe flexure and not joint deflection. The minimum radius for
PVC sewer pipe shall be determined using the following Formula:
R = 300 x D
Where
R = minimum allowable radius of curvature
D = pipe diameter
(R and D are in same dimensional units)
Manholes shall be located at lot lines whenever possible. Manholes are not to be located in the bottom of bar ditches or in
drive approaches.
Sewer lines shall be embedded and backfilled as required by the City's standard construction details. For trenches located in
streets, the backfill shall be compacted to a minimum of 95% Standard Proctor Density. Jetting will not be allowed.
11. Adequate Sanitary Sewer Capacity
a. No subdivision shall be finally approved unless assurances have been provided by the subdivider that the
subdivision will be served by adequate collection and treatment facilities for sanitary sewage disposal.
b. The capacity of the existing or planned collection mains and treatment facilities to serve the subdivision shall
be adequate to accommodate expected sanitary sewage flows generated by the development under engineering
design standards specified by the City Engineer, taking into account existing and future connections to the
collection mains and treatment facilities to which the lots in the subdivision are to be connected.
12. Determination of Capacity of Sewer Facilities.
a. Carrying capacity determination. The City Engineer, using accepted engineer standards and practices, shall
determine the carrying capacity of each sanitary sewer line operated by or in behalf of the City. Capacities shall be
determined for each segment of a sewer collection line, and each collection facility appurtenant to such line, such
as a lift station that potentially and separately limits the potential of a segment of the collection facility of which it is
a part.
b. Reserved capacity. The City Engineer, using accepted engineer standards and practices, shall determine the
initial reserved capacity of each facility for which carrying capacity has been determined in section a. Reserved
capacity for a given facility shall be determined initially by estimating the consumption of capacity attributable to
existing connections and future connections attributable to development of lots in approved final plats. The City
Engineer shall regularly update reserved capacity based upon approval of developments, as provided in section d.
c. Potential consumption of capacity. The City Engineer, using accepted engineer standards and practices,
shall determine the initial potential consumption of capacity of each facility for which carrying capacity has been
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/598
determined in subsection a. Potential consumption of capacity for such facility shall be determined initially by
adding to the reserved capacity of the facility the estimated additional consumption of capacity attributable to
development of lots in approved preliminary plats for which no final plat has been approved. The City Engineer
shall regularly update potential consumption of capacity based upon approval of developments, as provided in
subsection d.
d. Capacity update. The City Planning Director shall convey information to the City Engineer concerning the
land uses and number of lots for each proposed or approved final and preliminary plat. The City Engineer shall
regularly update his estimates of reserved capacity and potential consumption of capacity utilizing such
information.
e. Overcapacity determination. If the City Engineer upon his initial determination of carrying capacity, reserved
capacity and potential consumption of capacity finds that one or more sanitary sewer mains has reached potential
overcapacity, or actual overcapacity or 85% of carrying capacity, as described in subsections 15 and 16, he shall
report such fact to the City Manager, who shall institute public notification. Thereafter, the procedures in
subsections 15 or 16, as the case may be, shall govern the review of subdivision plats.
13. Reservation of Capacity.
a. Reserved status. Except as provided in this section, approval of a final plat by the City Planning and Zoning
Commission constitutes the City's determination that capacity in the sewer lines serving the subdivision is
reserved, so that each lot subject to the final plat may be connected to the City's sewer lines; provided, however,
that impact fees shall be paid at the time of such final plat approval pursuant to subsection d. Each lot in a final
plat which has been approved for connection to a sewer facility with remaining capacity by the Commission shall
be deemed to have reserved status in the City's sewer facilities serving the lot. Each lot within a final plat that was
approved prior to the effective date of this section shall be deemed to have reserved status.
b. Designation of status. In the event a final plat application proposes development that, if connected to the
City's sewer lines, would result in the overcapacity of such facility or facilities, the Commission's approval of the
final plat shall be subject to a notation that capacity in affected sewer facilities is not reserved for all or a portion of
the lots in the plat. In such event, a plat note shall be attached indicating which lots subject to the final plat do not
have reserved status. Such lots shall be deemed to have non-reserved status.
c. Connections prohibited. In no event shall any lot or land use be connected to a sewer line that is
overcapacity, nor shall connection be made to any lot that is subject to a plat note or other designation of nonreserved
status, unless unreserved capacity remains in the line or lines to which connection is proposed.
d. Payment of impact fees. No lot finally platted after the effective date of this ordinance shall acquire reserved
status nor shall any finally platted lot be connected to the affected sewer facility until impact fees have been paid
for such lot. An owner seeking reserved status for a proposed subdivision after the effective date of this ordinance
shall execute an agreement for payment of impact fees at the time of final plat approval.
14. Capacity Documentation.
a. Factors for calculation. In calculating the carrying capacity, potential overcapacity or overcapacity of a sewer
facility, the City Engineer shall take into account (1) the size and slope of gravity mains, (2) the size of force
mains, (3) the pump capacity and (4) the size of wet wells.
b. Identification of facilities and area affected. In making any determination concerning the capacity or
overcapacity of a sewer facility, the City Engineer shall identify with particularity the line, line segment or facility
affected, and shall outline the property potentially served by such facility.
c. Conventions. In making a declaration of potential overcapacity or overcapacity of a sewer line or
transmission facility, the City Engineer may establish reasonable thresholds below the carrying capacity of the
facility in order to avoid partial designation of lots in proposed subdivisions for reserved status.
15. Declaration of Potential Overcapacity.
a. Potential overcapacity determination. Upon determining that any sewer facility is at or beyond carrying
capacity, based upon the potential consumption of capacity of such facility, either upon initial determination of
potential consumption or following an update, and after documenting his finding in the manner provided in
subsection 14, the City Engineer shall inform the City Manager and the Planning Director of such determination.
b. Public notice. The City Manager shall cause to be published notice of such potential overcapacity in a
newspaper of general circulation. The notice shall describe the sewer line(s), line segment(s) or other facilities
affected by the determination.
c. Preliminary plat procedures. Following publication of notice of potential overcapacity, every preliminary plat
thereafter approved shall be subject to a condition that a potential overcapacity in one or more sewer lines has
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/598
been reached, and that the City cannot assure that final plat approval will result in reserved status for the lots in
the subdivision.
d. Potential overcapacity for part of subdivision. Where a proposed preliminary plat would result in a potential
overcapacity for one or more sewer facilities, the plat shall be subject to a condition that a potential overcapacity
in one or more sewer lines has been reached for a portion of the lots proposed in the plat, and that the City cannot
assure that final plat approval for such lots will result in reserved status for all lots in the subdivision.
16. Overcapacity Declaration.
a) Overcapacity determination. Upon determining that any sewer facility is at or beyond carrying capacity or at
85% of carrying capacity, based upon estimates of reserved capacity for such facility, either upon initial
determination of reserved capacity or following an update, and after documenting his finding in the manner
provided in subsection 14, the City Engineer shall inform the City Manager and the Planning Director of such
determination.
b. Public notice. The City Manager shall cause to be published notice of such overcapacity in a newspaper of
general circulation. The notice shall describe the sewer line(s), line segment(s) or facilities affected by the
determination of overcapacity. The notice also may announce a public hearing in the manner provided in
subsection 17.
c. Final plat procedures. Following publication of notice of overcapacity, or, in the event a moratorium is
adopted as provided in subsection 17, every final plat thereafter approved shall be subject to a designation of nonreserved
status for the lots contained in the plat that are to be served by the facility that is overcapacity, subject to
appeal as provided in subsection f [sic]. Lots bearing such designation shall not be connected to any sewer facility
that is overcapacity.
d. Partial overcapacity. Where a proposed final plat would result in overcapacity for one or more sewer facilities,
a portion of the lots subject to the final plat shall be designated for reserved status upon plat approval and the
portion of the lots that cannot be adequately served shall be designated for non-reserved status. Lots in the final
plat bearing a non-reserved designation shall not be connected to any sewer facility that is overcapacity.
e. Queuing of plats for reserved status. Following publication of notice of overcapacity, or as authorized
following adoption of a moratorium pursuant to subsection 17, approved final plats shall qualify for reserved status
in the event capacity is added or prior reserved capacity is released, according to the order in which the final plats
have been approved, provided that wastewater impact fees for the development shall be paid at the time the final
plat is approved.
17. Public Hearing and Ordinance.
a. Effective date. This section of the ordinance takes effect on September 1, 2001.
b. Public notice. Whenever the City Engineer determines that a sewer facility has reached 85% of its carrying
capacity based on the reserved status of finally platted lots, he shall inform the City Manager, who shall cause to
be published notice of public hearings to consider adoption of a moratorium arising from a shortage of sewer
facilities. The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City on the fourth day before
the first public hearing. The notice shall identify the time and place of a public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission and a public hearing before the City Council concerning the moratorium.
c. Temporary suspension of permits. On the fifth business day after the date of publication of the notice of
public hearings on the moratorium, no application for final plat approval shall be further processed or approved
nor shall any building permit be further processed or issued for construction of any structure on a lot that does not
have reserved status on such date, nor shall any connection to an affected sewer facility be made to such lot. The
temporary suspension on processing and approval of final plat applications and building permits expires if the City
Council does not enact an ordinance imposing such suspension within the time period prescribed in subsection e.
d. Public hearings. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct the initial public hearing and shall make
its recommendation to the City Council concerning adoption of a moratorium. The City Council shall conduct a
second public hearing to consider the adoption of a moratorium ordinance.
e. Moratorium ordinance. Based upon public testimony, the recommendation of the City Engineer and the
recommendation of the Commission, the Council shall determine whether to adopt an ordinance suspending the
processing or issuance of building permits for lots without reserved status pending addition of capacity to the
affected sewer facilities. The ordinance shall be adopted by the City Council on two readings within twelve (12)
days of the public hearing conducted by the Commission. The readings of the ordinance shall be separated by at
least four (4) days. The ordinance shall incorporate the findings mandated by subsection f. The ordinance also
shall expressly provide whether and the extent to which final plat applications may be approved during the
pendency of the moratorium.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/598
f. Findings required. The City Engineer shall prepare a report to the Commission and the City Council that
identifies each sewer facility that has reached the threshold specified in subsection a. [subsection b.] For each
such facility, the report shall document the carrying capacity of the facility, the number of and consumption of
capacity attributable to the actual connections utilizing the facility, the reserved capacity of the facility, the potential
overcapacity of the facility, the amount of impact fee revenues collected that are earmarked for construction of
improvements that add capacity to the facility, the capacity of any improvements which a subdivider has agreed to
construct, and the time period necessary to alleviate the overcapacity of the facility. Such evidence, as may be
modified based upon evidence obtained at the public hearings, shall be incorporated as the Council's findings of
fact within any ordinance suspending the processing or issuance of building permits under subsection e.
g. Duration of moratorium ordinance. A moratorium ordinance adopted pursuant to this section expires on the
120th day following the date of adoption, unless the Council extends the moratorium utilizing the procedures in
subsection h.
h. Extension procedures. The Council may extend a moratorium suspending the processing and approval of
final plat applications or building permits arising out of a shortage of sewer facilities by publishing a notice of a
public hearing on such proposed extension in a newspaper of general circulation within the City at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the date of the public hearing and at least twenty (20) days before the expiration of the
moratorium. The City Council shall conduct the public hearing on the proposed moratorium extension. If the
Council determines that the moratorium should be extended in whole or in part, it shall adopt an ordinance that
incorporates written findings identifying the problem requiring the need for the extension, describing the progress
made to alleviate the problem and specifying a definite duration for the extension of the moratorium. The
extension ordinance shall identify any sewer facilities which are to be released from the moratorium based on
addition of capacity and shall provide for complete or partial release in the event capacity is added to one or more
sewer facilities during the pendency of the moratorium.
i. Relief procedures.
(1) An applicant for approval of a final plat or a building permit affected by the moratorium may request a
waiver from the moratorium from the City Council by submitting a written petition claiming that he has a
vested right to the plat or permit under Tex. Loc. Govt. Code ch. 245 or at common law, or pursuant to a right
acquired under an approved development agreement. The Council shall act upon the waiver request within
ten (10) days after receiving the written request.
(2) The Council shall release an applicant from the moratorium who proposes to build capital
improvements that add capacity to the affected facility, upon construction and acceptance of such
improvements, in the manner provided in subsection 19.a.
18. Release of Capacity Reservations.
a. Termination of reserved status. Finally platted lots having reserved status shall retain such status for a period
of three years following the date of final plat approval, after which reserved status shall terminate, unless
extended by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee for good cause upon written request of the lot
owner, which extension shall not exceed ninety (90) days in duration. If a building permit has been issued for any
lot prior to the expiration of reserved status and remains in effect on the date such status would otherwise
terminate, but connection has not yet been made to sewer lines serving the property, reserved status shall be
extended automatically until the building permit expires. The date on which reserved status terminates for any lot
shall be considered the date on which lots that have applied for reserved status pursuant to subsection 16.e may
qualify.
b. Release of capacity. Upon termination of reserved status for lots subject to an approved final plat, the
capacity formerly reserved shall be released for use by lots that have applied for reserved status pursuant to
subsection 16.e, in the order in which such final plats were approved. The City shall notify the owners of finally
platted lots who have applied for reserved status and who can be served by the released capacity that they have
attained reserved status. Upon such notification, such lots shall be deemed released from any applicable
moratorium.
c. Termination of attained reserved status. Reserved status for finally platted lots that have been attained as a
result of the release or addition of capacity shall terminate three years from the date it was attained. The date on
which attained reserved status terminates shall be considered the date by which such lots qualify for reserved
status pursuant to subsection 16.e.
19. Declaration of Capacity
a. Determination of added capacity. Upon addition of capacity to a sewer facility resulting from improvements to
the facility, the City Engineer shall determine the new carrying capacity of the facility, the extent to which finally
platted lots on non-reserved status can be accommodated by the additional capacity, and whether a potential
overcapacity still exists. If the improved facility can adequately provide service to all finally platted lots, the City
Engineer shall declare that the overcapacity has been cured and report such fact to the City Manager. If the added
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/598
capacity cannot serve all finally platted lots on non-reserved status, the City shall notify the owners of finally
platted lots who can be served by the added capacity that they have attained reserved status in the manner
provided in subsection b. The addition of capacity to a sewer facility subject to a moratorium imposed under
subsection 17 may result in termination of the moratorium, in accordance with the provisions of the ordinance
establishing the moratorium.
b. Public notice. In the event the City Engineer makes a declaration of added capacity, the City Manager shall
cause notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation. The notice shall describe the sewer line(s),
line segment(s) or other facilities affected by the determination of capacity, and whether a potential overcapacity
still exists. Notice also shall be sent to any owner of a finally platted lot on non-reserved status who has requested
notification in the event that capacity becomes available.
c. Developer-constructed improvements. If, following a declaration of overcapacity pursuant to subsection 16,
the owner of a finally platted subdivision agrees to construct improvements that add capacity to a sewer facility
serving the property, such additional capacity shall be reserved for the subdivision notwithstanding the fact that
other final plats have been approved prior to the final plat for which capacity is being added. Any capacity in
excess of that needed to serve the lots in the subdivision shall be released for use in accordance with this section
and allocated in the manner provided in subsection 16.e. Construction of sewer improvements shall be in
accordance with all City design standards, including oversizing for and extension of facilities shown on the City's
approved master plans.
d. Development using temporary facilities. Following a declaration of overcapacity pursuant to subsection 16,
the owner of land that would be otherwise be served by the overcapacity facilities may temporarily utilize an onsite
sewage disposal system. The temporary on-site sewage disposal system must meet all applicable codes and
regulations for a permanent on-site sewage disposal system. Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 14-47
[sic] of the City Code of Ordinances, a temporary system authorized by this subsection may be permitted without
the necessity of obtaining a waiver of connection requirements. An owner must comply with the annexation
requirements of Section 14-47, Subchapter C. A temporary on-site sewage disposal system may be utilized for
the duration of the period during which an overcapacity exists. Upon a declaration of capacity for the facilities to
serve the property, the owner must cease utilizing the temporary on-site sewage disposal system and must
comply with Section 14-47, within twelve months of the date of declaration unless otherwise allowed by the City.
An owner who proposes to utilize a temporary on-site sewage disposal system must provide assurance that the
lot or lots served by the system may be connected to the City's sanitary sewer system. At the City's option, such
assurance based on current costs may be made by: (1) the owner installing sanitary sewer lines in accordance
with applicable codes and regulations, for connection to the City's sanitary sewer system; or (2) the owner
providing financial security, by cash escrow, bond, or other instrument acceptable to the City Attorney for the
installation of sanitary sewer lines for connection to the City's sanitary sewer system.
Editor's note–The user is directed to article 13.03 of the Code of Ordinances for regulations pertaining to
sanitary sewer connection.
e. Plat notation removal. The owner of a final plat that it is [sic] subject to a plat note designating all or a portion
of the lots within the subdivision for non-reserved status may remove such notation through replat procedures set
forth in section 4.17 [sic].
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.18, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2001-34, sec. 1(B),
(C), adopted 8/14/01; Ordinance 2001-39, sec. 1(16)–(19), adopted 8/28/01; Ordinance 2004-17 adopted 4/6/04)
SECTION 6.19 Utility Services
1. All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such manner so as to eliminate the necessity for disturbing
the street pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalks, and drainage structures when connections are made.
2. Water service lines shall be a minimum of 1-inch Type “K” copper, and shall be provided with a corporation at the main
and a curb stop located at least two (2) feet outside of curb with cover not to exceed 1-1/2 feet.
3. Sanitary sewer service lines shall be a minimum of 4-inch, shall meet the same requirements for sanitary sewers
described above, shall be constructed from the main to the lot property line using ways and necessary bends, and shall have
a minimum cover at the property line of four (4) feet, where possible.
4. Sewer services shall be located five (5) feet downstream from the center of each lot and as approved by the City
Engineer.
5. Sewer services shall have a cleanout located at the property line and a 2' x 2' x 6" reinforced concrete pad which shall
be poured around the cleanout. Provisions shall be made to connect the house sewer without disturbing the cleanout.
6. The subdivider shall make arrangements with all other appropriate utility companies for the extension of their respective
utility lines and service to and within the addition and for any costs or refunds of such cost.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/598
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 6.19, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(D), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2001-39, sec. 1(20),
adopted 8/28/01)
ARTICLE VII
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 7.11 Appeal
Any subdivider contesting any disapproval and/or the interpretation and/or the application of any rule, standard, regulation,
determination, requirement or necessity set forth in these Regulations, shall with the exception of Final Plats, Replats,
Amended Plats, Minor Plats or Variance have the right, after filing a written request with the City Council as set forth in these
Regulations within seven (7) days of the disapproval and/or interpretation, to have a hearing thereon before said body within
twenty-four (24) days after the date of filing of such request. Decision of said body shall be final, and such further appeal
shall be in accordance with appropriate law. (Ordinance 88-14, sec. 7.11, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(E),
adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2002-14, sec. 1(4), adopted 3/26/02)
SECTION 7.12 Penalty
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance or who shall fail to comply with
any provision hereof within the corporate limits of Midlothian shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed three hundred ($300.00) dollars, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly.
2. The City shall have the right to institute an action in the District Court to enjoin the violation or threatened violation of
any provision of such ordinance in the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 7.12, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(E), adopted 2/10/98; (Ordinance 2004-17 adopted
4/6/04)
SECTION 7.13 Special Exceptions
Upon application of a property owner, either concurrently with the application for a Final Plat or prior to development of a lot
after approval of a Final Plat, and following review and recommendation made by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
City Council may grant a special exception to these Regulations, when, in the opinion of the City Council, undue hardship will
result from requiring strict compliance with these Subdivision Regulations. In granting a special exception, the City Council
shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of
persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions
and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No special exception shall be granted unless the
City Council finds that:
a. There are special circumstances affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions
of these Regulations would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land if the Special Exception is not
granted; and
b. That the special exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of
the applicant; and
c. The granting of the special exception will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious
to other property in the area; and
d. The granting of the special exception will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other
land in the area in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Master Plan and the provisions of these
Regulations; and
e. The Special Exception will not result in a modification to any zoning regulations set forth in the City of
Midlothian Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
The above findings by the City Council, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be
incorporated into the official minutes of the City Council meeting at which such special exception is granted or denied.
Special exceptions may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the adopted
Comprehensive Master Plan and these Regulations so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and
substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue
hardship. The decision of the City Council to grant, deny, or grant with modifications any Special Exception shall be final.
(Ordinance 88-14, sec. 7.13, adopted 7/26/88; Ordinance 98-11, sec. 1(E), adopted 2/10/98; Ordinance 2002-14, sec. 1(5),
adopted 3/26/02; Ordinance 2016-43, sec. 1(E), adopted 11/8/16)
Appendix A
Applications and Checklists
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/598
SITE PLAN APPLICATION AND CHECKLIST FOR THE CITY OF MIDLOTHIAN, TEXAS
Case Number ____________
Date: ___________________
Name of Proposed Development
Name of Developer
Address Phone
Owner of Record
Address Phone
Name of Primary Land Planner
Address Phone
Name of Primary Surveyor
Address Phone
Name of Engineer
Address
Total Acreage Current Zoning
Number of Lots/Units Signed
The Site Plan shall be drawn to an appropriate scale not to exceed 1" = 100'. All sheet sizes shall be 24" x 36". In instances
where engineering designs for streets, drainage, or utilities are required, said drawing shall be drawn in accordance with the
procedures defined in the construction drawings checklist. The Site Plan shall contain or have attached thereto those items
listed on the following checklist:
On Plan Incomplete Not
Applicable
_____ _____ _____ 1. The location of all existing and planned structures on
the subject property and approximate locations of
structures on adjoining property within 200 feet.
_____ _____ _____ 2. Landscaping[,] lighting and/or fencing and/or screening
of yards and setback areas and proposed changes.
_____ _____ _____ 3. Design of ingress and egress.
_____ _____ _____ 4. Off-street parking and loading facilities, and
calculations showing how the quantities were obtained.
_____ _____ _____ 5. Height of all structures.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/598
_____ _____ _____ 6. Proposed uses.
_____ _____ _____ 7. The location and types of all signs, including lighting
and heights.
_____ _____ _____ 8. Elevation drawings citing proposed exterior finish
materials.
_____ _____ _____ 9. Street names on proposed streets.
_____ _____ _____ 10. Proposed water and sanitary sewer plans, grading
plans and storm sewer or drainage plans which shall be
submitted with and incorporated into the Site Plan.
_____ _____ _____ 11. Utility and drainage easements for dedicated
infrastructure if required.
_____ _____ _____ 12. Such additional terms and conditions, including
design standards, as the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the City Council deem necessary.
FOR CITY USE
Application reviewed for completeness by: ________________________ Date: ____________
Application Complete ____________ Application Incomplete ____________
Application Resubmitted: Date: ____________ Complete: Yes ____ No____
Application tentatively scheduled for P&Z agenda: Date: ____________
Fee Amount $____________ Date Paid: ____________ Receipt No. ____________
P&Z Recommendation:
Approval ______
Denial ______
Date ________________
Council Action:
Approval ______
Denial ______
Date ________________
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/598
PRELIMINARY PLAT APPLICATION AND CHECKLIST
Case Number ____________
Date: ____________
Name of Proposed Development
Name of Developer
Address Phone
Owner of Record
Address Phone
Name of Primary Land Planner
Address Phone
Name of Primary Surveyor
Address Phone
Name of Engineer
Address Phone
Total Acreage Current Zoning
Number of Lots/Units Signed
The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale not to exceed 1" = 100'. All sheet sizes shall be 24" x 36". The Preliminary Plat
shall generally include all of the tract intended to be developed at one time. When more than one sheet is necessary to
accommodate the entire area, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the
plat. The Preliminary Plat shall contain or have attached thereto those items listed on the following checklist:
On Plan Incomplete Not Applicable
_____ _____ _____ 1. Names and addresses of the subdivider, record
owner, land planner, engineer and/or surveyor.
_____ _____ _____ 2. Proposed name of the subdivision (which shall not
be so similar to that of an existing subdivision as to
cause confusion).
_____ _____ _____ 3. Names and lot patterns of contiguous platted
subdivisions within 200' of the proposed subdivision.
_____ _____ _____ 4. Vicinity map showing location of tract by reference
to existing streets or highways.
_____ _____ _____ 5. Subdivision boundary lines, indicated by heavy
lines, and the approximate area expressed in acres.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/598
_____ _____ _____ 6. Location of City limit lines, if they either traverse the
subdivision, form part of the subdivision, or are
contiguous to the subdivision boundary.
_____ _____ _____ 7. Dimensions, names and descriptions of all existing
or recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements or
other public rights-of-way within the subdivision,
intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or
forming such boundaries, as determined from existing
records, for a distance of two hundred (200) feet from
the proposed subdivision. If there are no adjacent
existing or dedicated streets and alleys within two
hundred (200) feet of the proposed subdivision on any
side, then a map on a smaller scale must accompany
the Preliminary Plat showing the outline and ownership
of adjacent properties, locations of the nearest
subdivisions and existing or dedicated streets and
alleys.
_____ _____ _____ 8. The locations, dimensions, names and descriptions
of all existing or recorded lots and blocks, parks, public
areas and permanent structures within or contiguous
to the subdivision.
_____ _____ _____ 9. The locations, sizes, and descriptions of existing
and proposed utilities, to include gas lines, sewer and
water mains, water towers and wells, power lines
(above and/or below grade), telephone lines, within the
subdivision or adjacent thereto.
_____ _____ _____ 10. The approximate location, dimensions,
descriptions and names of all proposed streets, alleys,
drainage structures, parks, open spaces, natural
features to be preserved, improvements to be installed
for beautification, other public areas; reservations,
easements or other rights-of-way; blocks, lots and
other sites within the subdivision specifically indicating
the connection of improvements to those
improvements in adjacent subdivisions.
_____ _____ _____ 11. Identification and location of proposed uses within
the subdivision to include tracts, by acreage intended
for residential, commercial, churches, parks,
governmental or other uses and also existing and
proposed zoning classifications for each use.
_____ _____ _____ 12. Topographical information based on 2-foot vertical
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/598
contour intervals except where excessive steep grade
prohibits in which case 5-foot vertical intervals may be
used.
_____ _____ _____ 13. Centerline of watercourses, creeks and ravines,
existing drainage structures and other pertinent data
shall be shown.
_____ _____ _____ 14. Areas subject to flooding shall be shown,
delineating the 100-year flood limits if applicable.
_____ _____ _____ 15. A drainage study may be required to provide
information as to the extent of drainage facilities that
will be necessary in order to develop the property.
_____ _____ _____ 16. A number or letter to identify each lot and each
block; an indication of the typical lot size; the
approximate area of the smallest lot; the total number
of lots proposed.
_____ _____ _____ 17. Building setback lines on all lots and sites adjacent
to streets.
_____ _____ _____ 18. Title, date of preparation, scale and north arrow.
_____ _____ _____ 19. Current description of the property to be
subdivided that includes survey name and tract
numbers from City or County records.
_____ _____ _____ 20. If the proposed subdivision is a portion of a tract
which is later to be subdivided in its entirety, then a
tentative Master Plat of the entire subdivision shall be
submitted with the Preliminary Plat of the portion first
to be subdivided. The Master Plat shall conform in all
respects to the requirements of the Preliminary Plat;
except, it may be on a scale of not more than one inch
(1") to four hundred feet (400').
FOR CITY USE
Application reviewed for completeness by: ________________________ Date: ____________
Application Complete ____________ Application Incomplete ____________
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/598
Application Resubmitted: Date: ____________ Complete: Yes ____ No____
Application tentatively scheduled for P&Z agenda: Date: ____________
Fee Amount $____________ Date Paid: ____________ Receipt No. ____________
P&Z Action:
Approval ______
Denial ______
Date ________________
FINAL PLAT APPLICATION AND CHECKLIST
Case Number ____________
Date: ____________
Name of Proposed Development
Name of Developer
Address Phone
Owner of Record
Address Phone
Name of Primary Land Planner
Address Phone
Name of Primary Surveyor
Address Phone
Name of Engineer
Address Phone
Total Acreage Current Zoning
Number of Lots/Units Signed
The Final Plat shall conform to the Preliminary Plat, as approved by the City Planning and Zoning Commission and shall be
drawn to legibly show all data at a satisfactory scale, not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet. The Final
Plat shall be submitted on a drawing which is 24 inches by 36 inches. The Final Plat shall contain or have attached thereto
those items listed on the following checklist:
On Plan Incomplete Not
Applicable
_____ _____ _____ 1. Title or name of development[,] written and graphic scale,
north point, date of plat and key map.
_____ _____ _____ 2. Location of the development by City, County and State.
_____ _____ _____ 3. Accurate boundary survey and property description with
tract boundary lines indicated by heavy lines.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/598
_____ _____ _____ 4. Accurate plat dimensions with all surveying information
necessary to reproduce plat on the ground.
_____ _____ _____ 5. Approved name and right-of-way width of each street,
both within and adjacent to the development.
_____ _____ _____ 6. Locations, dimensions and purposes of any easements or
other rights-of-way and all building lines.
_____ _____ _____ 7. Identification of each lot or site and block by number or
letter.
_____ _____ _____ 8. Record owners of contiguous parcels of unsubdivided
land, names and lot patterns of contiguous subdivisions
within 200 feet of the proposed subdivision.
_____ _____ _____ 9. Boundary lines, dimensions and descriptions of open
spaces to be dedicated for public use.
_____ _____ _____ 10. Certificate of dedication of all streets, alleys, parks and
other public uses signed by the owner or owners.
_____ _____ _____ 11. Designation of the entity responsible for the operation
and maintenance of any commonly held property and a
waiver releasing the City of such responsibility.
_____ _____ _____ 12. Space for signatures attesting approval of the plat by
Planning and Zoning Chairman, and City Secretary.
_____ _____ _____ 13. Seal and signature of the surveyor responsible for
surveying the development and the preparation of the plat.
_____ _____ _____ 14. All deed restrictions that are to be filed with the Plat shall
be shown on or filed separately with the Plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/598
_____ _____ _____ 15. Compliance with all special requirements developed in
preliminary plat review.
_____ _____ _____ 16. A receipt shall be noted on the Final Plat or shall
accompany the Final Plat indicating that all taxes have been
paid.
FOR CITY USE
Application reviewed for completeness by: ________________________ Date: ____________
Application Complete ____________ Application Incomplete ____________
Application Resubmitted: Date: ____________ Complete: Yes ____ No____
Application tentatively scheduled for P&Z agenda: Date: ____________
Fee Amount $____________ Date Paid: ____________ Receipt No. ____________
P&Z Action:
Approval ______
Denial ______
Date ________________
CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS CHECKLIST
Case Number ____________
Date: ____________
Name of Proposed Development
Name of Developer
Address Phone
Owner of Record
Address Phone
Name of Primary Planner
Address Phone
Name of Primary Surveyor
Address Phone
Name of Engineer
Address Phone
Total Acreage Current Zoning
Number of Lots/Units Signed
The engineering drawings submitted for review and approval of the proposed utilities shall be complete design drawings and
shall comply with the design standards as adopted by the City of Midlothian. These drawings will be submitted with the Final
Plat. The following Engineering Drawings Checklist is a summary of requirements. In all cases, the engineering drawings
should conform to good engineering practices. The drawings should be placed in the order of the following checklist. Any
resubmissions should contain the marked up set of drawings returned to the applicant. After completion, the City will be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/598
provided with the original and two copies of the as-built drawings showing all corrections as approved by the City. All plans
must be submitted and approved by City staff prior to placement on the City's agenda.
On Plan Incomplete Not
Applicable
UTILITY PLAN:
_____ _____ _____ 1. Plan view shall show relationship of all existing and
proposed utilities, including streets, storm drainage, water
distribution pipelines, sewer pipelines, natural gas
pipelines, electric lines, telephone cables and television
cables.
_____ _____ _____ 2. Plan view shall also include all existing and proposed
easements and rights-of-way.
_____ _____ _____ 3. Plan view shall show street lighting.
STREET SYSTEM:
_____ _____ _____ 1. Paving plan shall show plan of existing and proposed
street improvements.
_____ _____ _____ 2. Paving plan shall show paving width and standard curve
data.
_____ _____ _____ 3. Paving profile shall show existing ground grade and the
proposed grade of the right and left curb and the existing
and proposed utilities.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM:
_____ _____ _____ 1. A map showing the entire watershed on which the
project is located shall be included on the drainage map as
an insert. This map shall show contours at a minimum 5-
foot intervals and be on a scale no larger than 1 inch =
2000 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/598
_____ _____ _____ 2. A drainage area map of the project at a scale not to
exceed 1 inch = 100 feet with contours at a minimum of 2-
foot intervals shall be provided. This map shall show the
existing topography of the project site and the proposed
grading plan of the site. Drainage contributing from areas
outside the project site shall be specifically included in the
required on-site design requirements.
_____ _____ _____ 3. The drainage calculations for the site shall be provided
on the plans. This calculation shall identify the subdrainage
area by number, the contributing area in acres,
the time of concentration in minutes, the coefficient of
runoff, the storm frequency and duration, the storm
intensity in inches per hour and the accumulated runoff in
cubic feet per second.
_____ _____ _____ 4. The direction of stormwater flow on the site shall be
shown on the drainage area map, with a “Q” shown at
locations where flow enters inlets, channels or other
structures.
_____ _____ _____ 5. The drainage facilities shall be designed for ultimate
watershed development, as shown by the Comprehensive
Master Plan even though the project may be developed in
phases or the topography is such that other developments
contribute to the proposed site.
_____ _____ _____ 6. Where phased development will occur, the drainage
plans and calculations shall show how the drainage will be
controlled during intermediary construction.
_____ _____ _____ 7. Where the storm drainage facilities tie into existing
facilities, the plans shall show how this project will affect
those existing facilities.
_____ _____ _____ 8. All existing and proposed drainage easements on the
project site shall be shown.
WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM:
_____ _____ _____ 1. The plans shall show existing and proposed water supply
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/598
improvements, including size of pipelines, location of valves
(gate and flush) and location of fire hydrants and services.
_____ _____ _____ 2. The plans shall consist of plan and profile sheets drawn
to a scale of 1" = 40' horizontal and 1" = 4' vertical and
show existing and proposed wastewater collection
improvements, including location of manholes, cleanouts,
and services.
_____ _____ _____ 3. Where proposed facilities tie into existing facilities, the
plans shall show the flowline of the existing facilities and
how the proposed facilities affect the system.
FOR CITY USE ONLY
Application reviewed for completeness by: ________________________ Date: ____________
Application Complete ____________ Application Incomplete ____________
Application Resubmitted: Date: ____________ Complete: Yes ____ No____
City Engineer's release for placement on agenda ________________________
Application tentatively scheduled for P&Z agenda: Date: ____________
(Ordinance 88-14, app. A, adopted 7/26/88)
Appendix B
Certificates and Approvals (for Final Plat)
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
THIS is to certify that I, ____________, a Registered Public Surveyor of the State of Texas, have platted the above
subdivision from an actual survey on the ground; and that all lot corners, angle points, and points of curve have been
properly marked on the ground, and that this plat correctly represents that survey made by me.
_________________________________
(Signature) Surveyor
_________________________________
(Print name) Surveyor
Texas Registration No. ______________
(Seal)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION APPROVAL
Approved: ________________, 19___.
CITY OF MIDLOTHIAN
ELLIS COUNTY, TEXAS
By: ________________________, Planning and Zoning Commission Chairman
Attest: ______________________, City Secretary
Approved: ________________, 19___.
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/598
State of Texas
County of Ellis
WHEREAS, ____________ is the sole owner of all of the following described tract of land herein proposed as the
____________ being more particularly described as follows:
Beginning:
Thence:
Thence:
Containing:
NOW, THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That, ____________ acting by and through ____________, duly authorized so to act, does hereby adopt this plat
designating the herein above described property as the ____________, an addition to the City of Midlothian, Ellis County,
Texas, and does hereby dedicate to the public use forever, the streets and easements shown hereon. The easements are
hereby reserved for the purposes indicated. No permanent structures (buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or paving) shall be
constructed or placed upon, over or across said easements as shown, except with the written permission of the City of
Midlothian, Texas. Said easements being hereby reserved for the mutual use and accommodation of all public utilities. All
and any public utility shall have the full right and privilege to remove and keep removed all or any parts of any buildings,
fences, trees, shrubs, paving or other improvements or growths which may in any way endanger or interfere with the
construction, maintenance or efficiency of its respective utility system located within the easement, and all public utilities shall
at all times have the full right of ingress and egress to or from and upon said easements for the purpose of constructing,
reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining and adding or removing all or part of its respective system without the
necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. The reconstruction, relocation, or other replacement of any
buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, paving or other improvements or growths within such easements shall incur no responsibility
or liability to the City of Midlothian, Texas. (Any public utility shall have the right of ingress and egress to private property for
the purpose of reading meters and any maintenance and service required or ordinarily performed by that utility.) There will be
no permanent structures (buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, paving or other improvements or growths) or obstructions built,
placed or planted within the 100-year floodplain, designated as Floodway Easement. The maintenance of all easements
shown hereon shall be the responsibility of the property owners.
This plat approved subject to all platting ordinances, rules, regulations of the City of Midlothian, Texas.
WITNESS my hand at ____________, Texas, this the ______ day of ____________, 19___.
________________________
Name & Title
(NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGEMENT REQUIRED)
LIENHOLDER CONCURRENCE
NOW, THEREFORE, KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That, ____________ being the Lien Holder of the above described property, acting by and through ____________ duly
authorized so to act, do hereby concur with the provisions of the Owner's Certificate.
WITNESS my hand at ____________, this the ______ day of ____________, 19___.
________________________
Name & Title
(NOTARY ACKNOWLEDGEMENT REQUIRED)
MAINTENANCE BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS:
That ____________, hereinafter called Contractor, as principal, and ____________ as Surety, do hereby acknowledge
themselves to be held and bound to pay unto the City of Midlothian, Texas, the penal sum of ____________ dollars
($______), which is ten percent (10%) of said contract amount in lawful money of the United States, for the payment of which
sum well and truly to be made unto said City of Midlothian, Texas, and its successors, said Contractor and Surety do hereby
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/598
bind themselves, their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns and successors, jointly and severally and firmly by these
presents:
This obligation is conditioned, however, that Whereas, said Contractor entered into a written contract on the ______ day of
____________, 19___, with ____________ for the construction in the City of Midlothian, Texas as provided in said Contract
and specifications which are expressly made a part hereof, as though written herein in full and,
Whereas, in said Contract, the Contractor binds itself to use first class materials and workmanship and of such kind and
quality that for a period of one (1) year from the completion and final acceptance of the improvements by the City, the said
improvements shall require no repairs, the necessity for which shall be occasioned by defects in workmanship or materials
and during the period of one (1) year following the date of the final acceptance of the work by the City, the Contractor binds
itself to repair or reconstruct the said improvements in whole or part at any time within said period of process employed in the
construction of such improvements and that it will upon receiving notice, repair or reconstruct said improvements within such
period of time from the date of such notice as the City Engineer of said City shall determine to be necessary for the
preservation of public health, safety, or welfare. If said Contractor does not repair or reconstruct the improvements within the
time period designated then the City shall be entitled to have said repairs made and charge said Contractor and/or Surety the
cost of same under the terms of this maintenance bond.
Now, therefore, if said Contractor shall keep and perform its said work and keep the same in repair for the said maintenance
period of two years, as provided, then these presents shall be null and void, and have no further effect, but if default shall be
made by said work then these presents shall have full force and effect, and the said City of Midlothian, Texas, shall have and
recover from the said Contractor and its Surety, damages in the premises as provided in plans and specifications and
contract.
Provided, however, that the Contractor hereby holds harmless and indemnifies said City from any claim or liability for
personal injury or property damage caused by and occurring during the performance of said maintenance and repair
operation. However, there shall be no liability on the Surety for and damages resulting from fire, acts of God, accident, or
careless or malicious handling.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this instrument is executed this the ______ day of ____________, 19___.
CONTRACTOR: ________________
SURETY: ______________________
BY: ___________________________
Attorney-in-Fact
(Ordinance 88-14, app. B, adopted 7/26/88)
Appendix C
Illustrations (for Final Plat)
TYPICAL LOTS
SIGHT TRIANGLE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/598
RESIDENTIAL STREETS
LOT TYPES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/598
(Ordinance 88-14, app. C, adopted 7/26/88)
Appendix D
Development Fee Schedule
Editor's note–Appendix D, Development Fee Schedule, was removed from the subdivision regulations by Ordinance 2011-19 adopted
6/28/11.
ZONING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2013-24
SECTION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS, ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
1.01 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known officially as and may be cited and referred to as the “City of Midlothian Zoning Ordinance.”
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.01, adopted 7/9/13)
1.02 PURPOSE
a) The purpose of this Ordinance is to zone the entire area of the City of Midlothian in accordance with the adopted
Comprehensive Plan for the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the general public.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/598
b) The regulations and districts established have been designed to:
1) Lessen congestion in the streets;
2) Provide safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
3) Provide adequate light and air;
4) Prevent the overcrowding of land
5) Avoid undue concentration of population
6) Provide and facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public requirements.
c) Said districts have been established with reasonable consideration of the character of the district and its peculiar
suitability for the particular uses, and with the view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate
use of land throughout the community.
d) Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon land, buildings or structures than is imposed or required by
other ordinances, covenants or agreements, the provisions of these regulations shall govern. Where other ordinances
impose greater restrictions than are imposed herein the provisions of such other ordinances shall govern.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.02, adopted 7/9/13)
1.03 ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
An administrative official designated by the City Manager, usually the Planning Director, shall administer and enforce this
Ordinance. The Planning Director may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City Manager may
direct. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.03, adopted 7/9/13)
1.04 QUESTIONS OF INTERPRETATION & ENFORCEMENT
All questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to the Planning Director. After review, such questions
may be presented to the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) only on appeal from the decision of the Planning Director.
Recourse from the decisions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) shall be as provided by law. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec.
1.04, adopted 7/9/13)
1.05 CREATION OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
The City is hereby divided into districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance. The Official Zoning Map shall be
identified by the signature of the Mayor attested by the City Secretary and bearing the official Seal of the City under the
following words:
“This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Ordinance 2013-24 of the City of
Midlothian, Texas.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.05, adopted 7/9/13)
1.06 CHANGES, AMENDMENTS, & AVAILABILITY OF OFFICIAL MAP
a) The Official Zoning Ordinance and Map shall be made current, from time to time, to reflect the changes and
amendments that are approved by the City Council.
b) Any unauthorized change in the Official Zoning Ordinance and Map by any person is prohibited.
c) Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Ordinance and Map, which may, from time to time,
be made or published, the Official Zoning Ordinance and Map, which shall be located in the Planning Department, shall be
the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the City.
d) The Official Zoning Map shall be available to the public at all hours when City Hall is open to the public and available on
the City's official website.
e) From time to time, staff may format the Zoning Ordinance and include graphics and illustrations to help interpret the
actual wording or text.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.06, adopted 7/9/13)
1.07 REPLACEMENT OF THE ZONING ORDINANCE AND MAP
a) In the event that the Official Zoning Ordinance and Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret
because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Council may, by Resolution, adopt a new Official Zoning
Ordinance and Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Ordinance and Map.
b) The new Official Zoning Ordinance and Map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior Official Zoning
Ordinance and Map and bring it up-to-date to reflect any and all amendments or changes in the same.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.07, adopted 7/9/13)
1.08 DEFINITION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
In determining the location of zoning district boundaries on the map accompanying and made a part of these regulations, the
following rules shall apply:
a) Abandoned Public Ways: Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the
City Council, or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district lines adjoining each
side of such street, alley, or other public way, shall automatically extend to the centerline of such vacated street,
alley, or way, and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts.
b) Centerline of Public Rights-of-way: Where boundaries are shown to follow streets or alleys, the centerline of
such streets or alleys, as they exist at the time of adoption of these regulations shall be the zoning boundary; or,
c) City Limits Lines: Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following
such city limits; or,
d) Distances not indicated: Boundaries indicated as being parallel to or as extensions of features indicated in
items a) through g) shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Zoning Map, shall be
determined by the scale of the map; or,
e) Platted Lot Lines: Where boundaries are shown to enter or cross platted blocks, or [sic] property lines of lots,
as they exist at the time of adoption of these regulations, shall be the zoning boundary; or,
f) Railroad Lines: Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the centerline of the
right-of-way or if no centerline is established, the boundary shall be interpreted to be midway between the right-ofway
lines; or,
g) Shore Lines: Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and
in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; or,
h) Streams: Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or
other bodies of water shall be construed as following such centerlines; or,
i) Unplatted Lines: Where boundaries are shown on unsubdivided property, the location shall be determined by
scale shown on the map unless dimensions are given on the map; or, [sic]
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.08, adopted 7/9/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/598
1.09 PLAT REQUIRED PRIOR TO BUILDING PERMIT
a) No building permit application for a building or structure shall be approved unless there is an approved and filed plat for
that property or land seeking such permit, meeting the City's Zoning & Subdivision Ordinance.
1) Any property annexed into the City may be exempt from these requirements
2) Property subdivided and established by deed of record filed in the County Property Records prior to
Ordinance No. 116 (approved on May 4, 1959) shall be exempt from plat requirements.
b) A Conveyance Plat shall not be considered an approved plat.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.09, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(A), adopted 12/13/16)
1.10 CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION AND TEMPORARY BUILDINGS
a) No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered nor shall any other type of
development be allowed without the necessary permit or authorization issued by the designated Administrative Official (i.e.
Chief Building Official, City Engineer). No permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance
and all applicable fire and building codes of the City.
b) Temporary buildings and temporary building material storage area to be used for construction purposes may be
permitted for a specified period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the Building Official or the designated
representative and subject to periodic renewal for cause shown. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or
expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed at the direction of the Building Official or the designated
representative.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.10, adopted 7/9/13)
1.11 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or part thereof
hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a Certificate
of Occupancy shall have been issued stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of
this Ordinance. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.11, adopted 7/9/13)
1.12–1.40 RESERVED
1.41 RECOMMENDATIONS BY PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Prior to taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement, or zoning change or Specific Use Permit (SUP) by the City
Council, it shall be submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its recommendation and report. (Ordinance 2013-
24, sec. 1.41, adopted 7/9/13)
1.42 DUTIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL
a) The City Council shall have the sole authority to (i) consider and adopt proposed amendments to this Ordinance and the
Zoning Map including, but not limited to, changes in zoning, granting of specific use permits, special exceptions, and waivers
as set forth in this Ordinance, and (ii) establishing a schedule of fees and charges for applications, permits, and other matters
established by this Ordinance.
b) The duties of the City Council in connection with this Ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of
interpretation and enforcement that may arise (see Section 1.04). The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as
stated in Section 10 of this Ordinance.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.42, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(B), adopted 12/13/16)
1.43 ZONING CHANGE/SPECIFIC USE PERMIT APPLICATION
a) Applications for Zoning Amendments Generally. Any person, corporation, or group of persons having a proprietary
interest in any property, upon proof of such interest, may petition the City Council for a change or amendment to the
provisions of this Ordinance, or the Planning and Zoning Commission/City Council may, on its own motion, institute proposals
for change and amendment in the public interest. All petitions for the amendment of this Ordinance shall bear the signature of
the owners of all property within the area of request.
b) Applications for Specific Use Permits. Upon authorization by the City of Midlothian, a Specific Use Permit may be issued
upon submission of an application and appropriate material describing the proposed use. The purpose of this Specific Use
Permit is to provide for uses that generally have unusual nuisance characteristics or are of a public or semi-public character
often essential or desirable for the general convenience and welfare of the community, which without specific consideration
may have possible adverse impact on neighboring properties. A Specific Use Permit constitutes an amendment to this
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/598
Ordinance and shall be considered and adopted in the same manner as any other amendment to this Ordinance. See
Section 5.200.
c) When three-fourths vote required. A favorable vote of three-fourths of all of the members of the entire City Council shall
be required to approve any change in zoning when written protests are received and filed with the city secretary in
accordance with Texas Local Government Code Section 211.006, which protest must be written and signed in compliance
with the requirements of subsection d) of this Section by the owners of at least 20 percent of either:
1) the area of the lots or land covered by the proposed change; or
2) the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending
200 feet from that area.
In computing the percentage of land area, the area of streets and alleys shall be included in the computation.
d) Written protest procedures.
1) Purpose.
i) State law expressly enables the governing body of a municipality to establish procedures for adopting
and enforcing zoning regulations and district boundaries. Pursuant to that authority, the city council enacts
this subsection d) governing the receipt of written protests submitted for the purpose of requiring the
favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Council to effect a change in a zoning district
classification or boundary.
ii) This subsection is not intended to conflict with the state law; it is being enacted at a time when the state
law does not explicitly provide how, when, or where a written protest must be filed. The city council expressly
recognizes that this subsection may be partially or completely preempted at any such time that the state law
is amended to explicitly provide how, when, or where a written protest must be filed.
iii) This subsection is intended to accomplish the following objectives in keeping with the purpose, spirit,
and intent of state law:
a. To allow city staff sufficient time to accurately calculate the land area percentages that determines
the voting requirement;
b. To protect the rights of all parties by establishing minimum criteria to assure the reliability of
written protests received;
c. To protect the rights of those protesting by establishing procedures and deadlines which are not
unduly burdensome or restrictive; and
d. To promote order and maintain the integrity of the zoning process.
2) Form of protest.
i) A protest must be in writing submitted to the city secretary and, at a minimum, contain the following
information:
a. A description or the case number of the zoning case at issue;
b. The printed or typewritten names of all persons signing the protest of the proposed change in
zoning district classification or boundary;
c. The property description or physical address(es) of the lot(s) or land owned by the protesting
parties that is either covered by the proposed change or located within 200 feet of the area covered by
the proposed change or, alternatively, the parcel number or property tax account number assigned to
said lot(s) or land by the Ellis Central Appraisal District;
d. The mailing addresses of every person signing the protest;
e. The date the protest is signed;
f. If signing the protest on behalf of the owner of property pursuant to a power of attorney, a
statement to that fact; and
g. If applicable a copy of the power of attorney, granting the person signing the protest to act on
behalf of the record owner of the lot or land.
ii) The protest must bear the original signatures of all persons required to sign the protest.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/598
3) Who must sign the protest.
i) A protest must be signed by the owner of the property described in Section 1.43.c) or by a person
authorized by power of attorney to sign the protest on behalf of the owner. If the property is owned by two or
more people, the protest must be signed by a majority of the owners, or by a person authorized by power of
attorney to sign the protest on behalf of a majority of the owners, except that in the case of community
property, the written protest of one spouse will be presumed to be the protest of both.
ii) In the case of property owned by a corporation, the protest must be signed by the president, a vicepresident,
or by an attorney in fact authorized to sign the protest on behalf of the corporation. In the case of
property owned by a general or limited partnership, the protest must be signed by a general partner or by an
attorney in fact authorized to sign the protest on behalf of the partnership. In the case of property owned by
a trust, the protest must be signed by the trustee(s) authorized under the trust agreement to perform actions
with respect to the property.
iii) Lots or land subject to a condominium regime are presumed to be commonly owned in undivided
interests by the owners of all condominium units and under the control of the governing body of the
condominium. For such lots or land to be included in calculating the lots or land area protesting a proposed
rezoning, the written protest must state that the governing body of the condominium has authorized a protest
in accordance with procedures required by its bylaws, and that the person signing the protest is authorized
to act on behalf of the governing body of the condominium. A written protest signed by the owner of an
individual condominium unit shall not be accepted unless the filing party produces legal documents
governing the condominium which clearly establish the right of an individual owner to act with respect to his
or her respective undivided interest in the common elements of the condominium.
iv) For purposes of this subsection, the “owner” of the property for which a protest is being submitted shall
be determined to be the owner of the property shown in the records of the Ellis Central Appraisal District as
of the date of delivery of the protest to the city secretary. A person with only a leasehold or easement
interest in property is not an “owner” for purposes of filing a protest pursuant to this subsection.
v) A person who is not named on the records of the Ellis Central Appraisal District as the owner of the
property may submit additional information to the city attorney indicating that the person is the current record
owner of the property identified in the protest. The determination of the city attorney as to the sufficiency of
such information and whether or not the person should be considered the record owner of the property for
purpose of filing the protest is final. Any additional information submitted pursuant to this paragraph (v) must
be submitted by the deadline required for submission of the protest.
4) Filing deadline.
i) A written protest must be filed with the city secretary before Noon Central Time of the City business day
immediately preceding the date advertised for the city council public hearing. A protest sent through the mail
must be received by the city secretary before the deadline.
ii) Before the public hearing has commenced, the filing deadline is automatically extended whenever the
public hearing is re-advertised in the official newspaper of the city pursuant to statutory notice requirements.
iii) If after the public hearing has commenced, and
a. the public hearing is concluded with no action being taken on the zoning amendment at the same
meeting and a subsequent public hearing with notice of another public hearing is published in the
official newspaper of the city pursuant to statutory notice requirements; or
b. the public hearing is continued to a date certain as otherwise allowed under the Texas Open
Meetings Act;
the filing deadline will be extended to noon of the City business day immediately preceding the newly
advertised public hearing date or the date to which the public hearing is continued, as the case may
be.
iv) Written protests may be filed electronically be e-mailing the written protest as an attachment in .pdf
format to the city secretary or by sending via facsimile transmission to the published facsimile telephone
number for the office of the city secretary.
v) For purposes of determining compliance with the filing deadline, the date and time the city secretary's
office receives the written protest is solely determinative.
5) Withdrawals of protests filed. Withdrawals of protests previously filed must be in writing and filed with the city
secretary or delivered to the City Council prior to the commencement of voting by the City Council on the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/598
proposed zoning amendment. The provisions of this subsection governing the form and filing of protests apply
equally to withdrawals.
6) Presumptions of validity.
i) In all cases where a protest has been properly signed pursuant to this subsection, the City shall
presume that the signatures appearing on the protest are authentic and that the persons or officers whose
signatures appear on the protest are either owners of the property or authorized to sign on behalf of one or
more owners as represented.
ii) In cases of multiple ownership, the City shall presume that a properly signed protest which on its face
purports to represent a majority of the owners of the property does in fact represent a majority of the owners
of the property.
iii) The presumptions in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above are rebuttable, and the city attorney may advise
the city council that a presumption should not be followed in a specific case based on extrinsic evidence
presented.
7) Conflicting instruments. If multiple protests and withdrawals are filed on behalf of the same owner, the
instrument last received by the city secretary controls.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.43, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2017-22, sec. 1, adopted 4/25/17)
1.44 PUBLIC HEARING REQUIREMENT
a) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any application for amendment, supplement, or
change prior to making its recommendation and report to the City Council.
1) A public hearing shall also be held by the City Council prior to adopting any proposed amendment,
supplement, or change.
b) Written notice of all public hearings before the Planning & Zoning Commission, on a proposed amendment, supplement
or change shall be sent to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change is requested.
c) Such notice shall be given not less than 10 days before the date set for hearing, and may be served by depositing a
notice properly addressed and postage paid in the United States Post Office to such property owners as the ownership
appears on the last approved City Tax Roll.
d) An agenda shall also be placed at least 72 hours prior to a public meeting at the front window of City Hall and on the
City's official website.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.44, adopted 7/9/13)
1.45 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
Before the 15th day before the date of the public hearing conducted by the City Council as required by Section 1.44, notice of
the time and place of the hearing must be published in the City's official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation
within the City.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.45, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2017-22, sec. 2, adopted 4/25/17)
1.46 PLACEMENT OF SIGNS
a) The City may place at least 1 sign on any property upon which a zoning change request has been filed. Such sign(s)
shall, if possible, be located adjacent to a public thoroughfare in a visible location.
b) Such sign shall be removed immediately after final action by the City Council or when the applicant withdraws the
request, whichever comes first.
c) The sign shall contain a notice of the rezoning, and the agency and telephone number from which information relative to
the rezoning request may be obtained.
d) The erection or continued maintenance of the sign or signs shall not be deemed a condition precedent to the granting of
any zoning change or the holding of any public hearing.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.46, adopted 7/9/13)
1.47 REAPPLICATION
No application for rezoning shall be considered within 6 months of denial of a request for the same classification on the same
property. If in the event there has been substantial changes in planning principles, the applicant may with the approval of the
Planning Director, resubmit the application, waiving the 6 months waiting period. All reapplications will require payment of
application fees as if it were a new submittal. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.47, adopted 7/9/13)
1.48 ZONING & PERMITS ON NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY
a) All territory hereafter annexed into the City's corporate limits shall be initially designated as a zoning district that the City
Council, following a recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission and after notice and hearing as required for
amendments to the City of Midlothian Zoning Ordinance, determines complies with the adopted Comprehensive Plan. In the
event the annexation ordinance fails to establish the initial zoning of the area annexed, the area annexed shall be temporarily
classified as an Agriculture “A” Zoning District until permanent zoning is established in accordance with Sections 1.41
through 1.46 of the Zoning Ordinance and applicable state law.
b) No person shall erect, construct, or proceed or continue with the erection or construction of any building or structure or
add to any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the City without first applying
for and obtaining a building permit and/or Certificate of Occupancy from the Chief Building Official or the City Council as may
be required herein.
1) Any nonconforming uses may need to adhere to the ordinances in effect at that time. Such determination
shall be made by the Planning Director.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.48, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-36 adopted 10/25/16)
1.49 QUESTIONS ARISING ON ZONED AREAS
Where physical features of the ground are at variance with information shown on the Official Zoning Map, or when a question
arises as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved, the property shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/598
considered as classified Agricultural Zoning District, temporarily. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.49, adopted 7/9/13)
1.50 VIOLATION AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm, or corporation, who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, may be fined up to $2,000 per day for each offense. Each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty should not be construed as exclusive, and the City hereby
provides that any other remedy available to it, in law or in equity, is not intended to be, and is not, foreclosed by the provision
of such penalty. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.50, adopted 7/9/13)
1.51 FEES, CHARGES, AND EXPENSES
The City Council shall establish a Fee Schedule, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits
certificates of zoning compliance, appeals, applications for amendments, and other matters pertaining to this Ordinance. Until
all application fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.51, adopted 7/9/13)
1.52 VALIDITY
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, clauses and phrases of this
Ordinance are severable, and if any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the Ordinance shall be declared
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect
any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Ordinance, since the same would have
been enacted by the City Council without the incorporation in this Ordinance of any such unconstitutional section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.52, adopted 7/9/13)
1.53 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council of the City of Midlothian that the sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses and phrases of this Ordinance are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this
Ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, or sections of this Ordinance, since the same would have been enacted
by the City Council without the incorporation in this Ordinance of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph, or section. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.53, adopted 7/9/13)
1.54 REPEAL
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as
the same are in conflict with the provisions hereof. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.54, adopted 7/9/13)
1.55 APPENDICES
The Appendices attached hereto are made a part and portion of the Zoning Ordinance as adopted. The Specific Use Permits
(SUPs) and Planned Developments (PDs) shown therein are current zoning cases that will remain in effect as originally
passed. Any future changes to these cases will represent new zoning action and will be conducted in accordance with the
zoning rules and regulations as provided in this Zoning Ordinance and State Law. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.55, adopted
7/9/13)
Editor's note–The appendices referred to in section 1.55 are not printed herein.
1.56 EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its date of passage and publication as required by law.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 1.56, adopted 7/9/13)
SECTION 2
ZONING DISTRICTS & USE TABLE
2.01 ZONING DISTRICT CLASSIFICATIONS
The City of Midlothian is divided into the following zoning districts and special districts. The districts established herein shall
be known as:
Residential Zoning Districts
(see Section 3 for more details)
Abbreviation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/598
Agricultural A
Single-Family One SF-1
Single-Family Two SF-2
Single-Family Three SF-3
Single-Family Four SF-4
Residential 2.5* R2.5*
Residential Three* R3*
Medium Density One MD-1
Medium Density Two MD-2
Multifamily MF
Mobile Home MH
* these districts are inactive & cannot be zoned to this
district
Nonresidential Zoning Districts
(see Section 4 for more details)
Abbreviation
General Professional GP
Community Retail CR
Commercial C
Central Business District CBD
North 8th Street N8
Light Industrial LI
Medium Industrial MI
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/598
Heavy Industrial HI
Special Districts
(see Section 5 for more details)
Abbreviation
Planned Developments PD
Special Use Permits SUP
Historic Preservation Overlay H
Airport Overlay AO
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 2.01, adopted 7/9/13)
2.02 CLASSIFICATION OF NEW AND UNLISTED USES
a) New or unlisted uses shall be referred to the Planning & Zoning Commission, who shall make a determination as to the
appropriate classification of the new or unlisted use based on findings of fact in relation to the nature of the new or unlisted
use. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its
compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the district or districts within which such uses will
be permitted.
b) The Planning Director, at the applicant's request, shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, requesting an appeal for an interpretation regarding as to the zoning classification into which
such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by a statement of facts
listing the nature of the use, and the potential impacts, both positive and negative on the surrounding area and overall
community. Such interpretation may require an amendment to the Use Table.
c) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the City Council as to the
classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The City Council shall, by resolution, or minute order, approve the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission or make such determination concerning the classification of such
use as it determines appropriate, based on its findings.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 2.02, adopted 7/9/13)
2.03 NO REGULATION OF RAIL TRANSPORTATION
Nothing in this section shall be construed to require classification of any new or unlisted use that constitutes transportation by
rail carrier, nor shall any classification of uses listed in Section 2.04 be construed to regulate rail transportation. (Ordinance
2013-24, sec. 2.03, adopted 7/9/13)
2.04 USE TABLE
a) Residential Uses
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/598
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH
GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
P P P P P P P P P
P 1. Single-Family
Detached
S P
See Section 5.100 for more information 2. Single-Family
Attached
See Section 5.100 for more information
P P P
3. Two-
Family/Duplex
+
P
4. Multifamily
S S
5. Boarding or
Rooming House
P 6. Mobile Home
(Fixed)
P 7. Mobile Home
Park/ Subdivision
P S
8. Tri-plex or
Quadplex
P 9. Manufactured
Homes
S S S S S S S
10. Bed & Breakfast
(private home)*
P S S S S
11. Secondary
Dwelling Units
(SDUs)
See Section 3.5700 for more info on SDUs
* See Section 5.211 for more details
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
b) Educational/Institutional Uses
P Permitted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/598
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-
3
SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH
GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
By Resolution for a specific period 1. Revival, Gospel, or
Evangelistic Tent
By Resolution for a specific period
P P P P P P P P P P P 2. Place of Worship P P P P P P P P
S S S S S S S S S S S 3. College or University S S P P + P P P
S S S S S S S S S S 4. Day Care or
Kindergarten Center
S P P P
S S S S S S S S S S S 5. Foster Home
P
6. Fraternal
Organization, Civic
Club, Lodge,
Philanthropic Club
S S P P P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P 7. Family Home
P P P P P P P P P P P 8. Public/Private/Charter
Schools
P P P P P P P
9. Hospital P P P
P P P
S S S S S S S S S S
10. Public Library P P P P P
11. Nursing Care
P P P P P P
12. Business,
Commercial or Trade
School
S S P P P P P
S S S S S S S S S S S 13. Cemetery or
Mausoleum
S S S
S S S
S
14. Art Gallery or P P P P P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/598
Museum
S S S
15. Halfway House
P P P P P P P P P
16. Day Care (Home)
S S S S S S S S S S
17. Group Home for the
Developmentally
Challenged
S S S S S S S S S S S 18. Community Center
(public)
P P P P P P P
S S S S S S S S S S S 19. Fire Station/Public
Safety Building
P P P P P P P
20. Mortuary or Funeral
Home
P
P P P
21. Crematorium
P P P
22. Shelters
P P P
23. Pet Cemetery
P P P
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
c) Utility, Accessory & Incidental
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH
GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
See Section 3.5300, Home Occupation, for requirements and uses that are
approved, require SUP, or are not allowed
1. Home Occupation*
+
2. Electrical
Generating Plant
S S P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/598
S S S S S S S S S S 3. Electrical
Substation
S S S P P P
S
4. Commercial
Communication
Tower, Type 1
P P P
5. Commercial
Communication
Tower, Type 2
S S S S S S S
S S S S S S S S S S S 6. Telephone Line,
Exchange Switching,
Relay Station
P P P P P P P
S S S S S S S S S S S 7. Water Reservoir,
Pumping Station,
Well or Tower
S S P S P P P
S
8. Water Treatment
Plant/ Public Works
Facility
P P P
P P P P P P P P P P P 9. Wind Energy
System, single**
P P P P P P P
S S S S S S S S S S S 10. Wind Energy
System, multiple**
S S S S S S S
* see Section 3.5300 for more details
** see Section 7 for more details
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
d) Recreational & Entertainment
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
1. Stadium
S S
+ S P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/598
S S S S S S S S S S S 2. Golf Course
with/without Country
Club
P P P P
3. Dance Hall,
Tavern, or Nightclub
S S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P 4. Public Park or
Playground
P P P P P P P
5. Arcade
S S
S S S
S
6. Rodeo Grounds
(commercial)
P P P
S S S S S S S S S S S 7. Swim, Tennis, or
Racquet Club
S S
P P P
8. Theater
(outdoors)
S S S
9. Theater (indoors)
P P P P P P
10. Athletic
Facilities
P P P P P
11. Commercial
Amusement
(indoors)
P P P P P P
12. Commercial
Amusement
(outdoors)
S P P
P P P P P P P P P P P 13. Swimming Pool
P P
P P P
14. Archery or
Firearm Shooting
Range (outdoor)
S
S S S
15. Archery or
Firearm Shooting
Range (indoor)
P
P P P
16. Golf Driving
Range or Miniature
Golf Course
P P
P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/598
17. Circus, Carnival,
and Fairgrounds
(permanent)
S S S S
By Resolution for a specific period 18. Temporary
Outdoor Special
Event
By Resolution for a specific period
19. Sexually
Oriented
Businesses
P
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
e) Transportation & Related Uses
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
S
1. Airport, Heliport,
Helipad, or Helistop
S
+ S S S
2. Transit Passenger
Terminal
S S S S S
3. Moving or Storage
Company
S P P
4. Motor Freight
Terminal
P P
5. Truck Parking Lot
(without associated
use or building)
P P
6. Commercial
Parking Lot or
Structure
S S S S S
7. Golf Cart Sales &
Assembly
P
P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/598
8. General Freight
Trucking and Freight
Transportation
Arrangement
P P
9. Private Tracks
S P P
10. Truck Stop with
Fuel & Accessory
Services
S S
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
f) Motor Vehicle Related Uses
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
1. Car Wash S S S
+ P P P
2. Motor Vehicle
Sales & Service
S
S P P
3. Gasoline Station
with or without Retail
Sales
S S
S S S
4. Auto Parts Sales
Store
P P
P P P
5. Seat Cover, Tire,
or Muffler Shop
S
S P P
6. Tire Retreading or
Recapping
P P
7. Automobile Pound
S S
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/598
8. Businesses with
Drive-thru Service,
Drive-thru
establishment or
Motor Vehicle
Oriented Business
S S S S S S
9. Wrecker Service
S
S P P
10. Motor Vehicle
Salvage Yard
S S S
11. Automobile
Accessory Sales &
Service
S
S P P
12. Farm Machinery
Sales & Service
S
S P P
13. Bus, Truck, Taxi
Storage Yard,
Maintenance &
Garage Facility
S
S P P
14. Motor Vehicle
Repair Garage,
major
S
S P P
15. Motor Vehicle
Repair Garage,
minor
S
P P P
16. Motor Vehicle
Rental
S
S P P
17. Recreational
Vehicle (RV) Sales &
Service
P P
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
g) Retail & Service Types
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/598
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH
GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
1. Antique Shop
P P P + P P P
2. Bakery or Confect.
Shop (retail)
P P P P P P
3. Cleaning &
Laundry, Dropoff/
Pick-up & Self-
Service (small shop
w/ pick-up or drivethru
window)
P P P P P P P
4. Specialty Shop
P P P P P P
5. Handicraft or
Hobby Shop
P P P P P P
6. Fix-it Shop
(household items)
P P P P P
7. Pawn Shop
S
S S S
8. Restaurants (over
1,000 square feet)
S S S S S S S
8b. Restaurants
(under 1,000 square
feet)
P P P P P P P
9. Photo, Music, Art,
or Health Studio
P P P P P P P
10. Commercial Tool,
Trailer or Truck
Rental
S
S P P
11. Pharmacy, Drug
Store, Health &
Professional Care
Stores (with pick-up
or drive-thru window)
P P P P P P P
12. Beauty Shop or
Barber Shop
P P P P P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/598
13. Professional or
Admin. Office
P P P P P P P
14. Convenience
Store
S
S S S
15. Furniture or
Appliance Store with
Outdoor Display and
Storage (new)
S P P
16. Grocery Store,
Supermarket or
Superstore
S S S S S S
17. Farmers' Market
(outside sales of
produce &
merchandise)
P P P P P
18. General Retail
Sales store or shop
P P P P P P P
19. Gun Shop &
Repair
S S S S S S S
20. News or
Magazine Stand
P P P P P P P
21. Medical
Equipment Rental
and Leasing
P P P P P P P
22. Hotel or Motel S S S S S S S
23. Medical or Dental
Clinic
P P P P P P P
24. Bank or Financial
Institution
P P P P P P P
25. Book, Music,
Video, Electronics,
Appliance and
Furniture Store
P P P P P P
26. Mail
Services/Copy
Center
P P P P P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/598
27. Package Stores
(Alcohol Sales)
S
S S S
28. Open Air
Vending
S P P
29. Outdoor Sales,
Display and Storage
S P P
30. Ice Kiosk
Machines
P
P P P
[31.] Body Art
Studio*
S
S S S
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
* An SUP for a Body Art Studio shall not be granted if it will be located within the following distances of a Residential Zoning District, residential uses, a
Church, Mosque, Synagogue or other place where worship services are regularly conducted, a Public, Private, or Parochial School, or a Daycare: (i)
1,200 feet, if the property is located in a Commercial (C) District or Light Industrial (LI) District; or (ii) 550 feet if located in a Medium Industrial (MI) District
or Heavy Industrial (HI) District; the distance between a Body Art Studio to another Body Art Studio shall be a minimum of 1,200 feet in all
aforementioned districts. In determining whether or not the proposed location complies with the foregoing distance restriction, the distance shall be
measured by a singular straight line from the nearest property line of the property on which the Body Art Studio is to be located to the nearest property
line of the property where the other Body Art Studio, Residential Zoning District, Church, Mosque, Synagogue or other place where worship services are
regularly conducted, Public, Private, or Parochial School, or Daycare is located without regard to intervening structures, objects, or streets, alleys, and
highways, or natural features.
h) Agricultural
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH GP C CR CBD N8 LI MI HI
S
1. Animal Pound or
Shelter
S
+ P P P
P
2. Veterinary/Small
Animal Clinic (no
outside pens)
S
S P P
S
3. Veterinary/Large
Animal Clinic (outside
pens)
P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/598
P
4. Farm or Ranch
5. Greenhouse or
Plant Nursery
P
P P P
S
6. Kennels, Boarding,
Training or Breeding
S S S
7. Pet Shops
P P P P P P
8. Feed Store
S
S P P
P
9. Crop Production
P
10. Stables
(commercial)
P
11. Animal Production
P
12. Livestock Sales/
Shipping Facilities
P
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
i) Commercial
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2
SF-
3
SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
1. Furniture, Cabinet or
Upholstery Construction
or Repair Shop
+ S P P
2. Cleaning or Dyeing
Shop
P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/598
3. Contractor's Shop &
Storage Yard
S S P P
4. Heavy Machinery
Sales & Storage
S P P
5. Printing Plant
S S P
S
6. Dairy Operations
S
S P P
7. Painting Shop (mixing
& spraying)
S S P
8. Petroleum Products
Storage (wholesale
outdoor, under 10,000
gal)
S
9. Storage or Sales
Warehouse (indoor)
S
P P P
10.
Mobile/Manufactured
Home Sales
S
S P P
11. Wholesale Office or
Sample Room
P
P P P
12. Mini-Warehouse
(dead storage only)
S
S P P
13. Electronics & Sign
Manufacturing
S P P
14. Bottling Works or
Cannery
P P P
15. Machine Shop
S P P
16. Scientific or
Research Laboratory
S S
S P P
17. Stone Monument
Sales & Service
S
S P P
18. Food Catering
Service
P P P P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/598
19. Building Material
Sales & Service
S
S P P
20.
Business/Commercial
Showroom
S
S P P
21. Distribution Center
S S P
22. Bulk Storage
Facility/ Truck Storage
or Transfer
S P
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
j) Natural Resources Storage & Mining
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
1. Sales & Storage
of Stone, Rock,
Gravel, Sand, or
Dirt
+
S P
2. Mining and
Storage of Stone,
Rock, Gravel, Sand,
or Dirt
S S
3. Petroleum
Products Storage
(Tank Farm)
S S
S S
S S
4. Petroleum or Gas
Well Drilling
S
S S S
S S
S S
5. Compressor
Stations, related to
gas well drilling*
S
S S S
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/598
6. Petroleum
Refinery
S
7. Stoneyard,
Building Stone,
Cutting, Sawing, or
Storage
S P
8. Rock, Cement
Crushers & Stone
Quarry
S P
* see Section 5.212 for more details
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
k) Industrial Uses & Processes
P Permitted
S SUP
SE Special Exceptions
Not Allowed
A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5 R3 MD-1 MD-2 MF MH GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
1. Permanent Batch
Plant
S S
By Resolution for a specific period 2. Temporary Batch
Plant
By Resolution for a specific period
3. Cement or Hydrated
Lime Manufacture
+
P
4. Sanitary Landfill
S
5. Open Salvage Yard
for Rags, Machinery,
etc.
S
6. Smelter or Refinery
S
7. Steel Mill
S
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/598
8. Brick Kiln or Tile
Plant
S
9. Can Collection and
Recycling Center
S S S
10. Apparel
Manufacturing
S
S P P
11. Wood
Product/Paper
Manufacturing
S P P
12. Chemical
Manufacturing &
Processing
S P
13. Plastics & Rubber
Products
Manufacturing
S S
14. Glass, Non-metal
Mineral Product
Manufacturing
S P
15. Metal
Manufacturing
S P
16. Motor Vehicle
Manufacturing &
Accessorizing
P
17. Brewery, Distillery
or Winery
S P
18. Tobacco
Manufacturing or Tar
Distillation
S P
19. Animal Byproduct
Processing
S
20. Rubber Stamping,
Shearing/Punching
Manufacturing
S P
21. Cement Products
Plant
S P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/598
22. Outside Storage &
Display
S P P
23. Carpet & Rug
Cleaning
P P
24. Assembly of Pre-
Manufactured Parts
(except vehicle,
trailers, airplanes, or
mobile homes)
P P
25. Electroplating
P P
26. Fabricating or
Manufacturing
Housing, Temporary or
Office Building
P P
27. Food Processing
(no slaughtering)
S P P
28. Galvanizing, Small
Utensils
P P
29. Manufactured
Home/ RV Repair
S P P
30. Marble/Monument
Works (finishing &
carving only)
S P P
31. Furnace Blast;
Forge Plant, Boiler
Works Manufacturer
S
32. Manufacturing of
Basket Material,
Bicycles, Boots, Boxes
(other than paper,
caskets, shoes)
S P P
33. Manufacture of
Dies, Cores, Die-Cast
Molding, and Metal
Casting
S P
34. Metal Foundry
Plant or Fabrication
Plant
S
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/598
35. Metal Smelting,
Reclamation, or Ore
Reduction
S
36. Metal Stamping,
Dyeing, Shearing, or
Punching
S P
37. Mill (Feed or Flour)
S
38. Industrial Storage
Yard (accessory)
P P
+ N8 District: See Section 4.500 for more information.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 2.04, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2017-45 sec. 1(A), adopted 6/13/17; Ordinance 2018-05, sec.
1(A), adopted 2/13/18; Ordinance 2019-08 adopted 3/12/19)
SECTION 3
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS
3.01 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS TABLE (QUICK REFERENCE)
Regulation A SF-1 SF-2 SF-3 SF-4 R2.5
(inactive)
R3
(inactive)
MD-1 MD-2 MF MH
Min. Lot Size (sq.
ft.)
2 acres 1 acre/
43,560
20,000 14,000 9,000 7,500 6,000 6,000 11,000 (3)
14,000 (4)
2 acres 6,000
Min. Lot Width (ft.) 150 125 120 100 75 65 60 45 70 (3)
90 (4)
N/A 45
Min. Lot Depth (ft.) – 150 125 100 100 100 100 90 100 N/A 90
Min. Masonry
Coverage
90%* 90% 90% 90% 90% 90% 90% 90% 90% 90% 90%
Min. Dwelling (sq.
ft.)
2,000 2,000 1,800 1,700 1,600 1,400 1,400 550/
650/
800/
950
550/
650/
800/
950
550/
650/
800/
950
N/A
Max. Density
(du/a)
1 dwelling
per 2
acres
1.0 1.7 2.5 3.9 5.0 7.0 2 units
per lot
4 units per
lot
18.0 1 unit per
lot
Min. Front Yard
Setback (ft.)
50 50 35 30 25 25 25 25 25 25 25
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/598
Min. Side Yard
Setback (ft.)
side/street/ garage
25/25/25 20/20/25 15/15/25 10/15/25 6/15/25 6/15/25 6/15/25 5/15/25 5/15/25 5 (20)/
15/–
5/15/
25
Min. Rear Yard
Setback (ft.)
50 25 20 20 20 20 20 15 15 20 20
Max. Impervious
Coverage
40% 40% 45% 50% 60% 60% 60% 60% 60% 75% N/A
Front-loaded
garages
(maximum
allowed)
N/A N/A 35% 25% 10% 10% 10% N/A N/A N/A N/A
Max. Height (ft.) 45 or 2
stories
35 or 2.5
stories
35 or 2.5
stories
35 or 2.5
stories
35 or 2.5
stories
35 or 2.5
stories
35 or 2.5
stories
35 or 2
stories
35 or 2
stories
35 or 2
stories
15
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.01, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2015-12 adopted 4/28/15)
3.02 PERMITTED USES
a) In every zoning district, no building, structure, land or premises will be used and no building or structure shall hereafter
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for 1 or more of the uses listed in Section 2.04 Use Chart and as
regulated per each zoning district regulations.
b) For residential uses, not more than 1 principal dwelling unit shall be allowed per lot or tract of land. No dwelling unit
shall have a physical connection to any other building or structure located on another lot or tract of land.
c) The following additional uses shall be allowed:
1) Model home, located within the same subdivision where dwellings represented by such model homes are
under construction or for sale.
2) One temporary building used for a real estate sales office, only where such building is located on property
within the same approved subdivision where such sales activities are transpiring and for a period not to exceed
180 days. The exterior walls for such buildings shall be of a noncombustible material and must be compatible in
color to the surrounding buildings.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.02, adopted 7/9/13)
SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL STANDARDS
3.03 SPECIAL AREA, HEIGHT, AND USE REGULATIONS
a) Steeples, domes, spires, flagpoles, roof gables, chimneys and vent stacks, when attached to a principal structure, may
extend for an additional height not to exceed 15 feet from the maximum height limit of a structure to the highest point of the
architectural feature. Flagpoles, light poles, radio antennas, satellite dishes, monuments, statuary or other similar structures
not attached to a principal building shall not exceed the height of any principal building on the same lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/598
b) Utility towers including water towers, sports lighting facilities, utility poles and antennae structures owned or operated by
a public or private utility, or governmental entity shall be exempted from the maximum height regulations of their respective
zoning ordinance. This exemption shall not preclude the ability to regulate the height of such structures elsewhere in this
ordinance.
1) Water tanks, cooling towers, and other mechanical equipment when attached to the roof of a permitted
building may be erected for an additional height of 15 feet above the maximum building height.
c) The ordinary extensions of window sills, awnings, belt courses, cornices, roof overhangs, eaves, chimneys and other
architectural features may extend an additional 2 feet into any required front yard or setback.
d) Every part of a required front yard shall be open and unobstructed from the general ground level of the graded lot to the
sky. The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply, however to living plant material and landscaping, lighting fixtures,
flagpoles, mailboxes, fountains, goal posts for sports activities such as basketball or soccer, overhead service lines and poles
for utilities or fences which shall be situated and constructed in accordance with other applicable codes of the City of
Midlothian.
e) Lots with more than 1 frontage along a street, pie-shaped, non-rectangular or other irregular shaped lots, including lots
located along a curved portion of a street, may be required to demonstrate compliance with the dimensional or area
regulations specified for this district. The Planning Director shall have the authority to determine and designate front, side and
rear lot lines for such lots. Where the Planning Director makes such a determination, there shall be at a minimum 1 lot line
designated as a front lot line.
f) On corner lots the front of the lot shall be construed as the shortest boundary adjacent to a street unless the lot qualifies
as a “through” or “reverse frontage” lot. For through lots the front of the lot shall be determined by the prevailing building
pattern or lotting pattern or as determined by the Planning Director if such a pattern is not clearly distinguishable. For reverse
frontage lots the applicant or property owner may select any qualifying lot line as the front of the lot so long as all other width
depth and area requirements are satisfied.
g) A minimum building line setback of 50 feet shall be required for any lot within this district fronting on a Freeway,
Highway, Frontage Road serving a Freeway or Highway, Farm to Market Road, or Major Arterial thoroughfare. If the minimum
building line is already 50 feet, then this requirement may be increased to 75 feet. This requirement supersedes any other
front setback requirement specified in this ordinance.
h) Minimum Lot Area, Lot Width, and Lot Depth requirements shall not apply to any lot designated as a “Common Area,”
“Private Park” or “Public Park” so long as said lot remains in an undeveloped state.
1) For purposes of this section a lot containing landscaping, playground equipment, picnic tables, unlighted
athletic fields, fountains, statuary or similar recreational features shall be considered undeveloped.
2) The construction or placement of any building or permanent facility requiring the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy shall void this section and all lot area, width and depth requirements shall apply.
3) Temporary use of a Common Area, Private Park or Public Park for carnivals, festivals, fairs and special
events shall be authorized pursuant to any other provisions contained within this or any other City Ordinance,
regulation, rule, or policy for such events.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.03, adopted 7/9/13)
3.04–3.99 RESERVED
AGRICULTURAL (A)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/598
3.100 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is to allow construction and use of the land for purposes on large rural parcels of land
when part of a farm or ranch that have historically been allowed on large rural parcels of land. The district is also intended to
be used as a transitional district from rural and unzoned lands having more urban types of uses. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec.
3.100, adopted 7/9/13)
3.101 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 2 acres
Minimum Lot Width 200 feet*
Minimum House Size 2,000 square feet (A/C space only)
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 40%
Maximum Height 45 feet or 2 stories
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback 25 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 25 feet
* Measured at the front setback line
Editor's note–Ordinance 2015-12 amended section 3.01, residential district regulations table, changing the minimum dwelling
requirement for the A District. The title of Ordinance 2015-12 states that the ordinance amends section 3.100. “Minimum House Size” in
the table above has been changed to reflect the amendment to section 3.01.
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations** see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping**/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/598
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
** The Agricultural District is exempt from these regulations
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.101, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2015-12 adopted 4/28/15)
SINGLE-FAMILY ONE (SF-1)
3.200 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is to provide for compatible land, building and structure uses primarily oriented to
single-family detached dwellings together with certain select community facility uses to create low density neighborhood units
where the combination of these uses is appropriate. The principal element of the district is intended to be detached singlefamily
dwellings for occupancy by 1 family. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.200, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted
10/22/13)
3.201 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/598
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 1 acre (43,560 sf)
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 125 feet* / 150 feet
Minimum House Size 2,000 square feet (A/C space only)
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 40%
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Minimum Front Yard Setback 50 feet**
Minimum Side Yard Setback (interior &
street side)
20 feet***
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 25 feet
* Measured at the front setback line
** May encroach 10 ft. if porch is covered & 7' deep
*** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/598
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.201, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13)
SINGLE-FAMILY TWO (SF-2)
3.300 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is to provide for compatible land, building and structure uses primarily oriented to
single-family detached dwellings together with certain select community facility uses to create basic neighborhood units
where the combination of these uses is appropriate. The principal element of the district is intended to be detached singlefamily
dwellings for occupancy by 1 family. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.300, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted
10/22/13)
3.301 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 sf
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 120 feet* / 125 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/598
Minimum House Size 1,800 square feet (A/C space only)
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 45%**
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Min. Front Yard Setback 35 feet***
Min. Side Yard Setback (interior & street side) 15 feet****
Min. Rear Yard Setback 25 feet
Max. Garage Orientation 35% front-entry
* Measured at the front setback line
** Front yard area coverage cannot exceed 30%
*** May encroach 10 ft. if porch is covered & 7' deep
**** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.301, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13)
SINGLE-FAMILY THREE (SF-3)
3.400 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is to provide for compatible land, building and structure uses primarily oriented to
single-family detached dwellings together with certain select community facility uses to create basic neighborhood units
where the combination of these uses is appropriate. The principal element of the district is intended to be detached singlefamily
dwellings for occupancy by 1 family. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.400, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted
10/22/13)
3.401 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 14,000 sf
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 100 feet* / 100 feet
Minimum House Size 1,700 square feet (A/C space only)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/598
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 45%**
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Min. Front Yard Setback 30 feet***
Min. Side Yard Setback (interior/street side) 10 feet / 15 feet****
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 20 feet
Max. Garage Orientation 25% front-entry
* Measured at the front setback line
** Front yard area coverage cannot exceed 30%
*** May encroach 10 ft. if porch is covered & 7' deep
**** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Editor's note–Ordinance 2015-12 amended section 3.01, residential district regulations table, changing the minimum dwelling
requirement for the SF-3 District. The title of Ordinance 2015-12 states that the ordinance amends section 3.400. “Minimum
House Size” in the table above has been changed to reflect the amendment to section 3.01.
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.401, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2015-12 adopted
4/28/15)
SINGLE-FAMILY FOUR (SF-4)
3.500 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is to provide for compatible land, building and structure uses primarily oriented to
single-family detached dwellings together with certain select community facility uses to create basic neighborhood units
where the combination of these uses is appropriate. The principal element of the district is intended to be detached singlefamily
dwellings for occupancy by 1 family. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.500, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted
10/22/13)
3.501 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 9,000 sf
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 75 feet* / 100 feet
Minimum House Size 1,600 square feet (A/C space only)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/598
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 60%**
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 feet***
Min. Side Yard Setback (interior/street side) 6 feet / 15 feet****
Minimum Rear Yard Setback 20 feet
Max. Garage Orientation 10% front-entry
* Measured at the front setback line
** Front yard area coverage cannot exceed 40%
*** May encroach 10 ft. if porch is covered & 7' deep
**** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Editor's note–Ordinance 2015-12 amended section 3.01, residential district regulations table, changing the minimum dwelling
requirement for the SF-4 District. The title of Ordinance 2015-12 states that the ordinance amends section 3.500. “Minimum
House Size” in the table above has been changed to reflect the amendment to section 3.01.
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.501, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2015-12 adopted
4/28/15)
RESIDENTIAL 2.5 (R2.5)
3.600 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to allow dwellings that are designed and constructed for occupancy by 1 family and located on
a lot having a minimum area of 7,500 square feet. Only one (1) dwelling unit per lot will be allowed in this district. These
dwellings shall have no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract of land. This is an inactive zoning
district. No property can request a rezone to this zoning district. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.600, adopted 7/9/13)
3.601 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 7,500 sf
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 65 feet* / 100 feet
Minimum House Size 1,400 square feet (A/C space only)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/598
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 60%**
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Min. Side Yard Setback (interior/street side) 6 feet / 15 feet ***
Min. Rear Yard Setback 20 feet
Max. Garage Orientation 10% front-entry
* Measured at the front setback line
** Front yard area coverage cannot exceed 40%
*** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Editor's note–Ordinance 2015-12 amended section 3.01, residential district regulations table, changing the minimum dwelling
requirement for the R2.5 District. The title of Ordinance 2015-12 states that the ordinance amends section 3.600. “Minimum
House Size” in the table above has been changed to reflect the amendment to section 3.01.
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.601, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2015-12 adopted 4/28/15)
RESIDENTIAL THREE (R3)
3.700 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to allow dwellings that are designed and constructed for occupancy by one (1) family and
located on a lot having a minimum area of 6,000 square feet. Only one (1) dwelling unit per lot will be allowed in this district.
These dwellings shall have no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract of land. This is an inactive
zoning district. No property can request a rezone to this zoning district. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.700, adopted 7/9/13)
3.701 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sf
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 60 feet* / 100 feet
Minimum House Size 1,400 square feet (A/C space only)
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/598
Maximum Lot Coverage 60%**
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Min. Side Yard Setback (interior/street side) 6 feet / 15 feet ***
Min. Rear Yard Setback 20 feet
Max. Garage Orientation 10% front-entry
* Measured at the front setback line
** Front yard area coverage cannot exceed 45%
*** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Editor's note–Ordinance 2015-12 amended section 3.01, residential district regulations table, changing the minimum dwelling
requirement for the R3 District. The title of Ordinance 2015-12 states that the ordinance amends section 3.700. “Minimum
House Size” in the table above has been changed to reflect the amendment to section 3.01.
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.701, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2015-12 adopted 4/28/15)
MEDIUM DENSITY ONE (MD-1)
3.800 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to provide adequate space for medium density, duplex-type residential development located on
a lot having a minimum area of 6,000 square feet; and promoting a maximum density of 2 dwelling units per lot. (Ordinance
2013-24, sec. 3.800, adopted 7/9/13)
3.801 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sf
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 45 feet*/ 90 feet
Minimum House Size See diagram for sizes
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/598
Maximum Lot Coverage 60%**
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Min. Side Yard Setback (interior/street side) 5 feet / 15 feet ***
Min. Rear Yard Setback 15 feet
* Measured at the front setback line
** Front yard area coverage cannot exceed 40%
*** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.801, adopted 7/9/13)
3.802 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
a) An existing MD-1 lot can be subdivided into 2 lots under the following conditions:
1) Separate ownership of both dwelling units
2) Adequate firewall between both dwelling units is placed and conforms to the existing Building Code
3) Existing uses shall reference the existing Building Code
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.802, adopted 7/9/13)
MEDIUM DENSITY TWO (MD-2)
3.900 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to provide adequate space for medium density, 3-plex and 4-plex type residential development
promoting a maximum density of 4 dwelling units per lot. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.900, adopted 7/9/13)
3.901 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 11,000 sf (3-plex); 14,000 (4-plex)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/598
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 70 ft. (3-plex)*; 90 ft. (4-plex)* / 100 feet
Minimum House Size See diagram for sizes
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 60%**
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Min. Side Yard Setback (interior/street side) 5 feet / 15 feet ***
Min. Rear Yard Setback 15 feet
* Measured at the front setback line
** Front yard area coverage cannot exceed 40%
*** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.901, adopted 7/9/13)
3.902 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
a) An existing MD-2 lot can be subdivided into 2 lots under the following conditions:
1) Separate ownership of both dwelling units
2) Adequate firewall between both dwelling units is placed and conforms to the existing Building Code
3) Existing uses shall reference the existing Building Code
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.902, adopted 7/9/13)
MOBILE HOME (MH)
3.1000 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to provide adequate space and restrictions for the placement of mobile and modular homes in
the City. This district is established to provide housing densities compatible with existing and proposed neighborhoods by
providing alternate housing types both in construction and economy within an approved Mobile Home Park or Subdivision.
No mobile or modular home shall be allowed to be placed on any parcel or lot except on lots located within an approved
Mobile Home Park or Subdivision. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.1000, adopted 7/9/13)
3.1001 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/598
Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sf
Minimum Lot Width/Depth 45 ft.*; 90 feet
Minimum House Size N/A
Minimum Garage Size 400 square feet
Maximum Lot Coverage 60%
Maximum Height 35 feet or 2 stories
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Min. Side Yard Setback (interior/street side) 5 feet / 15 feet**
Min. Rear Yard Setback 15 feet
* Measured at the front setback line
** 25 feet if garage faces a side street
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.1001, adopted 7/9/13)
MULTIFAMILY (MF)
3.1100 PURPOSE
The purpose of this district is to provide adequate space and site diversification for multiple-family apartment and
condominium developments where the maximum density does not exceed 18 dwelling units per gross acre. This district
should be characterized by landscaping and open space and should be convenient to major thoroughfares and arterial
streets. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.1100, adopted 7/9/13)
3.1101 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 2 acres
Maximum Density 18 units per acre
Minimum House Size See diagram for sizes
Maximum Building/Lot Coverage 75%/50%
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/598
Minimum Open Space 25%
Maximum Height 2 stories not to exceed 35 ft.; if a residence is adjacent
to the property, the multifamily dwelling cannot exceed
the residential dwelling's height.
Min. Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Min. Side Yard Setback 20 feet
Min. Rear Yard Setback 20 feet/60 feet if residential adjacency
Residential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 3.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 3.5200
Home Occupations see Section 3.5300
Landscaping/Streetscaping/Amenities see Section 3.5400
Masonry, Architecture & Building see Section 3.5500
Parking and Garage Regulations see Section 3.5600
Secondary Dwelling Units see Section 3.5700
Signage Regulations see Section 3.5800
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.1101, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2019-09, sec. 1(A), adopted 3/12/19)
3.1102 MULTIFAMILY ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES
a) The following shall be permitted as accessory uses to the multifamily dwellings provided that none shall be a source of
income to the owners or users of the multifamily dwellings:
1) All accessory uses shall be located at least 20 feet from any street right-of-way and shall not be located
between the building line and the front property line.
2) All accessory buildings shall follow the exact setback lines established within this Section, except for side
yard setback, which shall be 20 feet.
3) The height shall be limited to 1 story.
4) Detached covered common parking, off-street parking and private garages in connection with any use
permitted in this district provided that such parking shall not be located in a front yard or open directly onto a
street.
5) Swimming pools and tennis courts no nearer than 75 feet to any residentially zoned district.
6) Laundry room for use of tenants.
7) Meeting, party and/or social rooms in common areas only.
8) Cabana, pavilion or roofed area.
9) Mechanical and maintenance equipment related to a principal use no nearer than 120 feet to any adjacent
residentially zoned district and housed in an enclosed building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/598
10) Screened garbage and/or solid waste storage on a concrete pad, no nearer than 50 feet to any adjacent
residential use district, and not within the front setback.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.1102, adopted 7/9/13)
3.1200–3.4900 RESERVED
3.5000 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All development standards found in the remaining sections shall apply to all residential districts proceeding [preceding] this
section, unless otherwise stated in that specific zoning district. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5000, adopted 7/9/13)
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDINGS STANDARDS
3.5100 RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING STANDARDS
a) A person shall obtain from the City an accessory building permit prior to constructing or otherwise locating an accessory
building of any size on a lot or parcel of land within the City zoned for use for residential purposes. The receipt of an
accessory building permit shall not relieve a person from obtaining from the City any other permit or consent relating to the
construction of buildings pursuant to the City's building codes.
b) All accessory buildings shall be constructed or located behind the principal building in the rear yard; provided, however,
an accessory structure located behind an opaque fence or otherwise not visible from a public street may be located forward
of the rear corner of the principal building.
c) Accessory buildings requiring a construction permit and certain accessory structures, regardless of whether a
construction permit is required, including, but not limited to, pools, pergolas, tool sheds, utility structures, and other similar
structures, shall comply with the following setback requirements:
1) Three (3) feet from the side and rear property lines if the floor area is less than 400 square feet.
2) Six (6) feet for [from] the side and rear property lines if the floor area is 400 square feet or greater but less
than 900 square feet.
3) A distance equal to the minimum rear and side yard setbacks established for the principal building if the floor
area is 900 square feet or greater.
Accessory buildings used as detached garages shall be subject to Section 3.5602.
d) The height of all accessory buildings shall be measured from the ground to the roof peak.
e) With respect to accessory buildings constructed or installed on a lot or parcel with an area of less than one (1) acre,
materials used for the exterior facade construction of an accessory building shall be consistent with the exterior facade of the
principal dwelling on the same lot or parcel except when
1) the accessory building is screened from all sides by a privacy fence or the principal building; and
2) if the screening is limited to a privacy fence, the roof plate of the accessory building is no higher than the
shorter of two feet and six inches (2'6") above the top of the fencing or ten feet and six inches (10'6").
f) With respect to accessory buildings constructed or installed on a lot or parcel with an area of less than one (1) acre,
materials used on the roof of accessory building must be consistent with the roof material on the principal building on the
same lot or parcel except when the peak of the roof is fully screened from all public streets by an opaque privacy fence or the
principal building itself.
g) Except as provided in paragraph (k), of this section, the use of an accessory building must be incidental, subordinate,
and supportive of the principal building located on the same lot or parcel.
h) An accessory building shall not be used as a dwelling unit except in compliance with Section 3.5701 [3.5700]
“Secondary Dwelling Unit Requirements.”
i) Any metal walls or roofing for accessory buildings must be designed by a professional engineer and not less than 26
gauge, roll-formed ribbed sheeting containing a factory-applied non-reflective finish with a manufacturer's warranty of not less
than 20 years for the structure and finish. All materials used for accessory buildings shall be required to comply with the
City's Building Code in effect at the time of construction or installation. If a more restrictive standard is contained within the
Building Code, the Building Code standard shall apply.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/598
j) Accessory buildings may not be constructed with plumbing fixtures except accessory buildings constructed on a lot or
tract one (1) acre or greater may be constructed with a full bathroom consisting of a toilet, one sink, and a tub and/or shower.
k) Accessory buildings may be constructed and located on a lot or parcel with an area of two (2) acres or greater located
within a residential zoning district without a principal building first being located on the same lot or parcel subject to the
following:
1) A concrete apron must be constructed from the curb of the adjacent public street (or the edge of the
pavement, if there is no curb) to a distance of twenty-five (25) feet or to the edge of the existing right-of-way
boundary adjacent to the property, whichever is greater;
2) The owner of the lot or tract must provide to the City as part of the accessory building permit a site plan
showing the location of any proposed dwelling unit to be located on the same lot or parcel;
3) The accessory building must be set back in a manner such that it will be located behind the future dwelling
unit; and
4) The accessory building shall not be used as a dwelling unit.
l) The exterior facades of all above-ground storm shelters shall match the materials of the principal building except when
the storm shelter is fully screened from all public streets by an opaque fence or the principal building itself. No roof pitch is
required if the height of the structure is below the top of the adjacent privacy fence line.
m) Shipping containers shall not be used as accessory buildings except as follows:
1) No more than one (1) shipping container is permitted to be located on a lot or parcel; and
2) The shipping container must be located on a lot or parcel with an area of 10 acres or greater;
3) The shipping container shall be one color, non-reflective, and of earth-tone shades; and
4) A person desiring to exceed one (1) shipping container per residential lot or parcel must obtain a Specific
Use Permit. The following factors will be considered in issuing the Specific Use Permit:
i) size of the tract or parcel;
ii) visibility from public streets and adjoining property; and
iii) the desired use and compatibility with the property and surrounding area.
n) A Specific Use Permit may be obtained to exceed any of the maximum size regulations of this Section 3.5100.
o) This Section 3.5100 applies solely to accessory buildings constructed or located on a lot or parcel located in a
residential zoning district or in a Planned Development that provides the lot or parcel may be used and developed for
residential purposes.
p) For purposes of this Section 3.5100, the phrase “accessory building” shall include accessory structure.
q) This Section 3.5100 does not apply to:
1) residential playground equipment the base of which is at ground level and is located no closer to the front
property line than ten (10) feet behind the front wall of the principal dwelling unit on the property unless screened
by a privacy fence from the public street adjacent to the front property line; or
2) Heating, air conditioning, and swimming pool equipment used in the operation of the principal dwelling unit
located on the same property, which equipment may be located within the building setbacks of the parcel,
provided such equipment is not located:
i) within any drainage or utility easement; or
ii) closer to the front property line than five (5) feet behind the front wall of the principal dwelling unit on
the property unless screened from the public street adjacent to the front property line; or
iii) in a manner that unreasonably prevents access of fire department personnel to the rear of any
building.
DISTRICT REGULATIONS TABLE
An accessory building authorized to be located on a lot pursuant to Section 3.5100 shall be subject to the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/598
Area of Property
Less than one (1) acre
Equal to one (1) acre or
greater by less than two
(2) acres
Two (2) acres or greater
Maximum Floor Area 50% of the first floor area of
the principal dwelling or 4%
of the lot area, whichever is
less.
75% of the first floor area
of the principal dwelling or
4% of the lot area
whichever is less.
No more than 4% of the lot
area.
Maximum Height Shall not exceed the height of
the principal dwelling
measured from the ground to
the roof peak.
Shall not exceed the
height of the principal
dwelling measured from
the ground to the roof
peak.
Not greater than 45 (fortyfive)
feet in height
measured from the ground
to the roof peak.
Building Materials (Does not
include pergolas*)
Building materials shall be
consistent with the principal
dwelling unless screened on
all sides, by a privacy fence
or the principal building, and
the roof plate is no higher
than the shorter of two feet
and six inches (2'6") over the
fence height or ten feet and
six inches (10'6").
Not required to be
consistent with the
principal dwelling.
Not required to be
consistent with the principal
dwelling
Maximum Number of
Buildings Allowed (does not
include structures such as
pools, pergolas, and similar
structures)
1 (One) 2 (Two) Multiple Accessory
Buildings, subject to
maximum lot coverage
allowed in accordance with
the zoning district in which
the lot is located.
* Pergola - a freestanding open air structure built as an outdoor sitting area consisting of parallel colonnades supporting a closed or open
roof (of girders and cross rafters). A closed roof shall match the primary structure's roof material. Pergolas shall be constructed of cedar
or redwood materials.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5100, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2017-13 adopted 3/28/17; Ordinance 2018-26 adopted 5/8/18)
[3.5200] RESIDENTIAL FENCE STANDARDS
3.5201 GENERAL FENCE STANDARDS
Unless specified elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of an ordinance governing a Planned Development
District, or an ordinance granting a Specific Use Permit, all fences and screening devices constructed or installed on property
used or zoned for residential purposes, whether required or optional, shall be installed plumb and in a professional manner
and in accordance with the following minimum standards:
a) Approved fence materials shall be those that are typically manufactured for and used in the fencing industry
and shall include:
1) wooden planks with vertical posts consisting of galvanized steel;
2) masonry or reinforced concrete;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/598
3) wrought iron, architectural steel, ornamental iron, tubular steel or other decorative-type metals which
are suitable for this type of use;
4) polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or vinyl composite which is designed and manufactured specifically as fencing
materials;
5) chainlink; or
6) Pipe-rail or split-rail fencing on properties not within a Planned Development (PD) district, and shown to
be consistent with the surrounding properties, may be permitted on a case-by-case basis.
All fencing materials must be designated for outdoor use and designed or treated to withstand the elements and provide
resistance to decay.
b) All fence materials shall be securely fastened using standard fasteners of the type, size and material
intended for the particular use in the fencing industry. All nails and fasteners shall be of a nonrusting, noncorrosive
metal and shall be of the type that when properly driven, will not work free due to wind vibration or shrinkage of
the materials.
c) Fences constructed in residential zoning districts are allowed in back and side yards with a fence height not
to exceed eight (8) feet.
Ordinance 2013-24, secs. 3.5200–3.5201, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5202 RESIDENTIAL TO RESIDENTIAL ADJACENCY FENCE STANDARDS
The following standards shall apply to fences installed on property used for or zoned for development as a single-family
residential property along a side or rear lot line or property line that is adjacent to property as used for or zoned for
development as a single-family residential property:
a) A fence or screening device is not required to be installed. If a fence is installed, it shall be as specified in
Table 3.5206.
b) Fences, walls, and dense landscaping hedges are permitted to be used as a screening device within the
same residential district provided the landscape hedge is not less than six (6) feet tall and complies with the
Residential Landscape Regulations set forth by Sections 3.5400 et. seq. of the Zoning Ordinance.
c) All installed fences shall comply with any applicable additional standards set forth in Section 4.5200.
d) Any fence abutting a designated open space or common area shall be constructed with nonopaque materials
such as wrought iron, tubular steel, split rail, etc. In no case shall wood stockade-type fencing be allowed as a
screening device adjacent to a designated open space or common area.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5202, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5203 RESIDENTIAL ADJACENCY TO MINOR THOROUGHFARE OR LOCAL STREET STANDARDS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/598
a) A fence or screening device subject to the standards described in Table 3.5206 is required to be installed on property
used for or zoned for development as residential property along a side or rear lot line or property line abutting a minor
thoroughfare or local street.
b) All installed fences and screening devices shall comply with any applicable additional standards set forth in Section
4.5200.
c) For purpose of this Section 3.5203, a “minor thoroughfare or local street” means a roadway designated to have an
ultimate right-of-way width of less than 80 feet as designated by the City's adopted Thoroughfare Plan Map or an approved
plat map.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5203, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5204 RESIDENTIAL ADJACENCY TO MAJOR THOROUGHFARE STANDARDS AND MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL
ADJACENCY TO SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL USE
a) A fence or screening device fabricated of masonry and/or tubular steel and subject to the standards described in Table
3.5206 is required to be installed on property used for or zoned for development as residential property along a side or rear
lot line or property line abutting a major thoroughfare or arterial highway.
b) Fence or screening devices abutting a major thoroughfare shall comply with the following:
1) All installed fences and screening devices shall comply with any applicable additional standards set forth in
Section 4.5200.
2) Wood fencing is prohibited.
3) Masonry columns shall be placed at intervals of no greater than 32 feet on-center; shall be at least eight (8)
inches taller than the remainder of the screening wall; and shall extend at least three (3) inches from the vertical
plane of the wall. The capstone of the column shall not exceed nine (9) feet in height.
4) When the terminus of a cul-de-sac is located within 80 feet of a major thoroughfare or arterial highway, an
opening of 150 feet must be provided along the fence subject to the following:
i) The measurement shall be taken from the middle bottom portion of the cul-de-sac closest to the major
thoroughfare or arterial highway and measured 75 feet in both directions, for a total of 150 feet;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/598
ii) The opening interval shall be constructed of either tubular steel or wrought iron with pedestrian access
through the fence authorized but not required; and
iii) Such a fence segment must comply with Section 4.5200.
c) For purposes of this Section 3.5204, the phrases “major thoroughfare” and “arterial highway” mean a roadway
designated to have an ultimate right-of-way width of 80 feet or more as designated by the City's adopted Thoroughfare Plan
Map or an approved plat map.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5204, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5205 RESIDENTIAL ADJACENCY TO INSTITUTIONAL USE STANDARDS
a) A fence or screening device is not required to be installed on property developed or zoned for institutional use abutting
property that is developed or zoned for residential use.
b) For purposes of this Section 3.5205, an “institutional use” shall mean the following uses:
1) Property used solely for a church, synagogue, mosque, temple, or other place of worship;
2) Public/private schools/day care centers;
3) Parks/Open Space/Trails; and
4) Any other use described or defined as a community facility.
c) Fences, walls, and dense landscaping hedges are permitted to be used as a screening device within the same
residential district.
d) Any required vegetative screen must:
1) be not less than six (6) feet high;
2) comply with the Residential Landscape Regulations set forth by Sections 3.5400 et. seq. of the Zoning
Ordinance;
3) comply with applicable regulations set forth in Section 4.5200;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/598
4) be maintained by HOA, if applicable, or property owner, and
5) have 75% opacity.
e) The owner of the property on which the institutional use is located shall maintain all fences and screening devices
located on the property in a healthy, growing condition.
f) All installed fences and screening devices shall comply with any applicable additional standards set forth in Section
4.5200.
g) Screening of playgrounds or private or public parks for institutional uses which do not contain a structure or paving
within 30 feet of a common residential property line is not required by this Section 3.5205.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5205, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5206 ADJACENCY TABLE
Table 3.5206 below summarizes the standards for fences constructed between the adjacent uses described in Sections
3.5202 through 3.5205, above. To the extent of any conflict between Table 3.5206 and the provisions of Sections 3.5202
through 3.5205, the provisions of Section 3.5202 through 3.5205 shall control. Compliance with all provisions of Sections
3.5202 and 3.5205 is required notwithstanding the omission of such requirement from Table 3.5206.
Table 3.5206
Zoning of Subject
Property
Zoning or Use of
Adjacent Property
Fence
Required?
Primary fence material, if installed
Single-family residential Single-family
residential No 6-foot wooden/PVC/Chainlink fence with
steel posts/tubular steel
Single-family residential Institutional No
6-foot architectural steel/ornamental iron
fence with 6-foot vegetative screening
wall
Single-family residential Right-of-way < 80 feet Yes
6-foot wooden fence or 6-foot
architectural steel/ornamental iron with
6-foot vegetative screening wall
Single-family residential Right-of-way = 80 feet Yes
6-foot masonry fence with decorative
landscaping or 6-foot architectural
steel/ornamental iron fence with 6-foot
vegetative screening wall
Multifamily
Right-of-way, Single-
Family Residential,
Nonresidential, or
Institutional
Yes
6-foot masonry fence with decorative
landscaping or 6-foot architectural
steel/ornamental iron fence with 6-foot
vegetative screening wall
Single-family residential Multifamily Yes
6-foot masonry fence with decorative
landscaping or 6-foot architectural
steel/ornamental iron fence with 6-foot
vegetative screening wall
(Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18; Ordinance 2019-09, sec. 1(B), adopted 3/12/19)
3.5207–3.5220 RESERVED
3.5221 WOOD FENCE MATERIAL STANDARDS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/598
All wooden fences shall be constructed in accordance with the following minimum standards:
a) Fence planks or pickets must be at least 5/8-inch-thick and shall be either spruce or any naturally rot
resistant material (e.g. cedar, cypress, redwood). Pine pickets and planks (treated or untreated) are prohibited. An
alternative wood material may be used if the product is determined by the Director of Planning and the Chief
Building Official to be of superior quality and have a longer useful life than the other wood materials otherwise
allowed by this paragraph.
b) Fences constructed adjacent to a public street, right-of-way, open space, trail or other designated public area
shall have the exposed posts and rails oriented toward the inside of the property and away from public view.
c) The bottom of a wood fence shall be constructed with no ground to wooden plank contact; provided,
however, the ground-to-fence separation shall not exceed four (4) inches.
d) A kick board made of material that is suitable for ground contact may be installed to cover the gap between
the ground and the bottom of the fence planks; provided, however, such kick board shall be installed such that
surface drainage is not impeded or blocked.
e) Vertical posts on wood fences shall be installed subject to the following:
1) All vertical posts shall be a minimum 2-3/8 inch outside diameter by .095 (Schedule 20) galvanized
steel and shall be capped using a galvanized cap designed for this type of application. Fences that are
required to be maintained by a property/homeowners association in accordance with a Planned
Development district, shall use 0.130 (Schedule 40) galvanized steel posts.
2) For fences measuring between five (5) feet and seven (7) feet in height, vertical posts shall be spaced
at a maximum distance of eight (8) feet on-center, embedded a minimum of 24 inches into a 30-inch-deep,
six (6) inch diameter (minimum) concrete post footing. Fences that are required to be maintained by a
property/homeowners association in accordance with a Planned Development district, shall have posts that
are embedded a minimum of 36-inches into a minimum 42-inch-deep, six (6) inch diameter concrete post
footing.
3) For fences measuring between seven (7) feet and eight (8) feet in height, vertical posts shall be spaced
at a maximum distance of six (6) feet on-center, embedded a minimum of 32 inches into a 42-inch- deep, six
(6) inch diameter (minimum) concrete post footing. Fences that are required to be maintained by a
property/homeowners association in accordance with a Planned Development district, shall have posts that
are embedded a minimum of 36-inches into a minimum 42-inch-deep, six (6) inch diameter concrete post
footing.
4) Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection e) to the contrary, the Chief Building Official may
require more stringent requirements relating to the placement and size of vertical fence posts based upon
soil conditions and boring test results.
f) Fence pickets shall be installed vertically and plumb to horizontal bracing stringers or rails (bottom and top
nailer boards) running from vertical post to post using one and three fourths (1-3/4) inch minimum galvanized
screw shank or ring shank nails.
g) One horizontal stringer will be required for every two (2) feet of fence height. The size of the stringers shall
be no less than two (2) inches by three (3) inches and shall be secured to the steel posts using noncorrosive
metal anchor straps and 1/4-inch minimum noncorrosive lag bolts. Fences that are six (6) feet in height shall have
a minimum of three (3) horizontal stringers and fences greater than six (6) feet in height shall have four (4)
horizontal stringers.
h) All materials shall be securely fastened (i.e., vertical pickets to horizontal stringers to vertical posts) to ensure
a continual, attractive appearance and safe conditions, free from rot, rust, other sources of decay and vandalism.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5221, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18; Ordinance 2018-51 adopted
8/28/18)
3.5222 MASONRY FENCE MATERIAL STANDARDS
a) Masonry walls, fences and screening devices shall be constructed of:
1) brick;
2) stone;
3) decorative split-face block; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/598
4) a reinforced concrete wall provided such wall has a finished appearance similar to separately laid masonry
materials.
b) Masonry columns shall be spaced a maximum of 32 feet apart on-center; the capstone of columns shall not exceed nine
(9) feet in height; columns shall extend at least eight (8) inches above the remainder of the screening wall; and columns shall
extend horizontally at least three (3) inches from the vertical plane of the wall.
c) Masonry walls and their foundations shall be engineered and have the certification or seal of a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of Texas.
d) There shall be no separation between the masonry wall and the ground (i.e. concrete footing), and the wall shall include
openings for drainage (i.e. weep holes).
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5222, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5223 WROUGHT IRON FENCE MATERIAL STANDARDS
a) Shrubs must be planted a distance of not greater than three (3) feet on center for the entire length of, and within two (2)
feet parallel to, all wrought iron, architectural steel, ornamental iron, tubular steel or other decorative-type metals when
allowed or required to be installed.
b) The Planning Director shall have the authority to allow an increase in the shrubbery spacing requirement set forth in
subsection a), above, based on the recommended spacing requirements for the plant species to be used.
c) Unless masonry columns are used, all posts for a wrought iron, architectural steel, ornamental iron, tubular steel or
other decorative-type metal fence shall be of the same or similar material type and color as the fence panels and shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and industry standards.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5223, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5224 PVC FENCE MATERIAL STANDARDS
PVC or vinyl composite fences shall be subject to the following:
a) All fence panels shall be white, gray, tan or similar neutral or earth-tone color;
b) Unless masonry columns are used, all posts shall be the same material type and color as the fence panels in
order to provide for a uniform appearance;
c) Installation shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and industry standards; and
d) The fence shall comply with all applicable provisions of Section 4.5200.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5224, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5225 CHAINLINK FENCE MATERIAL STANDARDS
a) Chainlink fences may be installed if another type of fence is not otherwise required for screening purposes.
b) Notwithstanding subsection a), above, a chainlink fence or other type of wire material used as a fence is not permitted
to be installed adjacent to any nonresidential use abutting a public thoroughfare that has a right-of-way width of greater than
80 feet, excluding parks, schools, churches and other places of worship, sports and play areas, and athletic and sports
facilities that are part of a park, school or church or other place of worship.
c) If chainlink fence is permitted by right within a residentially zoned area, excluding detached single-family units, such
fencing shall require a top and bottom rail.
d) All chainlink fences shall be constructed subject to the following:
1) Vertical posts shall comply with the following:
i) All vertical terminal posts (corner, gate and end) shall be a minimum 2-3/8 inch outside diameter by .065
gauge galvanized steel and shall be capped using an aluminum or galvanized post cap designed for this
type of application.
ii) All vertical line posts shall be a minimum 1-5/8 inch outside diameter x .065 gauge galvanized steel and
shall be capped using an aluminum or galvanized post cap designed for this type of application.
iii) All post lengths shall equal the fence height plus the bury depth of 24 inches minimum into a 30-inchdeep
minimum, six (6) inch diameter (minimum) concrete post footing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/598
2) The top and bottom rail shall be a minimum 1-3/8 inch outside diameter x .055 gauge galvanized steel.
3) The chainlink fabric shall be a minimum 11-1/2 gauge, galvanized material with a minimum 12-gauge single
strand tension wire along the bottom of the fabric. Tension wire to be pig-ringed to fabric on 16 to 18 inch centers
maximum and set to within four (4) inches or less from the bottom of the fence. Fabric to be secured to top rail
and line posts by minimum 11-gauge aluminum fence ties on 16 to 18 inch centers.
4) All materials shall be securely fastened using galvanized bands, bolts, tension bars, etc. to ensure a
continual, attractive appearance and safe conditions.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5225, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5226 BARBED WIRE
The use of barbed wire as a fence material is prohibited except in the following circumstances:
a) Barbed wire may be used on undeveloped parcels with an area of greater than three (3) acres; and
b) Barbed wire may be used as fencing necessary for containing livestock actually located and kept on property
where agricultural uses are permitted.
(Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
3.5227–3.549 RESERVED
3.5250 MAINTENANCE
a) If a Homeowners' Association (HOA) exists, the HOA shall be responsible for upkeep and maintenance of fencing or
screening device and the parkways between said devices and the curb or street pavement that constitute common areas of
the subdivision over which the HOA has jurisdiction.
b) If no HOA exists, then the individual owner of the property on which the fence is located shall be responsible for the
maintenance or upkeep of fencing or screening device and the parkway between said devices and the curb or street
pavement.
c) The City shall have the right to levy an assessment for the expense of needed repairs or maintenance should
homeowners or the HOA fail to maintain said fencing or screening devices and the parkway between said devices and the
curb or street pavement.
d) All portions of fences, required or optional, shall be maintained by the HOA (if one exists) or the owner of the property
so that the fence or screening devices are structurally sound and in a state of good repair, with all materials and fasteners
free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot, rust or loosening, and in a condition in which they do not pose a health or
safety risk. Fences shall not be more than ten (10) degrees out of vertical alignment as measured from the base. All broken,
damaged, removed or missing parts of a fence shall be replaced by the owner within ten (10) days of receiving notice from
the Chief Building Official or their designee.
e) At all street intersections, a clear vision must be maintained across the lot for a distance of 25 feet back from the
property corner along both streets.
f) The City Engineer, or his designee, must approve the location of the entrance sign to ensure said device will not obstruct
visibility and that there are no traffic safety issues.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5250, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/598
3.5251 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
a) Residential fences shall also meet any other requirements found in Section 4.5200, if applicable.
b) Structures and fences in existence at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from the General Fence
Design standards but shall conform to the maintenance requirements set forth in Section 4.5200. Any replacement,
expansion or structural addition of any kind to these structures or fences shall conform to the provisions of this Section.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5251, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-43 adopted 7/10/18)
HOME OCCUPATIONS
3.5300 HOME OCCUPATIONS
a) Customary home occupations are those ordinarily carried on in a home which are not detrimental or injurious to
adjoining property, provided that all such uses meet the following criteria:
1) Located in the dwelling and that no assistant, not a member of the family residing on the premises, is
employed;
2) No sign advertising such home occupation is displayed;
3) This use shall not increase normal automobile vehicle traffic in the neighborhood; nor require additional offstreet
parking in order to conduct business;
4) This use shall not involve the installation or outside storage of any machinery; equipment or materials other
than customary to normal household operations; and,
5) This use shall be deemed incidental and shall never be permitted as a principal use, but only as a secondary
use, and shall never involve the conduct of a retail business;
b) Customary home occupations may include, but are not limited to the following uses:
1) The office of a notary public, accountant, bookkeeper, architect, lawyer, engineer, musician, or artist;
2) A place where 6 or fewer children under 16 years of age are received for care, custody or maintenance;
3) Dressmaking, millinery, washing or ironing;
c) Customary home occupations shall not include but not limited to the following uses:
1) Barber shops, beauty shops, hairdressers;
2) Carpenter shops, electrical shops, plumbing shops;
3) Radio and/or TV shops;
4) Real estate sales office;
5) Tin shops, auto repairing, furniture repairing, or similar uses.
6) Taxidermy shops, candle making or any other commercial activity utilizing corrosive, toxic, caustic, or
flammable liquids.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5300, adopted 7/9/13)
3.5400 RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING, STREETSCAPING, AND AMENITY STANDARDS*
3.5401 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
a) These standards shall apply to any single-family detached and duplex residential zoning classification. Any area within a
planned development district or overlay district containing landscaping standards shall be regulated by the standards
contained in those respective ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/598
b) Permitted tree species shall be those identified in the City of Midlothian's approved tree list (see Section 4.5404) and
shall not be planted in utility easements or rights-of-way, nor shall be placed in an area such that the mature canopy of the
tree will interfere with overhead utility lines. No trees shall be planted within 10 feet of a fire hydrant or within required
visibility sight triangles at street intersections.
c) Native, drought-resistant tree and plant materials shall be permitted. Authorized plant materials and sizes shall be those
identified in Section 4.5404 along with any other additional requirements as indicated in Section 4.5400.
d) All required landscaping shall be planted prior to any request for final building inspection and no Certificate of
Occupancy shall be issued until such plant materials have been installed.
1) The Planning Director or the designated representative, may provide temporary relief from this provision in
accordance with Section 4.5400.
e) All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition and must be replaced with plant material of
similar variety and size if damaged, destroyed, or removed, All landscape areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, dead
plants and turf, and other similar deleterious materials.
f) An automatic irrigation system is required for all landscaping. The irrigation system shall be designed with zones to water
plants based on best management practices for the sustainability of the landscaped area.
1) The irrigation system shall be designed with efficient water usage as an operational goal.
2) The installed irrigation equipment shall include appropriate shut-off devices, manual override and rain/freeze
sensors.
g) In conjunction with new construction, all lawns and landscaping shall be irrigated by an underground automatic system.
1) This system shall adhere to the manufacturers' specifications and the rules and regulations established by
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) or successor agency, unless local regulations are more
restrictive.
2) On large area lots, the area of irrigation may be limited to the front yard, side yard(s) and around the
perimeter of the foundation or 12,000 square feet, whichever is more.
(Ordinance 2015-09 adopted 3/10/15)
3.5402 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL USES (ATTACHED AND DETACHED)
a) The shrub and tree requirements listed in this Section shall constitute the minimum landscape requirements for both
single-family attached and detached residential uses.
b) Front yard shrubs are required for each residential lot and shall be placed along the front, street-facing portion of the
house near the foundation. Individual shrubs shall be a minimum of three (3) gallon in size, totaling a minimum of eighteen
(18) such shrubs per residential lot.
c) For lots with an area less than 9,000 square feet, the following landscaping is required for each residential lot:
1) Two (2) shade trees in the front yard.
2) Two (2) overstory trees in the rear yard if the rear of the lot abuts or is adjacent to any City thoroughfare
other than a local street.
d) For lots with an area between 9,000 and up to 14,000 square feet, the following landscaping is required for each
residential lot:
1) Three (3) shade trees in the front yard.
2) Three (3) overstory trees in the rear yard if the rear of the lot abuts or is adjacent to any City thoroughfare
other than a local street.
3) One (1) ornamental tree to be placed at the preference of the owner, builder or developer within the
residential lot.
e) For lots with an area greater than 14,000 and up to 20,000 square feet, the following landscaping is required for each
residential lot:
1) Three (3) shade trees in the front yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/598
2) Three (3) overstory trees in the rear yard if the rear yard of the lot abuts or is adjacent to any City
thoroughfare other than a local street.
3) Two (2) ornamental trees to be placed anywhere on the lot at the preference of the owner, builder, or
developer.
f) For lots with an area greater than 20,000 square feet, the following landscaping is required for each residential lot:
1) Three (3) shade trees in the front yard.
2) Three (3) overstory trees in the rear yard if the rear of the lot abuts or is adjacent to any City thoroughfare
other than a local street.
3) Three (3) ornamental trees to be placed anywhere on the lot at the preference of the owner, builder, or
developer.
g) Subsections 3.5402(c)(2), (d)(2), (e)(2), and (f)(2) shall not apply if the development complies with the following:
1) A fifteen foot (15') wide landscape buffer easement is dedicated outside of any street right-of-way or utility
easements at the rear of lots adjacent to a thoroughfare or major collector;
2) Prior to issuance of any building permit for any dwelling unit within the phase of the Property where a
landscape buffer described in paragraph 1) above, is located, overstory trees not less than four (4) caliper inches
in diameter measured not less than twelve inches (12.0") above the ground at time of planting shall be planted not
greater than thirty feet (30.0') apart within said landscape buffer easement. All overstory trees shall be of the
variety and planted substantially in accordance with Section 4.5404 of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended; and
3) The landscape buffer easement required by this subsection g) shall be maintained as a common area for the
benefit of the development by a homeowners' association or district with authority to levy assessments to provide
funding for such maintenance.
h) At the time of planting, all trees required by this Section 3.5402 excluding subsection 3.5402(g), shall have a main trunk
with diameter of not less than three (3) caliper inches measured six inches (6.0") above the ground.
(Ordinance 2015-09 adopted 3/10/15; Ordinance 2018-19 adopted 4/10/18)
Editor's note–Ordinance 2015-09 contained two sections numbered as 3.5401. At the discretion of the editor, the above section,
designated as section 3.5401 in the ordinance, has been numbered as 3.5402.
3.5403 LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTIFAMILY USES (APARTMENTS, TRIPLEX, FOURPLEX,
TOWNHOMES, ETC.)
a) A required minimum 20-foot landscape buffer easement shall be provided adjacent to all property lines, and be
exclusive of street rights-of-way or utility easements, with such buffer easement to be maintained by the property owner or a
designated maintenance association or district. The following landscaping is required within the required landscape buffer
easement:
1) One (1) shade tree (four-inch caliper minimum) shall be planted along the perimeter for each thirty (30) linear
feet or portion thereof. Trees may be grouped or clustered along the street frontage to facilitate site design; the
trees along all other property lines may not be grouped or clustered.
2) Credits may be applied towards the residential tree planting requirements and within the landscape buffer
easement for the preservation of protected trees as defined in Section 4.5408.
3) At the time of site plan review, the width of the required landscape buffer easement may be reduced to
provide for the location of public improvements subject to approval of the City Council following receipt of
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b) Where parking lots and drives are located adjacent to the required landscape buffer, ten (10) evergreen shrubs (each
five-gallon minimum size) shall be planted per five hundred (500) square feet of landscape buffer. The number of required
shrubs shall be calculated solely on the area of the required landscape edge.
1) A berm may be placed within the landscape edge in lieu of the required shrubs except in situations where
said shrubs will be required for a headlight screen.
2) The berm shall be 18 to 40 inches above the average grade of the street or parking lot curb, and the slope of
said berm shall not exceed a three-to-one slope.
3) Proposed berm design shall be reviewed by the Director of Planning or designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/598
c) Parking area landscaping:
1) Twenty square feet of landscaping shall be required for each parking space provided.
2) One (1) shade tree (three-inch caliper minimum) shall be required for every ten (10) parking spaces
provided.
i) Ornamental trees may be substituted for shade trees at a ratio of two to one with approval of the
Director of Planning or designee.
ii) Ornamental trees shall be 8 feet - 10 feet in height if single-trunked, or an accumulative total of threeinch
caliper and 8 feet - 10 feet in height if multi-trunked.
3) A landscape island shall be located at the terminus of each parking row and must be at least one parking
space in size (180 square feet).
d) One (1) shade tree (four-inch caliper minimum) for every 1,000 square feet of required open space shall be provided
and be located within the open space.
e) All landscaped areas shall be protected by a raised six-inch concrete curb. Pavement shall not be placed closer than
five feet from the trunk of a required tree.
1) In cases where a tree must be planted within five feet of a curb or pavement, an approved root barrier device
shall be used.
2) The root barrier must be of a rigid material system and no chemicals or flexible mesh shall be used.
f) The landscape design is encouraged to include a variety of ornamental trees and flowers in addition to the required
plantings. Any permeable surface not occupied by trees, shrubs, plantings beds, and areas around signs or other permitted
fixtures, shall be planted with turf or other living ground cover. Gravel, bark mulch, or other similar materials are not
acceptable as a primary ground cover material.
g) No site developed prior to the effective date of this section (March 10, 2015) shall be required to conform to the
landscaping requirements of this section unless the site is redeveloped in a manner that reflects a thirty percent (30%) or
more increase in the existing square footage of the building area, and/or the surface area involved in the reconstruction of an
existing parking lot.
(Ordinance 2015-09 adopted 3/10/15; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(C), adopted 12/13/16; Ordinance 2019-09, secs. 1(C)–(E),
adopted 3/12/19)
Editor's note–Ordinance 2015-09 contained two sections numbered as 3.5401. At the discretion of the editor, the above section,
designated as section 3.5402 in the ordinance, has been numbered as 3.5403.
RESIDENTIAL MASONRY, ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING STANDARDS*
3.5501 MASONRY AND OTHER ARCHITECTURAL STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
a) All buildings and structures located in all the residential areas, single-family or multifamily, shall have an exterior fireresistant
construction, having at least 90% of the total exterior walls, excluding doors and windows, constructed of brick,
stone, or other approved masonry or material of equal characteristics in accordance with this Section, Section 100.200
(Masonry Definitions), City Building Code and Fire Prevention Code. This requirement shall increase to 95% if lots are
adjacent to the right-of-way classified as 80 feet of right-of-way or greater, as listed in the Thoroughfare Plan.
b) In addition, these design standards shall be followed for all residential structures:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/598
1) All chimneys on the exterior walls shall be constructed of 100% brick, stone, or faux stone.
2) Gable ends, soffits, eaves, cornices, or other visible accent features shall be constructed of cedar, redwood,
or a cementious fiber board.
3) Any other accent feature that is not visible, except the soffit area, may be built with materials not listed
above, provided it is not a load-bearing structure.
c) The following additional standards apply to all residential structures located in any single-family detached residential
zoning classification, including residential duplex zoning classification:
1) Radiant barrier roofing is required, unless otherwise indicated in the City's adopted Building Code, with an
exception for spray foam installations.
2) A minimum roof pitch of 8:12 from side to side shall apply to the predominant roof of the primary residential
structure, except a tile or slate roof may have a minimum roof pitch of 5:12 from side to side. A variety of roof
pitches may be incorporated into the roof design provided that the predominant roof meets the minimum roof pitch
requirement.
3) All asphalt roof shingles shall be laminated architectural shingles with a three-dimensional appearance and
warranted for at least 30 years. This requirement shall become effective January 1, 2014.
4) When a house is constructed, the same front-facing (and rear-facing when home backs up to a public
roadway) elevation shall not be used on other houses within 4 lots on either side of that house, including the other
side of the street. This includes the same combination of brick, stone, masonry-like materials[,] paint, doors and
windows, and flipping the elevation (although brick and stone colors will not be compared). The Building Official or
Planning Director shall make the determination if an elevation has been repeated.
5) Front porches that are fully covered and have a minimum depth of 7 feet may encroach a maximum distance
of 10 feet into the minimum front yard setback.
6) A maximum of three (3) box windows shall be allowed per exterior wall elevation. The box windows shall
have a maximum of (not to exceed) 18-inch trim on all sides of the window and shall have a minimum projection of
14 inches from the masonry wall. (For the purposes of calculating masonry coverage, only the doors and window
pane shall be excluded.)
7) Standing seam metal roofs may be installed subject to the following specifications:
i) The metal thickness must not be less than 26 gauge;
ii) The metal must have a Galvalume finish that is non-reflective; and
iii) Paint applied to painted metal roof panels must be applied to the panels at the factory using materials
and a baking or other process that prevents the paint from cracking or chipping through normal wear and
tear of a residential roof; and
iv) Field applied painting of standing seam roofs is prohibited.
8) Aluminum and/or Steel shingle metal roofs may be installed subject to the following specifications:
i) The metal thickness must not be less than 19 gauge; and
ii) The metal must have a finish that is non-reflective; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/598
iii) All paint, coatings and finishes applied to the metal roof shingles must be applied to the panels at the
factory using materials and a baking or other process that prevents the paint, coatings, and finishes from
cracking or chipping through normal wear and tear of a residential roof; and
iv) Any type of paint, coatings, and/or finishes applied to the metal roof panels in the field is prohibited.
d) Multifamily residential developments shall comply with the following design standards:
1) Elevations within internal walkways or internal walls of private patios or balconies shall be required to be of a
masonry material.
2) Not less than fifteen (15) percent of each elevation of each building which is visible from a public street rightof-
way or property zoned or used for residential purposes must feature patterned brick work other than running
bond or stacked pattern.
3) All windows must be emphasized through the installation of molding around the windows, plant ledges, sills,
shaped frames, awnings, or another similarly related architectural element.
4) A pitched roof of any style, including, but not limited to, hipped, gabled or shed roofs shall be acceptable. The
roof must cover 100 percent of the total roof area, excluding porches and porte-cocheres. No flat roofline shall be
visible from anywhere.
5) A parapet wall is permitted if constructed so that no flat roofline is visible from anywhere.
6) All ground level mechanical, heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning equipment shall be screened from view
from the public street right-of-way and from adjacent residential or residentially zoned property with either a sixfoot
tall architectural steel/ornamental iron with decorative landscaping or a living plant screen that is six-foot tall
at the time of planting.
7) All roof-mounted mechanical, heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning equipment shall be screened with a
parapet wall to a height not less than one foot higher than the height of the equipment.
8) All covered and enclosed parking shall be of similar and conforming architectural design and materials as the
main multifamily structure. Exposed steel or timber support columns for covered parking structures shall be
prohibited and shall be finished with a masonry finishing material to match the building.
9) Each dwelling unit must be constructed with a private balcony or porch not less than 50 square feet in area.
10) All entrances into a multifamily residential development (excluding emergency exit only) shall feature a
landscape median at least eight feet wide and at least 50 feet long (measured from back of curb to back of curb).
A minimum of one ornamental and two shade trees are required to be planted for every 50 linear feet that the
median extends (in length). The required median shall be completely covered with living plant materials and shall
be irrigated with an automatic underground irrigation system.
11) All buildings facing a public right-of-way, park, or residential zoning district shall meet the following
requirements:
i. Horizontal Articulation. No building facade shall extend for a distance greater than 3 times the average
elevation of the wall's height without having an offset of 20% or more of the wall's height. This offset shall
extend for a distance equal to at least 25% of the maximum length of either adjacent plane.
ii. Vertical Articulation. No horizontal wall shall extend for a distance greater than 3 times the height of the
wall without changing height by a minimum of 20% of the wall's height. This height change shall continue for
a minimum distance equal to at least 25% of the maximum length of either adjacent plane.
iii. Exceptions. For all structures where the articulation requirements in Paragraphs i. and ii, above, do not
apply, a minimum of one 24-inch vertical offset and one 36-inch horizontal offset is required.
e) Multifamily residential developments shall offer amenities that are consistent with the scale and character of the project.
1) The number of required amenities shall be based on the number of units within the development as follows:
i. 100 or less dwelling units shall provide at least two amenities.
ii. 101–200 dwelling units shall provide at least three amenities.
iii. 201–300 dwelling units shall provide at least four amenities.
iv. 301–500 dwelling units shall provide at least five amenities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/598
v. 501 or more dwelling units shall provide at least six amenities.
2) The following items can be classified as acceptable amenities. Providing two or more of the same amenity
shall not count as multiple required amenities unless specifically stated:
i. Swimming pool (minimum 1,000 square feet surface area) with cooling deck (minimum 10 feet wide in
all areas);
ii. Centralized swimming pool (minimum 3,000 square feet surface area) with cooling deck (minimum 20
feet wide in all areas). This amenity shall qualify as two required amenities;
iii. At least four barbeque grills with shaded seating areas for at least 16 people;
iv. Tot play lot (minimum 4,000 square foot area);
v. A splash pad (water play amenity for children) which is a minimum of 1,000 square feet in area;
vi. One regulation size volleyball, basketball, tennis, or similarly related playing court. Each court shall
count as an amenity up to a limit of two;
vii. Fitness center and/or weight room (minimum 500 square feet in area)[;]
viii. Business center (minimum 500 square feet in area)[;]
ix. Movie theater room including seating for a minimum of 50 people;
x. A dog park not less than 5,000 square feet in area that is enclosed by a vinyl coated chain link fence
not less than five feet (5.0') in height. The dog park must contain a minimum of one dog waste station area,
to include a bag dispenser and waste receptacle.
xi. Other comparable amenity as approved by the Planning Director or designee.
f) Exceptions to the material requirements and roof pitch standards set forth in this Section may be permitted on a case-bycase
basis upon approval of the City Council after receiving a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission,
such approval being subject to and in accordance with the following procedures:
1) All requests for alternative exterior building materials and/or roof pitch shall be noted and described on a Site
Plan with elevation drawings.
2) The requestor shall provide a written statement explaining the reason for the request and include, upon
request, a sample of any alternative material that the requestor seeks to use.
3) An alternative exterior material may be approved only if it is found by the City Council to be equivalent to or
better than masonry according to the criteria listed in the definition of Masonry Construction found in Section
100.200.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5500, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2014-42 adopted
9/23/14; Ordinance 2015-12 adopted 4/28/15; Ordinance 2017-10, sec. 1, adopted 2/28/17; Ordinance 2017-27 adopted
5/9/17; Ordinance 2019-09, sec. 1(F), adopted 3/12/19)
3.5502 PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINING ALTERNATIVE EXTERIOR MATERIALS (RESIDENTIAL)
a) Exceptions to the material requirements may be permitted on a case-by-case basis by the City Council following receipt
of recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
1) All requests for alternative exterior building materials shall be noted and described on a Site Plan with
elevation drawings.
2) If requested by the City, a sample of the material may be required to be submitted with the Site Plan.
b) The City Council, after a recommendation made by the Planning and Zoning Commission, may approve an alternative
exterior material if it is determined the alternative material is equivalent or better than masonry according to the criteria listed
in the definition of Masonry Construction found in Section 100.200.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/598
c) Consideration for exceptions to the above requirements shall be based only on the following:
1) Architectural design and creativity. Architectural variances may be considered for, but not limited to,
Gingerbread, Victorian, English Tudor, or Log designs.
2) Compatibility with surrounding developed properties.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5501, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(D),
adopted 12/13/16
3.5600 RESIDENTIAL PARKING AND GARAGE STANDARDS*
3.5601 PAVING STANDARDS
a) All required off-street parking, loading, drives, vehicle, sidewalk and/or storage areas outside of the right-of-way shall be
designed and constructed in compliance with Section 6.16 of the City of Midlothian Subdivision Regulations, as amended,
including, but not limited to, any alternative design and construction approved in accordance with said Section 6.16.
b) One (1) carport is allowed per residential lot subject to the following:
1) The carport must be located to comply with the setback requirements for the zoning district where it is
located;
2) The area covered by the carport shall be included in the calculation of determining compliance with
maximum lot coverage standards for the zoning district where the carport is located; and
3) Driveways leading to and the parking pad beneath the carport must comply with subsection (a), above, of
this Section; and
4) No construction or installation of a carport shall commence until a building permit has been issued by the
City or the City's chief building official has determined no building permit is required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/598
c) All off-street residential parking spaces required by Section 3.5604 are to be concrete, located outside of the public
right-of-way line, have a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet, and have a minimum width of ten (10) feet per space.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5600, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2015-09 adopted
3/10/15; Ordinance 2017-14 adopted 3/18/17)
3.5602 GARAGE REQUIREMENTS
a) All residential structures, including, but not limited to, single-family (attached or detached), duplexes, triplexes,
fourplexes, and townhouses, but not apartment complexes, shall have at least one (1) garage not less than 400 square feet
in area with a minimum width of nineteen (19) feet. Garages required to be constructed with apartment complexes shall be
subject to Section 3.5604.
b) The driveway entry into each required garage structure shall be constructed with either (i) one (1) garage door not less
than sixteen (16) feet wide, or (ii) two (2) garage doors each being not less than eight (8) feet wide to allow for parking and
access for two vehicles at all times.
c) The floor area of garages shall not be included in determining the minimum required area of the dwelling unit.
d) No more than one (1) detached garage may be constructed on a parcel or lot.
e) A detached garage shall not extend into the front, side, or rear setbacks of the lot on which it is located.
f) A detached garage with an opening onto a side street must be set back not less than twenty-five feet (25.0') from the
property line abutting such street.
g) Required garages shall be on the same lot of record as the principal structure.
h) No single-family structure may be constructed with a three (3) car garage that faces towards, and is visible from, the
street frontage except in compliance with the following:
1) Street facing garage doors may be installed only when the width of the frontage is sixty (60) feet or greater;
provided, however, this paragraph shall not apply to side entry garage doors facing the designated side street on
a corner lot.
2) Either the left or right garage bay must be set back an additional five (5) feet from the other two bays.
3) A brick overlay, or stamped concrete of a contrasting color to the concrete driveway, with a minimum width of
two (2) feet, shall be placed within the driveway paving extending from the base of the exterior wall separating the
third car garage from the adjoining two car garage and shall extend in a perpendicular direction from said exterior
wall to the front drive approach. (As shown in Figure 3.5600.1)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/598
4) A second brick overlay, or stamped concrete of contrasting color to the concrete driveway, shall run parallel
to the garage door across the drive approach from one edge of driveway pavement to the opposite edge of the
driveway pavement just outside of the right-of-way line for the property. (As shown in Figure 3.5600.1)
i) For purposes of this Section, a garage shall not be considered detached if at least 10% of the length of one wall of the
garage constitutes a common wall with the principal structure.
Figure 3.5600.1. Example of Paved Overlay Requirement for Three-Door Car Garage Configurations
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5601, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2015-09 adopted
3/10/15; Ordinance 2017-14 adopted 3/18/17)
3.5603 GARAGE CONVERSION
a) The conversion of required garage space into a living/office/workshop space is prohibited unless a garage that complies
with Section 3.5602 is constructed and completed prior to or concurrently with the conversion of said garage space.
b) The conversion of garage space, where not in conflict with Section 3.5602, shall comply with the requirements of the
City's adopted building and fire codes at the time of conversion.
c) Submission of building plans to the Building Inspections Department showing for the plans and specifications for the
converted space and issuance of applicable building permits will be required prior to commencement of construction resulting
in conversion of the garage space for another use. A certificate of occupancy will be required prior to commencement of use
of the converted space for purpose other than a garage.
d) Uses for the converted garage space must comply with Section 2.04 and, if applicable Section 4.5600, as may be
applicable.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5602, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2015-09 adopted
3/10/15; Ordinance 2017-14 adopted 3/18/17)
3.5604 RESIDENTIAL PARKING RATIOS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/598
The number of off-street parking spaces constructed on each lot developed with a residential use shall be not less than the
following:
Type of Dwelling Unit Minimum Spaces Required
Single-Family, Detached 2 per dwelling unit
Duplex 2 per dwelling unit
Triplex/Fourplex 2 per dwelling unit
Townhouse 2 per dwelling unit
Garage Apartment 1 per dwelling unit
Apartment/Multifamily Dwelling
2 per unit for the first 50 units plus 1.75 per unit for all units
thereafter. No less than 75% of the units shall have an
enclosed parking space (of which no less than 25% shall
be tuck-under parking) reserved for use by the tenant and
used solely for parking a vehicle and not storage, which
space shall be counted to satisfy the number of parking
spaces required. Enclosed parking spaces include tuckunder
parking and detached or attached garage(s).
Manufactured, Mobile, or Modular Home 2 per lot, tract or land
Group Home 1 per 375 square feet of floor area
All required parking spaces shall be paved and sized as required by Section 3.5601.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5603, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2015-09 adopted
3/10/15; Ordinance 2017-14 adopted 3/18/17; Ordinance 2019-09, sec. 1(G), adopted 3/12/19)
SECONDARY DWELLING UNITS
3.5700 SECONDARY DWELLING UNITS
a) Secondary Dwelling Units are only allowed by Specific Use Permit (SUP) in the A, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, SF-4 Zoning
Districts. The minimum requirements for secondary dwelling units are as follows:
1) Only 1 secondary dwelling unit shall be allowed per platted lot,
2) Shall meet all required setbacks for the zoning district it's located,
3) The maximum floor area shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the air conditioned floor area of the primary
dwelling.
4) Shall meet overall impervious surface of the zoning district it's located in,
5) Architecture shall match that of the principal structure,
6) Height of the structure shall not exceed the principal structure,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/598
7) Only 1 meter per utility billing purposes (can't be submetered) & use the same septic system as the principal
dwelling, if applicable,
8) There shall be 1 additional on-site parking for the secondary dwelling unit,
9) The occupant of any secondary dwelling unit shall be related to the owner of the principal structure.
10) Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy (CO), the property owner shall file a set of voluntary
deed restriction stating that this dwelling unit cannot be a commercial-rental property,
11) Any other additional requirements that may be added during the review process.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5700, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2017-31 adopted 5/23/17)
Editor's note–Ordinance 2017-31 purported to amend section 3.5701(a)(3). The ordinance has been included as amending section
3.5700(a)(3).
RESIDENTIAL SIGNAGE STANDARDS
3.5800 SIGNS LOCATED IN THE RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
a) Nameplate Sign:
1) Each family may install or permit to be installed an unlit nameplate, not exceeding 4 square feet in area
containing the name and if applicable, permitted home occupation of the occupant of the premises mounted flat
against the wall of the principal building.
2) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises.
3) Ground sign or pole signs are not allowed for residential uses or home occupations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5800, adopted 7/9/13)
3.5801 SIGNS LOCATED IN (A) AGRICULTURAL, SINGLE-FAMILY ONE (SF-1), SINGLE-FAMILY TWO (SF-2),
SINGLE-FAMILY THREE (SF-3) SINGLE-FAMILY FOUR (SF-4), RESIDENTIAL ONE AND HALF (R1.5), RESIDENTIAL
TWO AND HALF (R2.5), RESIDENTIAL THREE (R3), MEDIUM DENSITY ONE (MD-1), AND MOBILE HOME (MH)
ZONING DISTRICTS
a) Nameplate Sign:
1) Each family may install or permit to be installed an unlit nameplate, not exceeding 1 square foot in area
containing the name and if applicable, permitted home occupation of the occupant of the premises mounted flat
against the wall of the principal building.
2) There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises.
b) Ground Sign: Not allowed.
c) Pole Sign: Not allowed.
d) Special Provisions:
1) Temporary signs pertaining to garage sales and nameplates not exceeding 1 square foot in area may be
permitted.
2) Churches and other religious institutions, educational institutions or any other uses found in this zoning
district that are also allowed in all other zoning districts shall adhere to the sign standards of General Professional
(GP), Community Retail (CR) or Commercial (C) Zoning Districts found in Section 4.6017 of this Ordinance.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5801, adopted 7/9/13)
3.5802 SIGNS LOCATED IN THE MEDIUM DENSITY 2 AND MULTIFAMILY DISTRICTS
Only the following signs shall be permitted to identify the use or uses of the property upon which it is displayed as follows:
a) Building Sign:
1) Maximum height of 8 feet;
2) Maximum total area of 40 square feet.
b) Ground Sign:
1) Maximum height of 5 feet,
2) Maximum total area of 30 square feet,
3) Sign shall include a landscaped, stone-base feature,
4) Only 1 sign is allowed per street frontage and/or unified development.
c) Pole or revolving signs are not allowed.
d) Maximum allowable is one (1) per property. Additional ground/monument signs may be installed upon
approval of a Specific Use Permit (SUP).
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5802, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2019-09, sec. 1(H), adopted 3/12/19)
3.5803 SPECIAL SIGN PROVISIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/598
a) Signs may be illuminated, but the source of light shall not be visible to traveled ways and shall not be intermittent or
flashing.
b) Churches and other religious institutions, educational institutions or any other uses found in residential zoning districts
that are also allowed in all other zoning districts shall adhere to the following sign standards:
1) Wall Signage
i) Maximum height of 5 feet,
ii) Maximum total area of 40 square feet.
2) Ground Sign:
i) Maximum height of 10 feet,
ii) Maximum total area of 60 square feet,
iii) Sign shall include a landscaped, stone-base feature,
iv) Only 1 sign is allowed per street frontage and/or unified development.
3) Pole or revolving signs are not allowed.
4) Animated signs shall not be allowed.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5803, adopted 7/9/13)
3.5803 [3.5804] GARAGE SALE SIGNS
a) Temporary, unlit signs announcing the holding of a sale of household possessions, shall be allowed in any zoning district
and may be placed in any yard with the permission of the occupant.
b) Total sign height cannot exceed 2 feet and shall not exceed 8 square feet in area.
c) Signs may be posted for a period of 5 days prior to the first day of sale and shall be removed within 24 hours following
the last day of the sale.
d) Signs shall not be posted on any public property, right-of-way, median, utility poles, traffic signs, or trees.
e) The City shall have the right to remove all signs without notification as is deemed necessary.
f) No garage sale sign shall use attached display devices that includes, but is not limited to, balloons, flags, and pennants.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 3.5803, adopted 7/9/13)
SECTION 4
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS
4.01 NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS TABLE (QUICK REFERENCE)
Regulation GP CR C CBD N8 LI MI HI
Min. Lot Size (sq. ft.) 12,500 12,500 12,500 No minimum – No
minimum
No
minimum
No
minimum
Min. Lot Width (ft.) 125 125 125 No minimum – No
minimum
No
minimum
No
minimum
Min. Lot Depth (ft.) – – – – – – – –
Min. Masonry
Coverage
90% 90% 90% 90% 90% 90% 90% 90%
Max. Impervious
Coverage
80% 80% 80% No
maximum
80% 85% 85% 85%
Max. Height (ft.) 35 35 35 3 stories 20 or
2 stories
35 60 or
5 stories
No
maximum
Min. Front Yard
Setback (ft.)
25 25 25 No
minimum,
max. 10 ft.
Maximum 15
ft.
25 25 25
Min. Side Yard
Setback (ft.)
(side/res/nonres)
15/10/20 15/10/20 15/10/20 No minimum Min. 5 ft.
Max. 10 ft.
15/10/20 15/0/20 15/0/20
Min. Rear Yard
Setback (ft.)
(nonres/res)
10/20 10/20 10/20 No
minimum; 10
ft. if adjacent
to residential
only
Min. 5 ft.
Max. 10 ft.
10/20 10/20 10/20
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.01, adopted 7/9/13)
4.02 PERMITTED USES
a) In every zoning district, no building, structure, land or premises will be used and no building or structure shall hereafter
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, except for 1 or more of the uses listed in Section 2.04 Use Chart and as
regulated per each zoning district regulations. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.02, adopted 7/9/13)
4.03–4.99 RESERVED
GENERAL PROFESSIONAL (GP)
4.100 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is [to] permit a restrictive area for low intensity office or professional uses which may be
located close to all types of incidental uses, with appropriate buffers and landscaping so as not to create a blighting effect on
adjacent residential areas. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.100, adopted 7/9/13)
4.101 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 12,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width 125 feet*
Maximum Lot Coverage 80%
Maximum Height 35 feet**
Minimum Masonry Coverage 90%
Minimum Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
15/10/20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(nonresidential/residential)
10/20 feet
* Measured at the front setback line
** May extend an additional 15 feet if it has a distinct architectural feature of the structure and is not considered usable floor
area (i.e. towers, steeples, domes, spires, roof gables) and must be approved by the planning director.
Nonresidential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 4.5100
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/598
Fencing Regulations see Section 4.5200
Landscaping/Streetscaping Regulations see Section 4.5400
Masonry, Architecture Design & Building see Section 4.5500
Parking Regulations see Section 4.5600
Signage Regulations see Section 4.6000
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.101, adopted 7/9/13)
COMMUNITY RETAIL (CR)
4.200 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is to permit a limited area of service establishments and retail stores for the benefit of
adjacent and nearby residential development, and in which district all trade is conducted indoors and in such a manner as to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/598
be capable of placement adjacent to residential districts without changing the character of the later [latter]. (Ordinance 2013-
24, sec. 4.200, adopted 7/9/13)
4.201 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 12,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width 125 feet*
Maximum Lot Coverage 80%
Maximum Height 35 feet**
Minimum Masonry Coverage 90%
Minimum Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
15/10/20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(nonresidential/residential)
10/20 feet
* Measured at the front setback line
** May extend an additional 15 feet if it has a distinct architectural feature of the structure and is not considered usable floor
area (i.e. towers, steeples, domes, spires, roof gables) and must be approved by the planning director.
Nonresidential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 4.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 4.5200
Landscaping/Streetscaping Regulations see Section 4.5400
Masonry, Architecture Design & Building see Section 4.5500
Parking Regulations see Section 4.5600
Signage Regulations see Section 4.6000
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.201, adopted 7/9/13)
COMMERCIAL (C)
4.300 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is intended to permit a much greater variety of service and retail uses than the other
retail and service areas. This district is designed to contain some uses that have intensities greater than that which would be
desired to be placed adjacent to residential neighborhoods. It is also designed to be a transition district between industrial
type uses and residential uses. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.300, adopted 7/9/13)
4.301 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area 12,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width 125 feet*
Maximum Lot Coverage 80%
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/598
Maximum Height 35 feet**
Minimum Masonry Coverage 90%
Minimum Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
15/10/20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(nonresidential/residential)
10/20 feet
* Measured at the front setback line
** May extend an additional 15 feet if it has a distinct architectural feature of the structure and is not considered usable floor
area (i.e. towers, steeples, domes, spires, roof gables) and must be approved by the planning director.
Nonresidential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 4.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 4.5200
Landscaping/Streetscaping Regulations see Section 4.5400
Masonry, Architecture Design & Building see Section 4.5500
Parking Regulations see Section 4.5600
Signage Regulations see Section 4.6000
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.301, adopted 7/9/13)
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD)
4.400 PURPOSE
The purpose of the CBD Central Business District (CBD) zoning category is to accommodate the types of business and
commercial uses that have historically been located in the Midlothian Central Business area. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec.
4.400, adopted 7/9/13)
4.401 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area No minimum
Minimum Lot Width No minimum
Maximum Lot Coverage No minimum
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/598
Maximum Height 10 stories
Minimum Masonry Coverage 90%
Minimum Front Yard Setback No minimum
Minimum Side Yard Setback No minimum
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(nonresidential/residential)
0/10 feet
Nonresidential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 4.5100
Fencing Regulations* see Section 4.5200
Landscaping*/Streetscaping Regulations see Section 4.5400
Masonry, Architecture Design & Building see Section 4.5500
Parking Regulations* see Section 4.5600
Signage Regulations see Section 4.6000
* No minimum for this standard is required within this district
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.401, adopted 7/9/13)
4.402 RESIDENTIAL USES IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD)
a) Residential uses in the CBD require a Specific Use Permit[.]
b) Residential dwelling units shall be allowed as secondary/ancillary uses in upper stories of structures only, while
maintaining Central Business District uses as the primary use in the first/ground floor.
c) Floor plans shall be required to be submitted in conjunction with the Specific Use Permit. The floor plans shall include
the location and square footage of all nonresidential uses, the layout, square footage and total number of residential units.
d) All buildings and structures approved for residential uses must meet all applicable Uniform Building and Fire Codes.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.402, adopted 7/9/13)
4.403 DOWNTOWN DESIGN GUIDELINES & REVIEW AUTHORITY
a) New or remodeled structures in the Central Business District are to incorporate the historic character and appearance of
existing downtown structures and must follow the design regulations incorporated herein and also strive to follow the adopted
“Downtown Development Guidelines.”
b) These design regulations shall only apply to exterior improvements and renovations. All developments shall be subject
to review by the Historic Advisory Board (HAB) who should advise and make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning
Commission (P&Z) for final approval.
c) A project will not be penalized for not complying with these guidelines. However, the Historic Advisory Board and
Planning and Zoning Commission will review each project against these guidelines for consistency.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/598
d) The Historic Advisory Board (HAB) and Planning and Zoning Commission (P&Z) shall be primarily responsible for
determination of compliance with the CBD historic regulations and provide oversight of the guidelines.
e) Specifically, the Historic Advisory Board (HAB) shall have sole review and comment authority of any exterior
rehabilitation projects that have a total cost up to 25% of the total current year appraised value of the structure and property.
1) Both the Historic Advisory Board (HAB) and the Planning and Zoning Commission (P&Z) shall have review
authority of new exterior construction projects and exterior rehabilitation projects that have a total cost above 25%
of the total current year appraised value of the structure.
f) The City Council shall hear all appeals with respect to the decisions of the Historic Advisory Board and Planning and
Zoning Commission.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.403, adopted 7/9/13)
4.404 ADDITIONAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
a) The 1st floor must have minimum fenestration coverage of 70%.
b) There shall be a wooden kick panel with a minimum height of 18 inches.
c) There shall be a minimum 5-foot awning extension at the point of main entry.
d) Window signage or cover shall be a maximum of 25%.
e) Windows shall not be opaque; the interior of the building must be visible from the outside.
f) All structures shall be 100% masonry construction.
g) Doors and windows shall have a wood, bronze, antique metal finish or the appearance thereof.
h) Windows on the second story of a structure must be double-hung or have the appearance thereof.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.404, adopted 7/9/13)
NORTH 8th STREET DISTRICT (N8)
4.500 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of the North 8th Street District is to implement the goals and objectives of the Original Town Module,
set forth in the City's adopted Comprehensive Plan. Regulations that ensure development appropriate within this corridor
should:
* Encourage economic development that is sensitive to the identity of the City;
* Preserve the corridor as an entryway into the downtown area;
* Allow full utilization of small or irregularly sized parcels;
* Unify the area as a cohesive and attractive commercial corridor;
* Restricting certain land uses that may inhibit investment and improvement of property; and,
* Create a pedestrian-oriented streetscape.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.500, adopted 7/9/13)
4.501 BOUNDARIES
The North 8th Street District (8th) shall apply to all property located on both sides of North 8th Street from West Avenue B to
West Avenue E, and being one lot deep. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.501, adopted 7/9/13)
4.502 ALLOWED USES
a) Existing uses are grandfathered from these regulations. Projects which have received final site plan approval or building
permit approval prior to the effective date of this ordinance are also exempt from these regulations.
1) Any existing single-family residential use is exempt from all the nonconforming standards found in Section 9.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/598
b) The following are the only allowed uses within the North 8th Street District with a maximum floor area ratio of 1:1:
1) Existing single-family residential.
2) Professional office use (accountant, bank, insurance, lawyer, real estate, tax advisor, travel agent, etc.).
3) Medical office use (doctor, dentist, or other licensed medical practitioner).
4) Counseling services (psychiatrist, psychologist, or other licensed counseling practitioner).
5) Retail shops and services (computer software, clothing, jewelry, flower shop, candles, arts & crafts, hobby
shops, artist studio, photography, barber/hair salon, professional licensed massage).
6) Animal services (grooming, small animal veterinarian, etc.; kennels not allowed).
7) Medical records production.
8) Restaurants 1,000 square feet or greater of seating area, with an approved Specific Use Permit (SUP);
restaurants under 1,000 square feet of seating area are allowed by-right provided all other Zoning and Subdivision
requirements are met.
c) Any use not listed above shall require an amendment to the Use Section above. Any new use shall be consistent and
compatible with the adjacent uses of the North 8th Street District and subject to approval of the Planning & Zoning
Commission and City Council.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.502, adopted 7/9/13)
4.503 AREA REGULATIONS
The Planning Director shall have the authority and responsibility to establish specific internal procedures and submittal
requirements for the review and processing of all land use applications within the North 8th Street District. At minimum, a site
plan and building elevations shall be required. The site plan shall show building location, access, parking, landscaping,
fences, signage, and lighting.
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area No minimum
Minimum Lot Width No minimum
Maximum Lot Coverage No minimum
Maximum Height 20 feet
Minimum Masonry Coverage 90%
Minimum Front Yard Setback 15 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback 5/10 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(nonresidential/residential)
5/10 feet
Nonresidential Regulation Standard
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/598
Accessory Buildings see Section 4.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 4.506 [4.507]
Landscaping/Streetscaping Regulations see Section 4.508 [4.509]
Masonry, Architecture Design & Building see Section 4.503 [4.504]
Parking Regulations see Section 4.505 [4.506]
Signage Regulations see Section 4.504 [4.505]
Lighting Regulations see Section 4.507 [4.508]
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.503, adopted 7/9/13)
4.504 ARCHITECTURAL REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/598
a) Architecture shall consist of a historical theme consistent with the existing construction of the area and approved by the
Planning & Zoning Commission and/or the Historic Advisory Board. Such elements include, but not limited to:
b) Exterior walls may be of a cementious fiberboard material consistent with the historic-themed architecture[.]
c) Roof pitches & slopes shall be a material consistent with the architectural design of surrounding structures.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.504, adopted 7/9/13)
4.505 SIGNAGE REGULATIONS
a) Signage shall be consistent with the following requirements:
1) Ground signs shall only be allowed for nonresidential uses.
i) Maximum height of 4 feet and 20 square feet of sign face (limit 2 sides).
ii) Shall only be externally lit.
iii) Shall be landscaped at the base and be of an architecture style appropriate to the character of the
building and District.
b) Signage shall be integrated into the building design and be of style that complements the architecture of the structure.
1) Wall signage may be externally lit only.
2) If no ground sign is provided, wall signage may increase up to an additional 20 square [feet].
3) All other signs shall meet the requirements of Section 4.6000.
c) Any residential uses that have a display or wall signage shall not be lit in any manner.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.505, adopted 7/9/13)
4.506 PARKING REGULATIONS
a) An alternative parking pavement may be allowed if approved by the City Engineer.
b) On-street parking may count toward the required parking if it meets the following conditions:
1) May only be allowed on streets that run perpendicular to North 8th Street (Avenue B, Avenue C, and Avenue
D). Additional approval and requirements may be required in the public right-of-way.
2) Parking plan shall be approved by the City Engineer.
c) Shared parking may be allowed for multiple uses on a single or multiple parcels provided the hours of operation do not
overlap by more than 5 hours and shall not exceed one-half of the maximum allowable parking.
d) Off-street parking is encouraged to be placed behind the building with access from the alley upon successful
improvements approved by the City Engineer.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.506, adopted 7/9/13)
4.507 FENCING REGULATIONS
a) When a nonresidential use abuts an existing residential use, a wooden or wrought iron fence with decorative masonry
columns may be allowed with shrubs or other vegetative landscaping placed along the fence line.
b) A decorative fence, such as a wrought iron, picket, or other open design, may be allowed in the front yard provided it
does not exceed 3 feet in height.
c) For the purposes of this zoning district, the higher intense use shall be responsible for the placement of the fence.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.507, adopted 7/9/13)
4.508 LIGHTING REGULATIONS
a) All lighting shall be fully shielded and downcast so as not to shine onto adjoining properties and rights-of-way and to not
be a hazard to the passing motorist or constitute a nuisance of any kind.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/598
b) Any light posts shall be of a historic and pedestrian style with the ability to hang vertical banners.
c) All light posts shall be painted black.
(Ordinance 2013-24, 4.508, adopted 7/9/13)
4.509 LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
a) A minimum canopy coverage of 25% shall be maintained for all lots through existing or new landscaping. The canopy
coverage shall be measured in relation to the coverage of the lot.
b) All other landscaping shall meet the standards set forth in Section 4.5400.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.509, adopted 7/9/13)
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (L1)
4.600 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is intended to provide areas suitable for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication
activities that are primarily light and non-offensive in nature, as well as heavier commercial uses that are most appropriately
located adjacent to industrial areas and are necessary to industrial uses as filling support or immediate needs. (Ordinance
2013-24, sec. 4.600, adopted 7/9/13)
4.601 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area No minimum
Minimum Lot Width No minimum
Maximum Lot Coverage 85%
Maximum Height 35 feet*
Minimum Masonry Coverage 90%
Minimum Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
15/0/20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
10/20 feet
* May extend an additional 15 feet if it has a distinct architectural feature of the structure and is not considered usable floor
area (i.e. towers, steeples, domes, spires, roof gables) and must be approved by the planning director.
Nonresidential Regulation Standard
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/598
Accessory Buildings see Section 4.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 4.5200
Landscaping/Streetscaping Regulations see Section 4.5400
Masonry, Architecture Design & Building see Section 4.5500
Parking Regulations* see Section 4.5600
Signage Regulations see Section 4.6000
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.601, adopted 7/9/13)
MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL (MI)
4.700 PURPOSE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/598
The purpose and intent of this district is intended to provide areas suitable for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication
activities that are primarily light and non-offensive in nature, as well as heavier commercial uses that are most appropriately
located adjacent to industrial areas and are necessary to industrial uses as filling support or immediate needs. (Ordinance
2013-24, sec. 4.700, adopted 7/9/13)
4.701 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area No minimum
Minimum Lot Width No minimum
Maximum Lot Coverage 85%
Maximum Height 60 feet / 5 stories
Minimum Masonry Coverage 70%
Minimum Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
15/0/20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
10/20 feet
Nonresidential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 4.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 4.5200
Landscaping/Streetscaping Regulations see Section 4.5400
Masonry, Architecture Design & Building see Section 4.5500
Parking Regulations see Section 4.5600
Signage Regulations see Section 4.6000
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.701, adopted 7/9/13)
HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (HI)
4.800 PURPOSE
The purpose and intent of this district is intended to establish and preserve industrial areas for heavy manufacturing uses
which by their nature may not be compatible with commercial or other manufacturing uses. Provision is also made for the
location in this district of uses which may have characteristics of a noxious nature, along with the imposition of reasonable
standards for the protection of adjacent uses. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.800, adopted 7/9/13)
4.801 DISTRICT REGULATIONS & STANDARDS
District Regulation Standard
Minimum Lot Area No minimum
Minimum Lot Width No minimum
Maximum Lot Coverage 85%
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/598
Maximum Height No max.
Minimum Masonry Coverage 70%
Minimum Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
15/0/20 feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
(street/nonresidential/residential)
10/20 feet
Nonresidential Regulation Standard
Accessory Buildings see Section 4.5100
Fencing Regulations see Section 4.5200
Landscaping/Streetscaping Regulations see Section 4.5400
Masonry, Architecture Design & Building see Section 4.5500
Parking Regulations see Section 4.5600
Signage Regulations see Section 4.6000
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.801, adopted 7/9/13)
4.802 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following are maximum accepted levels of noise, vibration, smoke, particulate matter and toxic and noxious matter
allowable for industrial uses. If the proposed use emits sanitary sewage effluent containing industrial wastes or other effluent
into City of Midlothian sanitary sewage system which is considered by the City Engineer to be unusual or damaging to the
sanitary sewage systems, a description of methods of pretreatment of the effluent must accompany the development Site
Plan. The performance standards report may be waived by the Zoning Administrator if the proposed use is considered not to
produce the listed effects.
a) Noise:
1) The day-night average sound level at the property line shall not exceed 75 decibels, unless the
property line adjoins property zoned for residential uses where the maximum day-night average sound level
shall not exceed 65 decibels. The day-night average sound level (Ldn) is the 24-hour average sound level,
in decibels, obtained after addition of 10 decibels to sound levels in the night from 10 p.m. to 7 p.m.
b) Vibration:
1) At the point of measurement taken on the property line of the source property which has the highest
reading, the sound pressure level or impact level of any operation or plant shall not exceed the decibel limits
for the octave bands designated in Column 1 below, unless the point of measurement is located on a
property line of a residential district in which case the limits set forth in Column II shall apply.
Frequency
(Cycles/Second)
Column I
Displacement
(inches)
Column II
Displacement*
(inches)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/598
0 to 10 0.0022 0.0008
11 to 20 0.0016 0.0005
21 to 30 0.0010 0.0002
31+ 0.0005 0.0001
*Steady State: Vibrations, for the purpose of this Chapter, which are continuous or, if in discrete pulses,
are more frequent than 60 per minute. Impact vibrations, that is discrete pulses which do not exceed
60 pulses per minute, shall not cause in excess of twice the displacement stipulated.
c) Smoke, Particulate Matter and Visible Emissions: Smoke or visible emissions emitted from any vent, stack,
chimney, skylight, or window shall not exceed an opacity of 20% averaged over a 5-minute period. Any emission
of air pollutant must be in accordance with the requirements of the State of Texas. Emissions shall not exceed any
of the following net ground level concentrations:
1) 100 micrograms per cubic meter of air sampled, averaged over any 5 consecutive hours.
2) 200 micrograms per cubic meter of air sampled, averaged over any 3 consecutive hours.
3) 400 micrograms per cubic meter of air sampled, averaged over any 1 hour.
d) Toxic and Noxious Matter:
1) The handling, processing, storage and disposal of hazardous, toxic or noxious materials within this
district shall be in accordance with applicable State and Federal laws and regulations. In addition, the
Planning and Zoning Commission may establish additional performance standards, including setbacks,
berms, and buffers for the sitting of facilities which handle, treat, store or dispose of potentially hazardous or
dangerous materials.
e) Other Codes and Ordinances:
1) Other codes as normally enforced by the City, such as the Uniform Building Code, electrical codes,
plumbing codes, etc. shall also apply to all construction which may occur within the “HI” Heavy Industrial
District[.]
f) Additional Standards:
1) The Planning and Zoning Commission may establish additional performance standards to protect
neighboring areas and land uses from potential industrial hazards and nuisances.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.802, adopted 7/9/13)
4.900–4.4900 RESERVED
4.5000 NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All development standards found in the remaining sections shall apply to all nonresidential districts proceeding [preceding]
this section, unless otherwise stated in that specific zoning district. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5000, adopted 7/9/13)
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS STANDARDS
4.5100 ACCESSORY BUILDING STANDARDS
a) The following uses shall be permitted as accessory uses for nonresidential uses:
1) Mechanical equipment used for the operation and maintenance of the primary structure. This equipment
shall be located no more than 120 feet to any residentially zoned district.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/598
2) Screened garbage storage on a concrete pad shall be located at least 50 feet away from a residentially
zoned district and not located between the front of the building and any street right-of-way.
3) Parking of automobiles, provided that such facilities are within 60 feet of a residentially zoned district shall be
screened and/or fenced in accordance with the requirements listed in Section 4.5200 and/or 4.5400.
4) Any outdoor storage building shall be consistent with the same building materials as the primary building and
be placed towards the rear of the primary building within the allowable setbacks for that zoning district and have a
height that does not exceed 10 feet and away from any public right-of-way.
b) All accessory buildings, tool sheds and other utility structures shall comply with all setback lines established below:
1) less than 400 square feet: 3 feet side and rear yard setback
2) between 400 - 900 square feet: 6 feet side and rear yard setback
3) greater than 900 square feet: must meet setbacks of principal structure
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5100, adopted 7/9/13)
NONRESIDENTIAL FENCE STANDARDS
4.5200 PURPOSE
The standards set forth in this Section are established to encourage the suitable use of land while advancing the following
goals of the City: to preserve privacy; ensure safety, protect the character, stability and value of adjacent land and
development; and, enhance the aesthetic quality of the City's neighborhoods and streetscapes. No fence or screening device
shall be constructed or placed in such a manner as would endanger the health or safety of the general public. (Ordinance
2013-24, sec. 4.5200, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5201 FENCE REFERENCE TABLE
Your Property Adjacent Zoning or Use Is Fence Required Primary fence material,
if installed
Nonresidential Nonresidential No
Nonresidential Public right-of-way (any
road classification)
Depends on use
(refer to Section
3.5200 or 4.5200)
Masonry fence with
decorative landscaping
and/or ornamental iron
with decorative
landscaping
Nonresidential SF Residential or
Multifamily
Yes (refer to Section
3.5200 or 4.5200)
Both require masonry
fence with decorative
landscaping
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5201, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5202 GENERAL STANDARDS
The requirements in this Section shall apply to all fences and screening devices in all zoning districts within the City. These
standards shall apply to both required and optional screening fences. Fences not required may be removed without any
penalty.
a) A fence permit shall be required and obtained from the Building Inspections Department prior to its
installation or construction, whether or not said device is required[.]
b) The fence or screening device shall be located entirely on private property and no part of said device shall be
in the public right-of-way. Typically, fences may be placed within one foot of the right-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/598
c) No fence, screen wall, or visual barrier shall be constructed or located where it obstructs the vision of motor
vehicle drivers approaching any street or intersection. All fences, screen walls, or visual barriers must comply with
the visibility requirements and policies established by the City Engineer.
1) At all street intersections, a clear vision must be maintained across the lot for a distance of 25 feet back
from the property corner along both streets.
2) The City Engineer, or his designee, must approve the location of the fence or screening device to
ensure said device will not obstruct visibility and that there are no traffic safety issues.
d) Any required fencing or screening wall shall be in place before the final acceptance of a development's public
improvements or Certificate of Occupancy, if applicable[.]
1) When a fence or screening device is built in phases for a development, the color, height, style, and
exterior finish for all phases shall be matched as closely as possible, and shall in no case be incompatible.
2) The fence or screening device shall be equally finished on both sides.
e) No Certificate of Occupancy (CO) will be issued until all required fencing or screening devices have been
erected in accordance with the standards set forth by this Section, the Subdivision Ordinance, and the Zoning
Ordinance. This requirement, however, shall not apply to conditional COs issued for model homes used for the
sole purpose of marketing and sales.
f) The height of a screening device shall be the vertical distance from the ground level to the top of the fencing
or screening device.
g) No fence or other screening device, whether required or optional, shall have a height greater than 8 feet 3
inches above the highest adjacent grade located within 10 feet of the fence. No fence or screening device located
in the front yard area shall exceed a height of 4 feet; however, no fence or screening device shall be allowed
within the front yard between the building setback and the right-of-way lines.
h) When a screening device is required as a buffer between two different zoning districts, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the more intensely zoned property to erect the required screening at the time of
building construction, if such screening device does not exist.
i) The following types of fence or screening device are prohibited:
1) No fence shall be electrically charged, except for fences or screening devices that are:
i) used to enclose livestock on undeveloped tracts 3 acres or greater in area; and
ii) located more than 200 feet from any residence used for human habitation, other than a residence
owned and occupied by the person responsible for said fence or screening device.
2) No fence, guy wire, brace, or any post of any fence shall be constructed upon or caused to protrude
over property that the City or general public owns or has an easement over, under, around, or through,
without first obtaining permission from the City. This provision does not apply to utility easements, which are
permitted to be fenced.
3) Fences constructed of barbed wire on undeveloped land less than 3 acres and walls topped with
broken glass or surface[d] with any like material shall be prohibited.
j) Structures and fences in existence at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from the
General Fence Design standards but shall conform to the maintenance requirements of Section 5.202(i) [sic]. Any
replacement, expansion or structural addition of any kind to these structures or fences shall conform to the
provisions of this Section.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5202, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5203 NONRESIDENTIAL TO RESIDENTIAL FENCE STANDARDS
For this Section, nonresidential districts shall be defined and effect [affect] the following uses: commercial, retail, industrial,
multifamily residential.
a) A fence or screening device is required for nonresidential property abutting any residential district.
b) Additional requirements for fence or screening devices used to provide screening between nonresidential
and residential districts are as follows:
1) Such a required fence is limited to a masonry or reinforced concrete wall of at least 6 feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/598
2) Such a required fence shall also meet the requirements and standards set forth by this section and
Section 3.5200.
3) If the screening fence is required to screen a multifamily use from a single-family residential use or any
nonresidential use, the fence shall be comprised of masonry only.
c) The owner of the nonresidential use property shall properly maintain all required screening devices in
perpetuity. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5203, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5204 NONRESIDENTIAL ABUTTING PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
a) A fence or screening device is not required for nonresidential-zoned properties or nonresidential uses abutting a public
right-of-way, as long as there is no outdoor storage, display, manufacturing or customary operations of the business, except
passenger vehicle parking.
b) If such a fence is installed or there is outdoor storage, display, manufacturing or customary operations of the business, it
shall either require a masonry wall or wrought iron/ornamental iron placed with masonry columns as stated within this
Section. In no case shall any other type of screen device or fencing be allowed adjacent to public rights-of-way (e.g. chainlink
fencing is prohibited in such cases). Any vegetative screening such as hedges, berm or other natural barrier shall require
approval from the Planning Director and/or the Planning & Zoning Commission and/or City Council.
1) In addition, a 20-foot landscape easement shall first be placed adjacent to the right-of-way prior to the
installation of the required fence.
2) Said easement shall be landscaped with street trees placed every 30 feet spaced on center with minimum 5-
gallon shrubs in between providing an overall coverage of 75%, all in accordance with Section 4.5400.
3) The owner of the nonresidential-zoned property or nonresidential use shall properly maintain all screening
devices in perpetuity. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5204, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5205 OFF-STREET LOADING/DUMPSTER SCREENING
a) Off-street loading areas shall be adequately screened from view of any residentially zoned property or public street[.]
b) Outside storage areas shall be located in the rear yard away from any public visibility.
c) Outside storage of trash/recycling receptacle or any garbage, refuse and trash/recycling collection shall be placed at the
rear or sides of the building and meet the following conditions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/598
1) Trash or dumpster area that meets or exceeds the masonry coverage of the principal building and matches
the exterior materials of the facade of the building.
2) Screening wall or fence shall be at least 6 feet in height.
3) Such structure shall have an opaque door that shall remain closed at all times.
d) Exceptions
1) A periodic market held in an open area, such as a farmers' or flea market are not subject to the outdoor
storage regulations.
2) Construction activities.
3) Outdoor Christmas tree sales (1 week before Thanksgiving through December 31 of that same year).
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5205, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(E), adopted 12/13/16)
4.5206 SALVAGE & JUNK YARDS
a) All wrecking yards and salvage yards with open storage of wrecked or salvaged automobiles, machinery, appliances, or
other used commodities and equipment shall be screened as follows:
1) A solid, opaque screening fence or wall shall surround such open storage area. This fence or wall shall have
a minimum and maximum height of 8 feet and 12 feet, respectively. Fence or wall materials must comply with this
Ordinance.
2) In no instance will material be allowed to be stacked to a height that exceeds the height of the fence.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5206, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5207 OTHER REQUIREMENTS
a) Nonresidential fences shall also meet any other requirements found in Section 3.5200, if applicable.
b) Structures and fences in existence at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from the General Fence
Design standards but shall conform to any maintenance requirements. Any replacement, expansion or structural addition of
any kind to these structures or fences shall conform to the provisions of this Section.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5207, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5300 RESERVED
4.5400 NONRESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPING AND STREETSCAPING STANDARDS*
4.5401 PURPOSE
These landscaping regulations provide standards and criteria for new landscaping which are intended to promote the value of
property, enhance the welfare, and improve the physical appearance of the City. The standards contained in this Section are
deemed to be minimum standards and shall apply to all new construction occurring within all the nonresidential zoning
districts, including multifamily residential. (Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/598
4.5402 PERMITS
a) No permits shall be issued for building, paving, grading or construction until a landscape plan is submitted and approved
by the Director of Planning. In the event that the proposed development requires an approved, subdivision plat, site plan, or
master development plan, no such final approval shall be granted unless a landscape plan is submitted and approved.
b) Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy of any building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in
place in accordance with the landscape plan.
c) In any case in which a certificate of occupancy is sought at a season of the year in which the Director of Planning
determines that it would be impractical to plant trees, shrubs or grass, or to lay turf, a certificate of occupancy may be issued
notwithstanding the fact that the landscaping required by the landscape plan has not been completed provided the applicant
posts a letter of credit or deposits cash in an escrow account in the amount of the estimated cost of such landscaping. Such
letter of credit or escrow deposit shall be conditioned upon the installation of all landscaping required by the landscaping plan
within 6 months of the date of the application and shall give the City the right to draw upon the letter of credit or escrow
deposit to complete the said landscaping if the applicant fails to do so.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)
4.5403 SIGHT DISTANCE AND VISIBILITY
a) Landscape planting shall not be erected or installed in such a manner as to interfere with traffic view or impose a safety
hazard. Rigid compliance with these landscaping requirements shall not be such as to cause visibility obstructions and/or
blind corners at intersections. Whenever an intersection of 2 or more public rights-of-way occurs, a triangular visibility area as
described below shall be created. Landscaping within the triangular visibility area shall be designed to provide unobstructed
cross-visibility at a level between 3 and 6 feet. Trees may be permitted in this area provided they are trimmed in such a
manner that no limbs or foliage extends into the cross-visibility area. The triangular areas are:
1) The areas of property on both sides of the intersection of an alley access way and public right-of-way shall
have a triangular visibility area with 2 sides of each triangle being a minimum of 10 feet in length from the point of
intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two sides.
2) The areas of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of 2 or more public rights-of-way shall
have a triangular visibility area with 2 sides of each triangle being a minimum of 25 feet in length from the point of
intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other 2 sides.
b) Landscaping, except required grass and low ground cover, shall not be located closer than 3 feet from the edge of any
access way pavement.
c) In the event other visibility obstructions are apparent in the proposed landscape plan, as determined by the Planning
Director; the requirements set forth herein may be reduced to the extent to remove the conflict.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)
4.5404 GENERAL STANDARDS AND SPECIES
All required landscaped areas shall be completely covered with living plant material. Landscaping materials such as wood
chips and gravel may be used under trees, shrubs, and other plants. Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions
of this Ordinance shall conform to the standards of the American Standard for Nursery [Stock], or equal thereto. Whenever
possible, drought-resistant and native species of trees, grasses, and shrubs are encouraged. Grass seed, sod, and other
material shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests and insects. All plants used to satisfy this ordinance
shall be of a species common or adaptable to this area of Texas and have all been suited for xeriscape planting methods as
well. The following is a list of recommended plants. Plant material not on this list must be approved by the Planning Director
or designated representative before installation. The following criteria and standard shall apply to landscape materials and
installation:
a) Trees shall have an average spread of crown of greater than 15 feet at maturity. Trees having a lesser
average mature crown of 15 feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of 15
feet crown of spread. Overstory trees shall be a minimum of (i) four (4) caliper inches in diameter (measured 12
inches above the ground at the base of the tree trunk) and (ii) seven (7) feet in height at time of planting. Accent
trees shall be a minimum of one (1) caliper inch in diameter (measured 6 inches above the ground at the base of
the tree trunk) and (ii) five (5) feet in height at time of planting. The following list of trees may be used when
landscaping.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/598
RECOMMENDED TREES
Ornamental/Accent Trees: Small 15-25 feet; Medium 25-40 feet
Overstory/Canopy Trees: Large 40-60 feet
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks Shade Area
Anacacho, Orchid tree* Bauhania congesta S-M Semi-Evergreen, treeshrub,
white flower clusters
275
Anaqua*, Sandpaper tree Ehretia anacua M-L Evergreen broadleaf; white
flower clusters
875
Arizona Cypress Cupressus arizonica M-L Evergreen conifer; gray
green foliage; pyramidal
shape
875
Texas Ash*, Green Ash Fraxinus sp. M-L Deciduous; fast growing 875
Ashe Juniper* Juniperus ashei S-M Evergreen conifer; green
foliage, females fruit
275
Bald Cypress* Taxodium distichum L Deciduous conifer; fine
textured foliage; fall color
1200
Bur Oak* Quercus macrocarpa L Deciduous; large acorns
and leaves, good shade
tree
1200
Carolina Buckthorn* Rhamnus caroliniana S-M Semi-Evergreen; sunshade,
glossy leaves,
reddish fruit
275
Cedar Elm* Ulmus crassifolia M-L Deciduous; narrow canopy,
good shade tree for
R.O.W.s
875
Chinquapin Oak* Quercus muhlenbergii M-L Deciduous; round-topped
tree; bold foliage
875
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/598
Condalia, Brazil Tree,
Bluewood Condalia*
Condalia hookeri,
C. viridis
S-M Evergreen; delicate
foliage; very drought
tolerant; sun-shade, good
shade tree
275
Crabapple, Texas* Mollis texana S-M Deciduous, full to partial
sun, spring flowering tree
275
Ebony, Texas* Pithecellobium
flexicaule
S Evergreen; sun; white
flowers
n/a
Escarpment Black Cherry* Prunus serotina var.
eximia
M-L Deciduous; sun to shade;
fall foliage
875
Eve's Necklace* Sophora affinis M-L Deciduous; sun-shade;
white to pink flowers
875
Goldenball Lead Tree* Leucaena retusa S-M Deciduous; delicate
foliage; fragrant yellow
flowers
275
Huisache* Acacia farnesiana M Deciduous; delicate
foliage; fragrant yellow
flowers
550
Kidneywood* Eysenhardtia
polystachya
S Deciduous; delicate treeshrub;
fragrant white
flowers
n/a
Lacy Oak* Quercus laceyi M Deciduous; sun-partial
shade; hill county native,
good shade tree
550
Live Oak* Quercus virginiana M-L Evergreen-like; good
shade tree
875
Monterrey Oak Quercus polymorpha S-M Evergreen-like; good
shade tree
875
Mexican Buckeye* Ungnadia speciosa S Deciduous; pink-red spring
flowers
n/a
Pecan* Carya illinoensis L+ Deciduous; needs lots of
space; sensitive to root
impact
1200
Persimmon, Texas* Diospyros texana S-M Deciduous; sun-shade,
smooth bark; females have
black pulpy fruit
275
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/598
Plum, Mexican* Prunus mexicana S Deciduous; sun to shade;
white flowers, fruit
n/a
Possum Haw* Ilex deciduas S-M Deciduous; sun-shade;
female has red fruit
275
Retama, Paloverde* Parkinsonia texana S-M Deciduous; fast growing,
yellow flowers
275
Red Oak, Shumard* Shumard Quercus
shumardii
L Deciduous; fall color, good
shade tree
1200
Red Oak, Texas* Quercus texana M Deciduous; fall color, good
shade tree
550
Redbud, Texas, Oklahoma,
Mexican*
Cercis canadensis var
texana
S-M Deciduous; sun-shade,
red/pink or white flowers
275
Rusty Blackhaw* Viburnum rufidulum S Deciduous; fall color, white
flower clusters
n/a
Silk-tassle* Garrya ovata S Evergreen; sun-shade n/a
Sycamore, Mexican Platanus mexicana L+ Deciduous; large leaves,
good shade tree
1200
Sycamore, Texas * Platanus glabrata L+ Deciduous; large leaves,
good shade tree
1200
Texas Mountain Laurel* Sophora secundiflora S Evergreen, part shade to
full sun; fragrant purple
flowers
n/a
Texas Pistache* Pistacia texana S Semi-Evergreen; full sun to
part-shade; red fruit
n/a
Wafer Ash, Hop tree* Ptelea trifoliata S Semi-Evergreen; sunshade;
light green foliage
n/a
Western Soapberry* Sapindus drummondii M-L Deciduous; full to partial
sun; good shade tree,
large yellow flower clusters
875
Wild Olive* Cordia boisserieri S-M Semi-Evergreen; large
white flowers, hardy to
14ºF
275
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/598
Yaupon Holly* Ilex vomitoria S-M Evergreen; sun-shade;
female has red fruit
275
*Texas Native
The trees listed below shall not be used to fulfill the planting requirements of this Ordinance.
PROHIBITED TREES
Common Name Scientific Name
Arizona Ash Fraxinus velutina “Arizona”
Bois D'arc Maclura pomifera
Cottonwood Populus deltoides
Siberian Elm Ulmus pumila
Silver Maple Acer saccharinum
Mimosa Albizzia julibrissen
Mulberry Morus alba
Lombardy Poplar Populus nigra italica
Chinese Tallow Sapium sebiferum
Arborvitae Thuja accidentalis
Willow all species
b) Shrubs and hedges shall be a minimum of 1 foot in height when measured immediately after planting.
Hedges, where installed, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual
screen, which will be 2 feet high within 1 year after time of planting. The following list of shrubs and hedges may
be used when landscaping.
RECOMMENDED SHRUBS
Large (not taller than 25 feet at maturity)
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
Bay Laurel noblis 6'-12' Evergreen, sun-part sun, fragrant
leaves
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/598
Buckeye* Aesculus pavia 6'-12' Deciduous (even in dry weather),
shade, yellow or red flowers
Evergreen Sumac* Rhus virens 4'-15' Evergreen, sun-shade, red fruit
Flameleaf Sumac* Rhus lancelota 5'-15' Sun-partial shade; deciduous; red
berries in fall; fall color
Texas Mountain
Laurel*
Sophora secundiflora 10'-25' Tree-like evergreen shrub; purple
spring flowers; sun, part shade
Texas Pistache Pistacia texana 6'-12' Semi-evergreen, sun
Medium (5-10 feet at maturity)
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora 5'-9' Bronze evergreen foliage; white or
pink; sun, part-shade
Agarita* Mahonia trifoliata 5'-9' Holly-like evergreen foliage; yellow
spring; red edible berries; sun-shade
Cenizo, Texas Sage* Leucophyllum sp. 5'-9' Dusty gray evergreen foliage; sun;
blooms throughout summer; purplepink
flowers; several new varieties;
including compact
Elbow Bush* Forestiera pubescens 3'-6' Deciduous; sun-shade, small white
flowers, black fruit
Fragrant Sumac* Rhus aromatica 3'-6' Deciduous; part shade, fall color
Hogplum* Colubrina texenis 4'-6' Part shade, full sun; fragrant blooms
Juniper Juniperus sp. 5'-10' Tough evergreen; many varieties;
sun, part shade
Mutablis Rose,
Butterfly Rose, Old
Blush
Rosa chinensis x
(Mutablis)
3'-5' Sun, large single petal flowers
change color as ages
Pomegranate Punica granatum 5'-10' Sun, upright shrub; orange blooms;
edible fruit; dwarf variety
Primrose Jasmine Jasminum mesnyi 5'-8' Evergreen, sun-shade, sprawling,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/598
yellow flowers
Southern Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera 3'-8' Evergreen, sun-shade, compact
variety available
White Brush* Aloysia gratissima 4'-8' Delicate; fragrant white flower;
suckers, can be used as hedge
Small (not taller than 5 feet at maturity)
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
American Beautyberry Callicarpa americana 3'-4' Deciduous, fruit in fall and winter,
purple; part shade
Agave, century plant Agave americana 3'-5' Sun, rosette, spine-tipped leaves
Barbados Cherry Malpighia glabra 2'-4' Evergreen, pink flowers, red fruit,
sun-shade
Barberry Berberis thunbergii
atropurpurea
3'-5' Evergreen; sun-part shade, color
foliage
Grayleaf Cotoneaster Cotoneaster
glaucophylla
3'-5' Sprawling evergreen shrub; dusty
gray foliage; sun, part shade
Juniper Juniperus sp. 2'-5' Evergreen shrubs; many varieties
available; sun
Mexican Butterfly
Weed
Asclepias tuberosa 3' Broad clusters of orange flowers
Mexican Oregano Poliomentha
longiflora
2'-3' Evergreen, sun, pink flowers
Rock rose* Pavonia lasiopetala 2'-4' Deciduous; sub-shrub, pink or purple
flowers
Rosemary, Upright Rosemarinus
officinalis
3'-5' Evergreen, sun-part shade; blue
flowers
Red Yucca* Hesperaloe parviflora 3'-4' Sun, rosette, narrow leaves
Yucca* Yucca spp. 3'-4' Sun, rosette, narrow leaves, white
flowers
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/598
*Texas Native
The shrubs listed below shall not be used to fulfill the planting requirements of this Ordinance.
PROHIBITED SHRUBS
Common Name Scientific Name
Euonymus Euonymus japonicus
Ligustrum Ligustrum japonicum
Pittosporum Pittosporum tobira
Loquat Eriobotrya japonica
Oleander Nerium oleander
c) Ground covers used in lieu of grass in whole and in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a
finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage within 1 year of planting. The following list of ground
covers may be used when landscaping.
GROUND COVER
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
Asiatic Jasmine Trachelospermum
asiaticum
n/a Evergreen; green or variegated
foliage; sun, part shade, no flowers
Columbine
Hinckley Columbine*
Aquilegia spp.
A. hinckleyana
n/a Evergreen, gray/green foliage,
yellow flowers
Confederate Jasmine Trachelospermum
jasminoides
n/a Evergreen; fragrant, white spring
flowers; sun, part shade
Frogfruit* Phla incise (nodiflora) n/a Semi-evergreen, creeper, sun-part
sun, white flowers
Lantana purple, gold Lantana sp. n/a Deciduous, sun, purple, white or
yellow flowers
Pigeonberry* Rivina humilis 1'-2' Semi-evergreen shrub
Rosemary, prostrate Rosmarinus officinalis 1'-2' Evergreen sub-shrub, sun to part
sun, blue flowers
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/598
Santolina Santolina sp. 1'-2' Species with green or silver foliage;
sun
Trailing Juniper Juniperus sp. n/a Several varieties available; not
suitable for wet, humid areas; sun
Verbena* Verbena spp. n/a Evergreen, pink, purple, white, red
flowers
Yarrow Achillea millefolium n/a Gray or green gray leaves; many
varieties
*Texas Native
d) Vines shall be a minimum of 2 feet in height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences,
screens, or walls to meet screen requirements as specified. The following list of vines may be used when landscaping.
VINES
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
Autumn Clematis Clematis sp. n/a Evergreen; fragrant white fall; sun, part
shade
Carolina Jessamine* Gelsemium
semervirens
n/a Evergreen; yellow spring; sun, part
shade
Confederate Jasmine Trachelospermum
jasminoides
n/a Evergreen; fragrant white spring; sun,
part shade
Coral honeysuckle* Lonicera
sempervirens
n/a Almost Evergreen; red blooms; part
shade to full sun
Coral vine, Queen's wreath Antigonon leptopus n/a Pink flowers in late summer and fall; sun
Fig Ivy Ficus pumila (repens) n/a Evergreen; clings to walls; sun, part
shade
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/598
Lady Banksia Rosa banksia n/a Evergreen, flowers in yellow or white;
sun-part shade
Scarlet Clematis* Clematis texana n/a Shade to part shade, spring and
summer blooms; red, rust, maroon, or
rose-pink
Silverlace Vine Polygonum ambertii n/a Fluffy masses of white; sun, part shade
Virginia Creeper* Parthenocissus
quinquefolia
n/a Deciduous
*Texas Native
e) Lawn grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in
swales, berms, or other areas subject to erosion.
GRASSES, TURF
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
Bermuda grass Cynodon dactylon n/a Excellent drought tolerance; poor
shade tolerance; sun
Buffalograss* Buchloe dactloides 4"-6" Excellent drought tolerance; poor
shade tolerance; sun
Prairie mix n/a 8"-12" Mixture of Texas native Bunch, can
add wildflowers
St. Augustine grass Stenotaphrum
secundatum
n/a Produces dense turf; shade areas
only; poor drought tolerance; sodded
*Texas Native
f) The following list of plant materials may also be used when landscaping:
PERENNIALS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/598
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
Butterfly Weed Asclepias spp. 3' Semi-hardy perennial, orange
flowers
Cigar Plant Cuphea micropetala 3'-4' Red, yellow; summer to fall flowers;
sun
Fall Aster Aster spp. 2'-3' Semi-evergreen, sun-part sun, blue
or white
Firebush Hamelia patens 3'-5' Reddish orange; summer to fall
flowers; sun
Hinckley's Columbine* Aquilegia hinckleyana 18" Yellow; spring flowers; shade
Indigo Spires Sage Salvia spp. 2'-3' Semi-evergreen, sun, dark blue
flowers
Lantana Lantana sp. 1'-2' Many colors; spring to fall flowers;
sun
Mealy Cup Sage* Salvia farnacea 3' Sun, part shade; blue, white, purple
flowers
Mexican Oregano Poliomentha
longiflora
1'-3' Evergreen; tolerates shade; purple,
pink, white flowers, suckers
Mexican Petunia Ruellia sp. 1'-3' Evergreen; tolerates shade; purple,
pink, white flowers, suckers
Mexican Sage Salvia leucantha 3'-4' Semi-evergreen; blue; spring to fall
flowers; sun
Mist flower, Boneset Eupatorium spp. and
Ageratum spp.
2'-4' Hardy perennial, white to blue
flowers
Muhly Grass* Muehlenbergia
lindheimeri
3' Evergreen; hardy perennial; sun
Pigeonberry* Rivina humilis 1'-2' Semi-evergreen shrub
Purple Cone Flower* Echinacea purpurea 2' Hardy perennial, rosette with pink or
white flowers
Perennial verbena* Glandularia 6"-1' Many colors; spring to fall flowers;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/598
bipinnatifida sun
Rock rose* Pavonia lasiopetala 2'-4' Deciduous; sub-shrub, pink or purple
flowers
Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis 1'-4' Sun, part shade; blue flowers
Shrimp Plant Justicia spp. 1'-2' Hardy perennial, sun-part sun;
orange, red flowers
Skullcap* Scutellaria frutescens 1' Evergreen sub-shrub; pink or purple
flowers
Texas Betony* Stachys coccinea 1'-2' Evergreen, gray-green; red tubular
flowers
Tropical Sage* Salvia coccinea 2'-3' Evergreen, red, pink blooms; part
shade to full sun
Turk's Cap* Malvaviscus
drummondii
1'-4' Shade; red flowers
White Rain Lily* Zephyranthes
candida
1' Ephemeral; sun, part shade; white
*Texas Native
ORNAMENTAL GRASSES
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
Big Bluestem* Andropogon gerardi 1'-2' Sun, clump grass
Eastern Gamagrass* Tripsacum
dactyloides
2'-3' Dense, part shade, full sun
Inland Seaoats Chasmanthium
latifolium
2'-4' Shade, dappled shade, part shade
Little Bluestem* Schixachyrium
scoparium
1'-2' Evergreen, part shade, full sun
Maiden Grass Miscanthus sinensis 3'-5' Full sun, part shade, specimen or
screening
Muhly Grass* Muehlenbergia
lindheimeri
2'-5' Evergreen, part shade, full sun
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/598
Purple Fountain Grass Pennisetum
setaceum ‘Rubrum'
2'-3' Delicate color accent; full sun
Sideoats Grama* Boutelous
curtipendula
2'-3' Dappled shade, part shade, full sun
Switchgrass* Panicum virgatum 3' Part shade, full sun
*Texas Native
RIPARIAN AND AQUATIC
Common Name Scientific Name Height Remarks
Button Bush* Cephalanthus
occidentalis
6'-10' Large, deciduous shrub, sun, white
ball shape flowers
Indigobush* Amporpha fruiticosa 6'-10' Large, deciduous shrub, shade-sun,
spikes of purple flowers
Roughleaf Dogwood* Cornus drummondii 6'-15' Large, deciduous shrub or tree,
shade-sun, clusters of white flowers
Crab Apple* Crategus texana 8'-15' Large, deciduous shrub or tree,
shade-sun, large clusters of white
flowers
Wooly Rosemallow* Hibiscus lasiocarpus 3'-6' Large shrub, white to rose flowers
Edwards Plateau
Sedge*
Carex microdonta 1"-7" Rhizomatous perennial, calcareous
soils
Bear Grass* Nolina sp. 2'-3' Large clump grass-like, shade-sun,
good for bank stabilization
Purple Iris Iris brevicaulis 1'-1.5' Hardy perennial, purple flowers
Pickerelweed* Pontoderia cordata 5' [5"]-1' Aquatic edge, sun, spikes of purple
flowers
Horsetail Equisetum
laevigatum
1'-1.5' Rhizomatous, grass-like, shade-sun,
water edge
Blue Water Lily* Nymphaea n/a Floating, semi-sun-sun
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/598
Pond Weed Potamogeton
illinoiensis
8"-16" Rhizomatous, whorls of purple
flowers
*Texas Native
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14; Ordinance 2017-75, sec. 1, adopted 10/10/17)
4.5405 XERISCAPE STANDARDS AND PRINCIPLES
a) Purpose. The city recognizes that it is desirable to accommodate xeriscape practices by using the principles explained
in this ordinance within the city. This chapter is intended to provide principles for xeriscaping. Each principle must be
considered during the planning and design phase, as the sequence of installation is also very important in assuring a
successful xeriscape.
b) Xeriscape Principles. Xeriscape is a method of landscaping that promotes water conservation. Rather than a specific
“look” or a limited group of plants, xeriscape is a combination of seven basic landscaping principles. These principles are
explained below in the order a landscape planner or property owner would consider to install the best possible landscape.
Each principle must be considered during the planning and design phase, as the sequence of installation is also very
important in assuring a successful xeriscape.
1) Plan and design comprehensively. Have a plan. Consider the view, slope, exposure and soils of the area.
Take into account the existing vegetation and topography of the site and intended use. Decide where & where
things will be. Most landscapes are best done in phases. A mixture of various heights of plants should be within
the planned or designed area, and arranged in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
2) Evaluate soil and improve if necessary. Soils can vary within a given site; an analysis based on random
sampling can provide information for plant selection and soil amendments. The soils in North Texas range from
clay to sand, and both are low in organic material. Whether clay or sand, the soil in your landscape will benefit
from the addition of sphagnum peat moss, compost, aged manure or other decomposed organic materials. This
will improve root development and water penetration and retention. Consult with a local nursery or Texas Argi Life
Extension Services on how to improve the soil before planting and installing the irrigation system.
3) Create practical turf areas. The type and location of turf areas should be considered a major design element
of the landscape. The selection and location of turf should be decided on the same basis as other plantings, such
as your purpose and function of the landscape. The reduction or elimination of high-water-use turf areas, and
locating them separately so that they may be watered more efficiently, can result in significant reductions in water
use. Turf grass areas shall be consolidated and limited to those areas on the site that receive pedestrian traffic
and provide for recreation use.
4) Use appropriate plants. Most plants have a place in xeriscape - even those that have high water needs. Plant
selection should be based on the plant's adaptability to the existing conditions present at the landscaped area and
native plant communities, particularly considering appropriate hardiness zone, soil type and moisture conditions,
light, mature plant size, desired effect, color and texture. Plant species that are drought and freeze tolerant are
preferred. Use of more plants with low water needs and native plants will allow the maximum water conservation.
5) Water efficiently. If an irrigation system is to be installed, it should be well planned and well managed. Turf
areas should be watered separately. Group plants with like water needs, and water each group on separate
zones. Not all plants need the same amount of water. Irrigation needs change with the season and the weather.
Irrigate according to the needs of the plants rather than watering on a fixed schedule. Even plants used in
xeriscape will require supplemental irrigation until they become established, which can take between two to three
years.
6) Use organic mulch. Mulch minimizes evaporation, reduces weed growth, slows erosion and helps prevent
soil temperature fluctuations. Organic mulch such as wood chips or bark is best, and although this mulch will
decompose slowly over time, it will improve the soil by adding nutrients. The use of plastic is not recommended
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/598
because it will cause organic mulch to slide or shift in location, preventing air and water from filtering into the soil,
causing increased water runoff. Inorganic mulch, such as rock, should be used sparingly. Surrounding a home
with rock will increase the temperatures, making the environment too warm for plants and people.
7) Maintain appropriately. Proper pruning, weeding, and fertilization, plus attention to the irrigation system, will
preserve and enhance the quality of xeriscape. A landscape adapted to the environment will require less
maintenance, less fertilizer and reduce the use of pesticides and other chemicals.
c) Xeriscape Plant Selection
1) Select trees, shrubs, perennials, vines, grasses, and ground covers based on their adaptability to your
region's soil and climate. Texas contains an abundance of beautiful native plants which are naturally adapted to
the region. Most have lower water demands, fewer pest problems and less fertilizer needs than many nonadapted,
exotic plants brought into Texas landscapes.
2) Through the support of the nursery industry, native Texas plants are becoming more available in retail
nurseries and garden centers. Combining Texas natives with well-adapted exotic plants is a key to a beautiful,
interesting landscape which conserves water. Refer to the tables in Section 4.5404 above and check with your
local nursery or Texas Agri Life Extension agent for recommendations on adapted landscape plants.
d) Xeriscaping Allowed
1) It shall be lawful for xeriscape plants to be planted or installed, so long as such xeriscape plants are located
in a planned and maintained area as defined herein.
2) The City seeks to encourage each property owner to create and sustain a condition of ecological stability on
their property, that is, a state of good health and vigor, as opposed to one of impairment and decline.
3) It is not the intent of this ordinance to allow vegetated areas to be unmanaged or overgrown in ways that
may adversely affect human health or safety, or pose a threat to agricultural activity.
4) It is the express intent of this ordinance that it shall be lawful to grow xeriscaped areas as accent areas of the
front yard, but xeriscaped areas must be limited to 25% of the front yard.
i) The accent areas in which xeriscape plants are permitted shall be in the front yard within determined
boundaries.
5) The accent areas and boundaries of the accent areas for xeriscape plants shall be determined by a border
line parallel to and no more than five feet (5') inward from the sides and rear edges of the front yard as described
and illustrated below:
i) From either edge of the side property lines of the front yard
ii) From the rear edge of the front yard where it meets the residence building line.
iii) Due to the tall height of some xeriscape plants, the area between the front edge of the front yard by the
public sidewalk and the rear edge of the front yard, save an area up to no more than five feet (5') from the
rear edge where it meets the residence building line as illustrated in this ordinance, shall remain free of all
xeriscape plants.
6) Only the turf grass that encompasses most (75% or more) of the front yard shall be allowed in the front area
of a front yard.
7) The areas described and illustrated in this ordinance are the “permitted use” accent areas for ornamental
grasses.
8) Though xeriscape plants may be allowed in any of the above defined permitted use areas, the totality of all
accent areas used that contain xeriscape plants shall not exceed 25% of the total area of the front yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/598
9) The illustration in this ordinance only shows the areas permitted for use of xeriscape plants and does not
illustrate that every area can be used simultaneously. Simultaneous use of all permitted areas can result in more
than 25% of the total area of the front yard being used, which is not permitted.
10) It will be the responsibility of the land owner to prove that accent areas containing xeriscape plants do not
exceed 25% of the total area of the front yard and that such xeriscape plants do not extend or grow beyond the
area in which such grasses are permitted.
11) Xeriscape plants in permitted use areas will not be required to meet the six-inch (6") height requirement for
turf grass.
12) Any planned and maintained area that contains xeriscape plants must have visible physical borders around
the boundaries of the permitted use accent areas (see front yard illustration in this ordinance).
i) The physical borders of the permitted use accent areas must be sufficient in depth and height to
maintain separation of xeriscape plants and turf grasses.
ii) It will be the responsibility of the land owner to keep xeriscape plants from growing or hanging over the
borders in a manner that prevents visibility of the borders.
13) As front yards are visible to the public, this ordinance about xeriscape plants only applies to the front yard or
any side or back yard that is visible to the public or other residents in the neighborhood.
i) As long as all side or back yard areas are not visible to the public, that is, enclosed by a fence that
meets the requirements of the Fences Regulations, property owners are free to utilize any landscaping
scheme of their choosing, including xeriscape, in any percentage amount in said enclosed side or back
yards, and maintain these areas as they see fit.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)
4.5406 MINIMUM LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
a) Landscaping Percentage for Street Yard Area: The street yard area is the area between the building front line and the
front of the property (right-of-way) line. For all parcels with less than 250 feet of frontage adjacent to a dedicated public rightof-
way, at least 10% of the street yard shall be permanent landscape area. For all parcels having 250 feet or more of frontage
shall have at least 15% of the street yard shall be permanent landscape area. The required landscaping shall consist of a
mixture of plant materials consisting of grass and/or ground covers, plants, shrubbery and trees of a variety of sizes as
approved on the landscape plan. The street yard shall be defined as the area between the building front and the front
property line.
b) Landscaping Adjacent to Public Rights-of-Way: A minimum 10-foot landscape buffer (interior parkway) adjacent to the
public right-of-way of any thoroughfare as designated on the approved Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Midlothian is
required. Corner lots fronting on 2 thoroughfares shall be required to observe the 10-foot buffer on both frontages. All other
street frontages shall observe a minimum 5-foot landscape buffer. Developers shall be required to plant 1 large tree per 40
linear feet or portion thereof of street frontage. Trees may be grouped or clustered to facilitate site design. The landscaped
portion of interior parkways may be included in the required street yard area percentage. The interior parkway is defined as
that area on private property between the street right-of-way line and the curb of the parking area or building area.
c) Landscaping within Off-Street Parking Areas: Landscape areas within off-street parking areas should generally be at
least one parking space in size, with no landscape area less than 50 square feet in area. Landscape areas shall be no less
than 5 feet wide and shall equal a total of at least 16 square feet per parking space. There shall be a landscaped area with at
least 1 tree within 60 feet of every parking space. There shall be a minimum of 1 tree planted in the parking area for every 10
parking spaces within parking lots with more than 20 spaces. Within parking lots, landscape areas should be located to
define parking areas and assist in clarifying appropriate circulation patterns. A landscape island shall be located at the
terminus of all parking rows, and should contain at least one tree. All landscape areas shall be protected by a monolithic curb
or wheel stops and remain free of trash, litter, and car bumper overhangs.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/598
d) Screening of Parking Areas Adjacent to a Public Right-of-Way: At least seventy-[five percent] 75% of the frontage of
parking areas, adjacent to a public right-of-way, within the street yard, shall be screened from public streets with evergreen
shrubs attaining a minimum height of 3 feet or a low masonry wall or earthen berm of equal height. Use of a wall or earthen
berm for parking lot screening should be accompanied with landscape planting in the form of low shrubs and ground cover to
soften the appearance of the wall or earthen berm.
e) Percentage of Overstory Trees: A minimum of 50% of the total trees required for the property shall be overstory trees as
specified on the approved plant list. Accent trees shall be used under existing or proposed overhead utility lines.
f) Necessary driveways from the public right-of-way shall be permitted through all required landscaping in accordance with
City regulations.
g) Residential Buffer Yards: For any development in “MF”, “GP”, “CR”, “C”, “LI”, “MI”, and “HI” zoning districts which abut
districts zoned residential or mobile home there shall be a minimum 20-foot wide green belt of live plant material of the
evergreen variety, planted on 6-foot centers, for the entire distance along which the development abuts the residential or
mobile home districts. Where a fire lane is required, the green belt may be reduced to 10 feet.
h) Multifamily Buffer Yards: For any development in “GP”, “CR”, “C”, “MI”, and “HI” zoning districts which abuts a district
zoned multifamily there shall be a minimum 20-foot wide green belt of “live plant material of the evergreen variety,” planted
on 6-foot centers, for the entire distance along which the development abuts the residential or multifamily districts. In
addition, the developer shall add 10 3-inch canopy or evergreen trees per acre of pervious property, excluding trees provided
to satisfy parking lot and R.O.W. requirements. Where a fire lane is required, the green belt may be reduced to 10 feet.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)
4.5407 RESERVED
4.5408 TREE CREDITS
a) Any trees preserved on a site meeting the herein specification may be credited toward meeting the tree requirement of
any landscaping provision of this Section according to the following table:
Circumference of Existing Tree
(measured at 4-1/2 feet above ground)
Credit Against Tree Requirements
6 to 8 inches 1 tree
9 to 30 inches 1-1/2 trees
31 to 46 inches 2 trees
47+ inches 3 trees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/598
b) All other existing trees may receive credit if they are not on the City's approved plant material list but approved by the
City Council. Should any required tree designated for preservation in the landscape plan die, the owner shall replace the tree
with one or more trees that are not less than four (4) caliper inches in diameter at the time of planting, with the number of
replacement trees determined in accordance. Tree circumference shall be measured 4-1/2 feet above natural grade.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14; Ordinance 2017-75, sec. 2, adopted 10/10/17)
4.5409 LANDSCAPING PLANS
a) Prior to the issuance of a building, paving, grading, or construction permit for any use other than single-family dwellings,
a landscape plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department. The Department shall review such plans and shall approve
same if the plans are in accordance with the criteria of these regulations. If the plans are not in accord, they shall be
disapproved and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the changes necessary for compliance.
b) Landscaping plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect, landscape contractor or landscape designer,
knowledgeable in plants, materials and landscape design. Landscape plans shall contain the following information:
[1) Reserved]
2) Location of all trees to be preserved;
3) Location of all plants and landscaping material to be used including plants, paving, benches, screens,
fountains, statues, or other landscape features;
4) Species of all plant material to be used:
5) Size of all plant material to be used;
6) Spacing of plant material where appropriate:
7) Layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler or water systems, including placement of water sources;
8) Description of maintenance provisions for the Landscape Plan;
9) Persons responsible for the preparation of the Landscape Plan.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)
4.5410 LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE
All landscaping shall be the responsibility of the property owner. It shall be permanently maintained and shall have either an
irrigation system installed, meeting all applicable requirements of the City, or shall be located within 75 feet of a bibcock,
faucet, or other water source.
a) Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other such material or plants not a part of the
landscaping.
b) All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of
the year.
c) Plant materials which die shall be replaced with plant material of similar variety and size.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)
4.5411 ENFORCEMENT
a) The provision[s] of this Section shall be administered and enforced by the Director of Planning.
b) If, at any time after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the approved landscaping is found to be in
nonconformance to the standards and criteria of this Section, the Director shall issue notice to the owner, citing the violation
and describing what action is required to comply with this Section. The owner, tenant, or agent shall have 30 days from date
of said notice to restore the landscaping as required. If the landscaping is not restored within the allotted time, such person
shall be in violation of the Midlothian Zoning Ordinance, Section 1.50.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)
MASONRY, ARCHITECTURE DESIGN AND BUILDING STANDARDS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/598
4.5500 RESERVED
4.5501 MASONRY STANDARDS FOR CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD)
a) All buildings and structures shall be of exterior fire resistant construction, having 100% of the total exterior walls,
excluding doors and windows, be constructed of brick, stone, or brick veneer.
b) All other architectural requirements found in Section 4.400 shall also apply.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5501, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5502 MASONRY STANDARDS FOR GENERAL PROFESSIONAL (GP), COMMUNITY RETAIL (CR), COMMERCIAL
(C), AND LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LI) DISTRICTS
a) All buildings and structures shall be of exterior fire resistant construction, having at least 90% of the total exterior walls,
excluding doors and windows be constructed of masonry or glass wall construction, in accordance with the City Building
Code and Fire Prevention Code. No blank walls shall face public streets.
1) The following approved masonry list shall apply:
i) Stone, brick or tile laid up unit by unit and set in mortar
ii) Stucco (exterior Portland cement plaster with 3 coats over metal lath or wire fabric lath)
iii) Cultured stone or cast stone
iv) Architecturally finished block (i.e. burnished block, split faced concrete masonry units or architecturally
finished tilt wall)
v) Architectural glass (less than 25% reflectance)
2) A maximum of 10% of the facade may include accent materials not listed on the approved masonry list
above.
b) Existing structures as of the adoption date of this ordinance shall be exempt from these nonresidential design
standards.
1) If existing structures are expanded by 20% or more of their original size, all new construction shall comply
with these design standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/598
c) The following materials are allowed for sloping roofs. Pitched roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 6:12. Architectural
elements that add visual interest to the roof, such as dormers and masonry chimneys, are encouraged.
1) Asphalt shingles,
2) Industry approved synthetic shingles
3) Standing seam metal
4) Tile roofs
5) Flat roofs shall require parapet screening which adheres to vertical articulation requirements for the main
face of the structure.
i) Parapet shall require cornice detailing.
6) The following materials are prohibited as primary cladding or roofing materials:
i) Aluminum siding or cladding
ii) Galvanized steel or other bright metal
iii) Wood or plastic siding
iv) Cementitious fiberboard
v) Unfinished concrete block
vi) Exposed aggregate
vii) Wood roof shingles
viii) Reflective glass
d) The following shall apply to all buildings within these 4 zoning districts:
1) Entryway Features
i) All ground floor entrances shall be covered or inset and shall not apply to loading areas.
ii) Primary building entrances are to be defined and articulated with architectural elements such as
pediments, columns, porticos, porches, and overhangs.
2) All buildings facing a public right-of-way, park, or residential zoning district shall meet the following
requirements:
i) Horizontal Building Articulation
aa) No building facade shall extend for a distance greater than 3 times the average elevation of the
wall's height without having an offset of 20% or more of the wall's height.
bb) This offset shall extend for a distance equal to at least 25% of the maximum length of either
adjacent plane.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/598
ii) Vertical Articulation
aa) No horizontal wall shall extend for a distance greater than 3 times the height of the wall without
changing height by a minimum of 20% of the wall's height.
bb) This height change shall continue for a minimum distance equal to at least 25% of the maximum
length of either adjacent plane.
iii) For all structures where the above articulation requirements do not apply, a minimum of one 24-inch
vertical offset and one 36-inch horizontal offset is required.
e) Architectural Design Features
1) All nonresidential buildings shall be architecturally finished on all 4 sides with the same materials and
detailing (e.g., tiles, moldings, cornices, wainscoting, etc.).
2) The rear facade of a building, which is not adjacent to or does not face a public right-of-way, park or
residential district, shall not be required to comply with the above requirement.
3) All entrances of a building along any street shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes and awnings
that protect pedestrians from the sun and weather.
4) Other design features encouraged to be used include but not limited to:
i) Canopies, awnings, arcades, covered walkways or porticos
ii) Recesses, projections, columns, pilasters projecting from the planes, offsets, reveals or projecting ribs
used to express architectural or structural bays
iii) Varied roof heights for pitched, peaked, sloped or flat roof styles
iv) Articulated cornice line
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/598
v) Arches
vi) Display windows, faux windows or decorative windows
vii) Architectural details (such as tile work and molding) or accent materials integrated into the building
facade
viii) Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaping and sitting areas or outdoor patios
ix) Integrated water features
x) Other architectural features approved by the Planning Director or a designated representative
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5502, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5503 MASONRY STANDARDS FOR MEDIUM AND HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (MI & HI) DISTRICTS
a) All industrial buildings and structures shall be of exterior fire resistant construction, having at least 70% of the total
exterior walls, excluding doors and windows be constructed of masonry or glass wall construction in accordance with the City
Building Code and Fire Prevention Code.
b) Exceptions:
1) Only industrial-type buildings or structures located in the Heavy Industrial (HI) Zoning District are not
required to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) above.
2) Buildings or structures inside private developments containing 50 acres or more with no public access and
located 500 feet or more from all public rights-of-way are not required to comply with the provisions of subsection
(a) above.
3) Lots in platted industrial developments that do not meet the exception criteria above are not required to
comply with the provisions of subsection (a) above if they meet all of the following criteria:
i) The development is at least 80% built out based on total buildable acreage that is developed,
ii) At least 80% of the structures within the subject development do not already comply with the masonry
requirements of subsection (a) above; and,
iii) The proposed structure would not front a public collector or arterial roadway.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5503, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5504 PROCEDURE FOR DETERMINING ALTERNATIVE EXTERIOR MATERIALS (NONRESIDENTIAL)
a) Exceptions to the material requirements may be permitted on a case-by-case basis by the City Council following receipt
of recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
1) All requests for alternative exterior building materials shall be noted and described on a Site Plan with
elevation drawings.
2) If requested by the City, a sample of the material may be required to be submitted with the Site Plan.
b) The City Council, after a recommendation made by the Planning and Zoning Commission, may approve an alternative
exterior material if it is determined the alternative material is equivalent or better than masonry according to the criteria listed
in the definition of Masonry Construction found in Section 100.200.
c) Consideration for exceptions to the above requirements shall be based only on the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/598
1) Architectural design and creativity. Architectural variances may be considered for, but not limited to
Gingerbread, Victorian, English Tudor, or Log designs.
2) Compatibility with surrounding developed properties.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5504, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(F), adopted 12/13/16)
NONRESIDENTIAL PARKING REGULATIONS
4.5600 PURPOSE
This section sets minimum standards for off-street requirements for new residential or nonresidential construction and
expansion or changes to existing uses. The purpose of this Section is to ensure that uses have a minimum level of off-street
parking to avoid:
a) Congestion on surrounding streets while avoiding excessive parking;
b) Discouraging pedestrian access, driving up the cost of development, and;
c) Inviting excess levels of traffic congestion, which creates increases in flooding and nonpoint source pollution.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5600, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5601 GENERAL APPLICATION
a) The minimum parking ratios standards shall apply in all zoning districts, except in the CBD District.
b) The Planning Director shall determine the parking requirement for uses that do not correspond to the categories listed in
this section using either the APA PAS Report 481/482 (Parking Standards) or the 21st Century Land Development Code as a
reference. Other sources may also be used to determine the correct ratio for unlisted uses.
c) Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to be the nearest whole number.
d) Required off-street parking spaces shall be used for passenger vehicle parking only, and in no case shall parking
spaces, loading spaces or drives be used for sales, repair work, storage, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment,
products, materials or supplies.
e) No parking spaces or drives shall be located on slopes greater than 10%.
f) Fire lanes as required by the Fire Code shall be provided and clearly marked.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5601, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5602 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required shall be computed in accordance with the following specifications:
a) The number of spaces required shall serve residents, customers, patrons, visitors, employees and consider
building design capacity, square feet of sales and service area, and hours of operation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/598
b) Each parking area shall have adequate drives and room for ingress and egress to each parking space.
c) All off-street parking shall be built per adopted City standards.
d) Whenever a building is constructed and the issuance of its initial Certificate of Occupancy results in an
increase in the number of employees, dwelling units, seating capacity, and/or modifies its use, the Planning
Director or his designated representative shall recalculate the number of required parking spaces as provided in
this Section. In the event the recalculation results in an increased number of required spaces, the owner or
occupant must comply with the recalculated parking requirement, seek a joint-parking agreement, or seek a
Special Exception as stated in Section 10.
e) The maximum number of spaces provided shall be 25% above the required minimum based on the ratios
below. Any additional parking requested above the maximum shall require a parking feasibility study to be
submitted to determine its viability. The City Council, following receipt of a recommendation from the Planning and
Zoning Commission, may approve the construction of spaces in numbers exceeding the maximum.
f) The queuing or stacking of vehicles for any use (i.e. drive-thru lanes, pick-up/drop-off areas, etc.) shall be
reviewed by City staff and approval determined on a case-by-case basis, based upon but not limited to specific
use, location, site layout, and traffic circulation.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5602, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(G), adopted 12/13/16)
4.5603 ON-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
a) On-street parking shall be permitted on local streets, unless otherwise designated by the City.
b) On-street parking along all other roadway classifications (i.e. collectors, arterials, etc.) shall be reviewed by the City
Council and approval determined on case-by-case basis, based upon but not limited to existing and/or projected traffic
volumes, roadway alignment, design speed, surrounding land use, sight distances, and compatibility with the adopted
Thoroughfare Plan.
c) The cross-section of the roadways shall be widened to accommodate the on-street parking unless otherwise approved
by the City.
d) The on-street parking shall be clearly distinguishable from the travel lanes.
e) At a minimum, the pavement design of the on-street parking shall match that of the travel lanes.
f) The right-of-way width requirements shall be increased by the width of the on-street parking facilities, unless otherwise
approved by the City.
g) Other Provisions
1) On-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from street intersections and 10 feet from
driveways, or as stated by the City Engineer.
2) On-street parking shall not be installed within 20 feet of a marked crosswalk. At street intersections a bulbout
should be present to prevent right-turning vehicular traffic from utilizing the parking lane for this movement.
3) On-street parking shall not be placed so that it restricts required vehicular sight distances below required
minimums as established by AASHTO.
h) On-street parking shall be served by sidewalks and curb cuts that meet the Texas Accessibility Standards.
i) Parking meters or parking restrictions shall not be installed without prior approval by the City.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5603, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5604 SHARED AGREEMENTS
Off-street parking requirements of a given use may be met with off-site or off-street parking facilities of another use when,
and if, all of the following conditions are met:
a) The off-site or off-street parking facilities are within 300 feet of the property or business.
b) The parking demands of the individual use, as determined by the Planning Director or designated
representative, are such that the total parking demand of all the uses at any one time is less than the total parking
stalls required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/598
c) A written agreement between the owners and/or lessees is executed for a minimum of 10 years (and may be
subsequently renewed by the consent of all interested parties), approved by the Planning Director as provided in
subsection d) below. The agreement shall be recorded and a copy maintained in the project file.
1) Should the lease expire or otherwise be terminated, the use for which the off-site parking was provided
shall be considered nonconforming and any and all approvals shall be subject to revocation.
2) Expansion of the use shall be prohibited unless the use is brought into compliance with the Parking
Regulations.
d) A joint-parking agreement shall be signed by the Planning Director, by the owner of the entire land to be
included in the joint-parking plan, the owners or owners of all structures then existing on such land area, and all
parties having a legal interest in such land area and structures.
1) Sufficient evidence to establish the status of the applicants as owners or parties having a legal interest
shall be provided.
2) The agreement shall include plans showing the location of the uses or structures for which off-street
parking facilities are required, the location of the off-street facilities, and the schedule of times used by those
sharing parking in common.
3) After approval, such agreement shall be filed in the County Clerk's Office and a copy provided to each
party and the City.
e) Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which the jointparking
plan was approved and filed, any such plan may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely
at any time without penalty, if all land and structures remaining under such plan comply with all the conditions and
limitations of the plan, and all land and structures withdrawn from such plan comply with the regulations of this
Section.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5604, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5605 DRIVEWAY SPACING AND DESIGN
The Non-Single-Family Driveway Spacing and Design Criteria for Driveways Located Within Public Rights-of-Way is hereby,
adopted as the official policy of the City.
a) Definitions: Words or phrases not expressly prescribed herein are to be defined in accordance with their customary
usage as it relates to this specific application.
1) Driveway means any public or private drive designed for vehicular access (ingress/egress) to a development
or property.
2) Driveway spacing distance refers to the distance between two driveways as measured from where the curb
radii return ends perpendicular to the street of one driveway to where the curb radii return ends perpendicular to
the street of another driveway (refer to Figure 1).
b) Driveway Spacing Requirements:
1) Minimum driveway spacing shall be as specified in the following table. For properties located at the corner of
2 intersecting streets, the spacing requirements below shall be increased by a minimum of 10%.
Thoroughfare Type Right-of-Way
(feet)
Min. Driveway
Spacing Distance
(feet)
Minor Collector 60/70 200
Major Collector 80 230
Minor Arterial (frontage road or 4 lane - divided
median 90 280
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/598
Major Arterial (6 lane - divided median) 120 330
i) Exception: A development with street frontage within the distance established above shall be permitted
to have a single driveway with a 36-foot maximum width per frontage which shall be located as far as
physically possible away from where the curb radii return of an existing driveway ends perpendicular to the
street. However, if common access can be provided from an adjacent non-single-family development, no
driveway will be permitted within the established distance with regard to the subject property, unless
approved by the City Engineer or their designated representative.
2) The minimum driveway spacing from a railroad crossing shall be 50 feet from the railroad right-of-way.
3) The minimum distance between median openings on divided thoroughfares (existing or proposed shall be
600 feet, as measured from median nose to median nose (refer to Figure 2).
4) All efforts shall be made, where feasible based on the determination of the City Engineer or their designated
representative, to align new driveways with pre-existing driveways or median openings.
5) All efforts shall be made, where feasible based on the determination of the City Engineer or their designated
representative, to establish cross-access easements and shared drives in order to increase internal access
efficiency between adjacent developments, to minimize curb cuts, to reduce excessive ingress and egress onto
thoroughfares, and to reduce traffic conflict potential. Access drives/aisles are to be extended to the
development's property boundary in order to provide for connectivity with future development(s).
6) Driveways located along State maintained roadways shall adhere to the requirements of the Texas
Department of Transportation or their successor agency.
c) Driveway Design Requirements:
1) Driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with City standards.
2) All driveways shall provide for pedestrian access that meets the provisions of the Texas Accessibility
Standards (refer to Figure 3).
3) Driveways shall be constructed without any encroachments and shall have a clear line of sight at the street
approach.
4) In areas where concrete curb and gutter exist, the driveway radius return shall not begin any closer than the
existing expansion joint at either a standard or recessed curb inlet.
5) In areas where roadside ditches exist, driveways shall have drainage culverts with safety end treatments
installed in accordance with City standards.
d) Exemption: If any of the driveway spacing or design requirements cannot be physically satisfied, the City Council, after
receipt of a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, may grant an exemption to the required spacing.
Any exemption to the required driveway spacing shall be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and
shall not be granted until every feasible option for satisfying the driveway spacing or design requirements has been
considered.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/598
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5605, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(H), adopted 12/13/16)
4.5606 PARKING RATIOS
The minimum number of parking spaces required for uses within any district shall be determined as follows:
Proposed/Existing Use Minimum Spaces Required
A. Lodging Uses
Hotel/Motel 0.8 for the 1st 50 guest rooms or residential
unit +1 per each room thereafter
B. Institutional Uses
Community/Conference Center 1 per 250 square feet of floor area
Elementary School 3 per classroom
Middle School 2 per classroom
High School 8 per classroom
Post-secondary Educational Facilities
(Trade/Vocational School;
College/University)
1 per 200 square feet of floor area
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/598
Public Assembly Hall 1 per 4 seats (fixed seating)
1 per 100 square feet of floor area (nonfixed)
Place of Worship 1 per 4 seats in sanctuary or auditorium
Child Care Institutions 1 per 400 square feet of floor area
Hospital, Nursing Home or Long-Term Care 1 per 400 square feet of floor area
Mortuary or Funeral Chapel 1 per 150 square feet of floor area
Labor Union/Day Labor Center 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Museum 1 per 450 square feet of public area
Library 1 per 400 square feet of public area
Police Station 1 per 1,000 square feet designated as
police space
Fire Station 1 per 450 square feet of floor area
Court 1 per 400 square feet of floor area
C. Recreational, Special Entertainment
Uses
Theater (performance and/or entertainment) 1 per 200 square feet
Bowling Alley/Pool Halls 1 per 200 square feet
Health Club or Gym/Recreation Center or
associated uses
1 per 400 square feet of floor area
Indoor Amusement 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Outdoor Amusement 1 per 600 square feet of outdoor recreation
area
Sports Stadium/Arena 1 per 8 seats
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/598
Lodge/Fraternal Organization 1 per 400 square feet of floor area
Golf Course/Country Club 4 per hole
Miniature Golf Course 3 per putting tee
Driving Range 2 per driving tee
D. Personal Services and Retail Uses
Personal Services Establishment 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Retail Stores (Stand-alone building or one
tenant)
1 per 250 square feet of floor area
Furniture or Appliance Sales and Repair 1 per 600 square feet of floor area
Multi-tenant Retail Center 1 per 175 square feet of floor area (15%
reduction may be provided if a crossaccess
easement & drive is provided)
Open Retail Sales 1 per 600 square feet of site area
(exclusive of buildings)
Self-Service Laundry or Dry Cleaning 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
E. Food and Beverage Services Uses
Restaurant, Bar, Nightclub or Private Club 1 per 100 square feet of seating area
F. Business Services Uses
Bank or Similar Financial Institution 1 per 450 square feet of floor area
Medical, Dental or Animal Clinic or Office 1 per 400 square feet of floor area
Other Office, Business, Professional or
Administrative Use
1 per 300 square feet of floor area
G. Automotive and Equipment Uses
Service Station (gas station/convenience
store)
1 per 375 square feet of floor area (pump
locations are not to be included as a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/598
parking space)
Motor Vehicle Repair, Garage or Shop 2 per service bay +1 for each 350 square
feet of floor area
Motor Vehicle Sales establishment 1 per 300 square feet of floor area +1
space per 4,500 square feet of outdoor
display area
Car Wash (automated, self, and/or full
service)
1 per 125 square feet of floor area (under
main roof, including wash and detail areas)
H. Storage, Wholesale & Manufacturing
Uses
Brick or Lumber Yard or Similar Area 1 per 3,000 square feet of site area
Open Storage of sand, gravel, or petroleum 1 per 2,000 square feet of site area
Warehouse and Enclosed Storage 1 per 3,000 square feet of floor area + Must
meet the requirements of the office parking
requirements
Commercial or Wholesale Manufacturing
Operations
1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Mini-warehouses 1 per 4,000 square feet of storage area
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5606, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5607 PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
a) Minimum stall widths shall be 10 feet. In addition, the dimensions of up to 30% of the total number of off-street parking
spaces may be reduced to 9 feet in width to accommodate compact automobiles. These spaces may be labeled accordingly.
b) In all cases, parking located immediately adjacent to landscaped buffer islands/areas shall include a minimum 24-inch
pedestrian stripped [striped] area.
c) The off-street parking areas shall be designed in accordance with the following diagram below. All aisle widths shall be
as indicated, unless it is designated as a fire lane with the width as indicated in the adopted Fire Code. All dimensions are in
feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5607, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5608 HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES
In each parking facility in districts “MD-2”, “MF”, “GP”, “CR”, “C”, “LI”, “MI”, and “HI” a portion of the total parking shall be
specifically designed, located, and reserved for vehicles licensed by the State for use by the handicapped. Each parking
space designated for use by the handicapped shall consist of a rectangular area not less than 12-1/2 feet wide by 18 feet
long, with a vertical clearance of 7-1/2 feet, shall be located in an area not exceeding 2% slope, and shall be located near a
level or ramped entrance accessible to handicapped persons. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be signed in
accordance with State law and restricted for use by the Handicapped only. These spaces will be provided according to the
following schedule:
Total Spaces in Lot Number of Handicapped
Spaces
Up to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/598
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
More than 501 2% of Total
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5608, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5609 OFF-STREET LOADING
All business uses shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods
within the building or on the lot adjacent to a public alley or private service drive to facilitate the movement of traffic on the
public street in addition to other parking requirements. Such space shall consist of a minimum area of 10 feet by 25 feet and
be provided as follows:
Floor area space
(in square feet)
Loading or unloading
berths
Less than or equal to 25,000 1
25,001 to 84,000 2
84,001 to 156,000 3
156,001 to 236,000 4
Each additional 100,000 1 additional
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5609, adopted 7/9/13)
4.5700 RESERVED
4.6000 SIGN REGULATIONS
4.6001 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section 4.6000 and all related subsections, hereafter collectively called the “Midlothian Sign Regulations”
are to create the legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of signage in the City. These regulations are
intended to provide an easy, pleasant communication between people and their environment. These regulations aim to
enhance the community by minimizing visual clutter along public rights-of-way that are potentially harmful to the aesthetics of
the community, traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance. Whenever
a provision in the Midlothian Zoning Ordinance, the Code of Ordinances, or other ordinances refer to Section 4.6000, such
reference shall be inclusive of all regulations and standards relating to the regulations of signs following the header “Section
4.6000 Sign Regulations” as amended and replaced. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5800, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20
adopted 4/10/18)
4.6002 SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/598
Except as provided by other ordinances, it is unlawful to construct, install, or permit any type of sign within the City without an
approved Sign Permit. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5801, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6003 APPLICATION TO EXTRATERRATORIAL JURISDICTION.
The provisions of this Section 4.6000 and all other regulations applicable to billboard and off-site advertising signs within the
City shall apply to the regulation of billboards and off-site advertising signs within the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ)
as provided by these regulations. (Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6004 DESIGN REVIEW GUIDELINES FOR ALL SIGNS
a) Colors: Natural colors (earth tones), neutral colors, and muted colors are favored. If a sign is located on a canopy or
awning, then the canopy or awning should be compatible and complement the color scheme of the building or structure to
which it is attached, rather than: the color of the sign or its logo. Predominate use of bold or bright colors is discouraged, and
must be specifically reviewed as a special exception by the Commission and require approval by the City Council. The City
may maintain a list of approved colors or palette as a reference for sign contractors. If a registered trademark symbol for the
business entity is included on a sign, the trademark may be allowed without alteration to the registered trademark colors.
b) Landscaping: Landscaping, where required, should be designed to harmonize with the building and surrounding natural
landforms and native plants, and be maintained in a neat, clean, and healthy condition. All landscaping will comply with the
landscape provisions in the Zoning Ordinance.
c) Distance Between Signs. Whenever a provision of the Midlothian Sign Regulations requires a minimum or maximum
distance between signs, such distance shall be measured horizontally in a straight line between the closest elements of each
sign, notwithstanding any intervening object or structure between the signs.
(Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6005 REAL ESTATE AND HOME BUILDER SIGNS
a) Real Estate Signs announcing the sale or lease of residential property shall be placed on property within the City
subject to the following:
1) Only one (1) is permitted to be placed on the lot;
2) The sign must be unlit;
3) Sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet in area;
4) Sign shall be removed within one (1) week following the close of sale or lease of the lot;
5) The sign may only be placed on a lot for which a final plat has been recorded with the Ellis County Clerk's
Office; and
6) The City Engineer had determined pursuant to Section 5.10.5 of the Subdivision Regulations that the public
improvements have been completed and accepted to the point that a building permit may be issued for the lot.
b) On developed nonresidential property, only one (1) Real Estate Sign announcing the sale or lease of all or portion of the
building may be located on the property subject to the following:
1) The sign must be placed flat against any wall of the business building;
2) The sign shall be no taller than the wall of the building and shall not exceed an area of 100 square feet;
3) The sign must be removed not later than one (1) week following the close of sale or lease of the building or
portion thereof offered for lease; provided, however, if multiple portions of the building are being leased, the sign
must be removed not later than one (1) week after all portions of the building are leased;
4) The sign shall be unlit; and
5) The sign may contain the name and contact information where to obtain information about the sale or lease
of the property and other relevant information about the sale or lease of the property on which the sign is located.
c) On any undeveloped, unplatted property or tract of land, only one (1) Real Estate Sign may be located on each street
frontage of the property subject to the following:
1) The sign must be located not less than fifty (50) feet behind the property line or current right-of-way line,
whichever is greater, and outside any required visibility triangle, regardless of distance;
2) The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/598
3) The sign face area shall not exceed 100 square feet;
4) The sign must be removed not later than one (1) week following the close of sale or lease of the land or, in
the case where the property consists of multiple lots or tracts being sold or leased individually, not later than one
(1) week following when the last lot or tract is sold or leased; and
5) If the property is located on multiple street frontages, only one (1) sign per street frontage is permitted, not to
exceed a total of two (2) Real Estate Signs, which signs must be located not less than five hundred (500) feet
from each other; provided, however, the City Council may grant a special exception to allow such signs to be
located less than five hundred (500) feet apart following receipt of a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
d) Before a sign announcing a “Coming Soon” (or similar language) of a residential or non residential project may be
located on property, the owner or developer of the property on which the sign is to be located must first obtain approval of
zoning on the property that allows the property to be developed for the announced project, an approved site plan, or a final
plat recorded with the Ellis County Clerk's Office. Such sign shall be subject to the following:
1) The sign must be located not less than fifty (50) feet behind the property line or current right-of-way line,
whichever is greater, and outside any required visibility triangle, regardless of distance.
2) The sign shall not exceed 15 feet in height;
3) The sign face area shall not exceed 100 square feet.
4) The sign shall be removed not later than thirty (30) days after construction on the first phase is complete. If
any additional phases are planned, the sign can be moved to the location of the next phase provided application is
made for a new Sign Permit for the relocated sign.
e) For any residential subdivisions, only one (1) temporary unlit sign shall be allowed announcing the builder(s) who are
building dwellings on lots within the subdivision, sale price or range of prices of property to be sold within the subdivision, and
other relevant information regarding the sale of lots and dwellings within the subdivision. Such sign shall be subject to the
following:
1) The sign shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet behind the property line or current right-of-way line, and
outside any required visibility triangle, regardless of distance;
2) The sign may be located on the property of the subdivision only after a final plat for any phase of the
development has been recorded with the Ellis County Clerk's Office;
3) The sign shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height;
4) The sign face area shall not exceed 100 square feet;
5) If the sign faces any existing or proposed public street or right-of-way greater than 80 feet in width as shown
on the Thoroughfare Plan, a Specific Use Permit (SUP) for the sign must be approved prior to locating the sign on
the property. In no case, however, shall such sign be allowed to face or be located adjacent to the U.S. Highway
287 Bypass/Loop; and
6) The sign shall be removed not later than one (1) week following the close of the sale that results in all
residential units being occupied for the first time after completion.
f) For nonresidential subdivisions, only one (1) temporary unlit sign announcing the contractor, financing institution and
other relevant information shall be placed on the property on which the project will be constructed, subject to the following:
1) The sign shall be located not less than twenty (20) feet behind the property line or current right-of-way line,
and outside any required visibility triangle regardless of distance;
2) The sign may be located on the property of the subdivision only after a final plat for the property has been
recorded with the Ellis County Clerk's Office;
3) The sign shall not exceed five (5) feet in height;
4) The sign face area shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet;
5) No such sign shall face or be located adjacent to the U.S. Highway 287 Bypass/Loop;
6) Such sign shall be removed not later than (1) week following the completion of construction of all buildings
located on the property on which the sign is located;
7) This type of sign shall not require the issuance of a Sign Permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/598
g) All signs described in this Section 4.6005 are subject to the following:
1) Placement in a median or affixing to utility poles, trees, or traffic signs is prohibited;
2) Attaching to the sign display devices that include, but are not limited to balloons, flags, and/or pennants, is
prohibited;
3) The signs shall have no more than two (2) sign faces; and
4) The signs shall not be electronically lit.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5802, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6006 DEVELOPMENT DIRECTIONAL SIGNS
No person shall place a Development Directional Sign on property located within the City. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5803,
adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6007 KIOSK SIGNS
The City Council may grant the exclusive right to design, erect and maintain kiosk signs within the City pursuant to the terms
and conditions of a license agreement approved by the City Council and consistent with the following:
1) Kiosk signs must be designed and constructed according to the specifications contained in the approved
license agreement;
2) Prior to erecting any kiosk sign, the licensee shall submit a sign location map to the Development Services
Department for approval;
3) Kiosk sign installations shall include breakaway design features as required for traffic signs in the street
rights-of-way;
4) No signs, pennants, flags or other devices for visual attention or other appurtenances shall be attached to
kiosk signs;
5) Individual sign panels on kiosk signs shall have a uniform design and color; and
6) Kiosk signs shall not:
i) Interfere with the use of sidewalks, walkways, bike and hiking trails;
ii) Obstruct the visibility of motorists, pedestrians or traffic-control signs;
iii) Be installed in the immediate vicinity of street intersections; and shall comply with any required visibility
triangle or other visibility easements;
iv) Be illuminated in any manner; and
v) Contain any price information.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5804, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6008 POLITICAL SIGNS
a) Political signs may be placed on privately owned real property in any zoning district without first obtaining a sign Permit
if the sign:
1) Is eight (8) feet or less in height measured from the top of the sign to the ground;
2) The sign face area is 36 square feet or less;
3) Is not illuminated internally or externally; and
4) Has no moving elements.
b) Prior to locating a political sign on any property within the City that does not comply with subsection a) of this section, a
person must obtain a Temporary Sign Permit for the sign and otherwise comply with Section 4.6011 with respect to the
zoning district in which the sign is to be located.
c) No political sign shall be erected on private real property without the consent of the owner of the property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/598
d) No political sign shall be located on any portion of any property dedicated by plat or separate instrument as the right-ofway
of a public highway, street, or alley.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5810, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2014-29 adopted 7/22/14; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted
4/10/18)
4.6009 EVENT SIGNS
Unlit Event Signs with a sign height of not greater than two (2) feet may be placed on property in any zoning district with the
consent of the owner or other person in control of the property on which the sign is placed for a period beginning two (2)
weeks prior to the first day of the event and ending ten (10) days following the last day of the event. (Ordinance 2013-24,
sec. 4.5811, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6010 PORTABLE SIGNS, VEHICLE SIGNS, TEMPORARY ADVERTISING DEVICES, WIND DEVICES
a) Portable signs are prohibited on any property.
b) Vehicle signs are prohibited; provided, however, it shall be a defense to a violation of this Section 4.6011(b) [Section
4.6010(b)] if the vehicle is fully operational, properly registered with the Texas Department of Motor Vehicles, and:
1) Is regularly driven by the owner, employee, or other authorized person in the normal operation of the
business advertised on the vehicle which is located on the same property where the vehicle is parked; or
2) Is parked in the driveway or along the street frontage of the residence of the person who (i) owns or leases
the vehicle, or (ii) is the owner or employee of the business entity that owns or leases the vehicle, and regularly
driven by such person in the normal operation of the business advertised on the vehicle.
It is a rebuttable presumption that a vehicle which has not been moved from its parked location for a period of more than
seven (7) consecutive days is not being regularly driven. This paragraph b) does not apply to political signs attached to
vehicles.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5821, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6011 TEMPORARY ADVERTISING DEVICES
Except as provided in Section 4.6013 [Section 4.6012], temporary Advertising devices may be located only within “CR,” “C,”
“LI,” “MI,” and “HI” zoning districts subject to the following:
a) A Temporary Advertising Device may be erected or installed after issuance of a Temporary Advertising
Device Permit.
b) Temporary Advertising Device Permit shall be issued for the current calendar year during which the Permit is
issued regardless of date the permit is issued.
c) Temporary Advertising Devices may be displayed on a property no more than a total of 90 days during a
calendar year.
d) Temporary Advertising Devices shall be placed on the lease space of the occupied building or structure and
shall not exceed three (3) feet in height or have a sign face exceeding fifteen (15) square feet.
e) Temporary Advertising Devices shall be non-illuminated and non-electric and remain [on] the property of the
business establishment which the device advertises.
f) The owner of the business or property displaying a Temporary Advertising Device shall accept all
responsibility regarding the security of the sign, the placement of the sign, and damage that may occur to the sign
or other property.
g) The owner of the business or property displaying a Temporary Advertising Device(s) shall be required to
remove the sign upon expiration of the Temporary Advertising Device Permit.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5822, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6012 TEMPORARY ADVERTISING DEVICES WITHIN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD)
Temporary Advertising devices may be displayed within the “CBD” zoning district subject to the provisions of Section 4.6012
[Section 4.6011] and the following:
a) No display devices, including but not limited to balloons, flags, and pennants, shall be attached to a
temporary advertising device located within the Central Business District; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/598
b) Temporary Advertising devices placed by the City in the Central Business District for a City-sponsored event
are exempt from this Section 4.6013 [Section 4.6012] if approved by the City Manager or designee.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5823, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6013 WIND DEVICES
Except where otherwise provided by ordinance, wind devices may be displayed only in non residential zoning districts
following issuance of a sign permit subject to the following:
a) A Permit may be issued for not more than two (2) wind devices to be located on a property during a calendar
year;
b) Wind Device Permits shall be issued for the current calendar year during which the permit is issued
regardless of date the permit is issued;
c) Wind devices may be displayed on a property not more than a total of 90 days during a calendar year;
d) Not later than five (5) days after receipt of notice by the Code Enforcement Division, the owner or manager of
the business displaying any wind device(s) shall remove (i) tattered and/or torn wind device(s) and (ii) a wind
device that has faded to the extent that the color of the wind device is no longer the same as the color authorized
by the sign permit authorizing placement of the wind device;
e) Wind devices shall not be located on or over any public street, alley or highway maintained or within any
required visibility triangle so as to not obstruct the view of drivers or otherwise isolate vision; and
f) Wind devices shall be non-illuminated and non-electric.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5824, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6014 BILLBOARDS AND OFF-SITE ADVERTISING SIGNS
a) New billboards and off-site Advertising signs are prohibited within the City and its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ).
b) Existing billboards and off-site Advertising signs displaced because of the expansion of street or highway right-of-way
associated with the construction of public road improvements may be relocated to property immediately adjacent to the
property from which the billboard or off-site Advertising sign is being displaced upon issuance of a sign permit, but only if:
1) The sign structure on which the sign is located does not change (provided, however, a dual pole structure
may be changed to a single pole structure);
2) The height of the relocated sign is not greater that [than] the height prior to begin displaced;
3) The number of sign faces of the relocated sign is equal to or less than the sign faces of the displaced sign;
4) The sign face area of the relocated sign is equal to or less than the sign face area of the displaced sign;
5) The type of sign face on the relocated sign is the same as the sign face of the displaced sign (i.e. a static
sign face may not be changed to an electronic, digital, or other sign face with moving components); and
6) The Texas Department of Transportation does not object to such relocation.
Relocation of a billboard or off-premises Advertising sign displaced because of the expansion of street or highway right-ofway
associated with the construction of public road improvements that does satisfy the above criteria may only be relocated
within the City's incorporated limits or ETJ following approval of a Specific Use Permit or ordinance establishing a Planned
Development District[.]
c) Existing billboards may not be modified or expanded in any form, shape, or fashion that will cause it to be altered from
its current state including modification of an existing Billboard to a Changeable Electronic Variable Message Sign. The sign
face area of an existing billboard may be reduced in size or relocated on the existing sign structure if such reduction or
relocation is required to prevent the sign from encroaching on or over a public street or highway right-of-way being widened
by a governmental entity. The changing of the advertisement or message on a billboard is not a violation of this section.
d) Regular maintenance and upkeep of an existing billboard is allowed. For purposes of this section, “regular maintenance
and upkeep” means the process of keeping a sign in good repair. Such maintenance may include, but not limited to:
1) cleaning;
2) painting;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/598
3) repair and/or replacement of parts with like materials in a manner that does not alter the basic design or
structure of the sign.
If a billboard is in such disrepair or destroyed to the point that repairs or replacement of the billboard will exceed 50% of the
cost of a new billboard, said billboard shall be removed and no new billboard shall be allowed.
e) The following alterations to a billboard are not considered regular maintenance and upkeep and are prohibited:
1) converting a sign from a multiple pole structure to a monopole structure (or vice versa);
2) replacing wooden components with metal components;
3) increasing the area or height of a sign;
4) adding illumination to a non-illuminated sign;
5) adding additional display faces;
6) converting a sign to use animated display or movable/digital/electronic copy technology.
f) If an existing billboard or off-site advertising sign is dismantled for any purpose other than regular maintenance and
upkeep permitted in this Section or except to relocate it as provided in subsection b) of this Section 4.6014, the billboard or
off-site Advertising sign may not be replaced.
g) Following any required notice, the Building Official or designated representative has the authority to remove any
billboard or off-site Advertising sign that is deemed unsafe, deteriorated and/or dilapidated as stated in Section 116 (Unsafe
Structures & Equipment) of the 2015 International Building Code or the latest Building Code in effect. All expenses incurred
by the City incidental to such repair or removal may be placed as a lien against the property from which the sign is removed.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5831, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6015 VIEW OBSTRUCTION PROHIBITED
No Billboard or Off-Site Advertising Sign shall be located in such a manner that it:
a) obscures or otherwise interferes with the effectiveness of a traffic sign, signal or device, or
b) obstructs or interferes with a driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5832, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6016 BILLBOARD OR OFF-SITE ADVERTISING PERMIT REQUIRED
a) A Billboard or Off-Site Advertising Sign Permit shall be required for each Billboard and Off-Site Advertising Sign.
b) Billboard or Off-Site Advertising Sign Permits shall be renewed by December 31st of each calendar year. Billboards or
Off-Site Advertising Signs whose permits have expired shall be removed not later than 30 days after expiration of the permit.
c) Each applicant shall present a copy or copies of valid and current State permits to the City and pay a $100.00 fee before
a permit shall be issued.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5833, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6017 SIGNS LOCATED IN GENERAL PROFESSIONAL (GP), COMMUNITY RETAIL (CR), OR COMMERCIAL (C)
DISTRICTS
The following signs shall be permitted in the General Professional (GP), Community Retail (CR), and Commercial (C)
Districts to identify use or uses of the property upon which it is displayed as follows:
a) Building Wall Sign:
1) Signs on buildings shall not extend beyond the building. All building wall signs shall be mounted
parallel to the building surface to which they are attached, and shall project no more than thirteen (13)
inches from the surface. Signs shall not be mounted on pitched roofs or above the wall on flat roof structures
(see below):
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/598
2) The total sign face area of building wall signs on a building shall not exceed the following:
i) For each one (1) linear foot of primary building face (i.e, the facade facing a public street or, where
the building is not located on a public street frontage, the facade of the building that contains the
building's main entry to the building), three (3) square feet of wall sign area is allowed, not to exceed
the area set forth in subsection iii), below.
ii) Notwithstanding subsection i), above, a freestanding building may have wall signs installed with a
sign face area of at least 100 square feet but not exceeding the area allowed in subsection i), above.
iii) The maximum building wall sign area allowed on a freestanding building based on the square
footage of the area of the ground floor of the building is as follows:
Building Footprint
(in square feet)
Maximum Sign Area
(in square feet)
Less than 11,999 150
12,000–49,999 300
50,000 or more 600
iv) Lease spaces: For each one (1) linear foot of facade of a lease space of a multi-use complex or
office complex or shopping center, two (2) square feet of building wall sign face area is allowed, not to
exceed 200 square feet. Tenant signs in such complex or center shall be consistent in color and size
and designed to complement or enhance the other signs in the complex or center.
v) Mounting:
a) Reverse Channel Signs (any color letter) must be back lit with white or off white. No
illumination of any bulb type shall have exposed bulbs.
b) Individually mounted channel letters shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/598
i. If the sign only contains words and no logo, occupy 100 percent of the permitted area
of the sign and be white, ivory, black, grey, beige or similar neutral colors or earth tone
color;
ii. If the sign has lettering and a logo, the logo may only cover 20 percent of the permitted
sign area and may be of any color and the letters must be white, ivory, black, grey, beige,
similar neutral colors or earth tone color;
iii. If the sign consists of a logo only, the logo may cover 100 percent of the sign and use
any color;
iv. Raceways shall match the color of the materials to which they are mounted. All
electrical transformer boxes and raceways are required to be concealed from public view. If
a raceway cannot be mounted internally behind the finished exterior wall, the exposed
metal surfaces of the raceway shall be finished to match the background wall, or integrated
into the overall design of the sign. If raceways are necessary, they must be as thin and
narrow as possible and not extend in width or height beyond the area of the sign's lettering
or graphics. All exposed conduit and junction boxes shall also be concealed from public
view.
c) Cabinet signs (internally or externally illuminated cabinet signs) or Flat Panel signs of any kind are
not permitted as building wall signage.
3) Awnings (attached to structures) or canopies (freestanding; i.e. gasoline canopy) shall be considered a
building wall sign; however, the awning or canopy cannot exceed the total area as listed in Section 4.6018(a)
(2) [Section 4.6017(a)(2)]. All awnings or canopies shall be compatible and complement the color scheme of
the building or structure to which it is attached or associated with, rather than the color of the sign or its logo:
i) All awnings shall be metal containing a galvalume or earth tone color. Fabric awnings are
prohibited.
ii) A combination of the two (awning or canopy and wall sign) is allowed provided the square footage
does not exceed the cumulative maximum total area described in Section 4.6018(a)(2) [Section
4.6017(a)(2)] the above section.
iii) Only awnings shall be allowed to extend further than thirteen (13) inches beyond the building.
iv) Any signage (word, number, figure, device, design or trademark logo or color) on a canopy (i.e.
gas canopy, etc.) shall be subtracted from the allotted wall signage of the associated main building.
4) Window signage shall not exceed 25% of the window or glass area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/598
5) Neon signs are allowed provided they outline the window and do not exceed ten (10) percent coverage
of the visible window pane area. “Open” signs shall not include any other wording or advertising and shall
not flash, blink, or contain any movement.
6) Wall signs for lease spaces may not exceed 75% of the width of the lease space facade and shall be
centered within the width of the lease space front facade.
7) Signs that project three (3) inches or more from the wall shall maintain a minimum clearance of nine (9)
feet from the ground.
8) No more than one (1) sign per elevation per business may be installed. Rear wall signs are prohibited.
If a building has two or more public entrances on a corner lot facing separate public streets, then an
additional sign on the secondary street may be approved by the City Council, subject to the size limitations
of Section 4.6018(a)(2) [Section 4.6017(a)(2)] stated herein.
9) Any building wall sign located in a GP, CR, or C District that does not conform to the regulations set
forth in Section 4.6018(a) [Section 4.6017(a)(2)] may be located on a lot following the application and
approval of a Specific Use Permit (SUP).
b) Monument Signs:
1) Monument signs must be built on a monument base with no separation between the base of the sign
and natural grade. The sign base shall span the width of the sign face.
2) The sign base and sign structure of a monument sign shall be brick, stone, or masonry material
matching the front facade of the associated building.
3) The sign face of a monument sign shall be framed by a minimum of six inches (6") of brick, stone, or
masonry material matching the front facade of the building and have a sign face area not greater than 60
square feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/598
4) A monument sign shall not exceed a height of 10 feet.
5) A monument sign shall be landscaped as follows:
i) A minimum landscaped area of twenty-four (24) square feet surrounding the perimeter of the base
of the Monument Sign.
ii) All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and clean condition and at a height
that does not obstruct the sign face or any text (including addressing information) located on the sign.
6) A monument sign shall contain only the name, logo, address, product or service of the establishment
except as provided herein:
i) Gasoline service stations shall mount price per gallon signs on monument signs only; all other
areas are prohibited (i.e. canopy, building, etc.).
ii) The monument and individual tenant names of multi-tenant office and/or retail buildings may be
listed subject to the following:
a. All individual tenant name plates shall be uniform in size, color and font; the background
color for all sign panels on the sign shall be consistent.
b. Minimum letter size shall be six (6) inches,
c. If a tenant vacates the lease space, the name plate must be removed by the monument sign
owner, owner of the property where the sign is located, or other party having control over such
sign not later than 30 days after such vacancy;
d. No other advertising or promotional information is permitted on the multi-tenant monument
sign;
iii) A monument sign may be single or double faced.
iv) Cabinet signs made of plastic or similar materials are not permitted as monument signs.
7) No more than one (1) monument sign may be located on the major traffic street or way on which the
building abuts. If a building has two or more public entrances on separate public streets, one (1) additional
monument sign with a maximum sign area of forty (40) square feet is allowed on the secondary street
following approval of a Specific Use Permit.
8) A monument sign located in a GP, CR, or C District that does not conform to the regulations set forth in
Section 4.6018(b) [Section 4.6017(b)] of this section may be located on a lot following the application and
approval of a Specific Use Permit (SUP).
c) Pole Signs. Poles signs are allowed only for those businesses having not less than 500 linear feet of
continuous street frontage subject to the following:
1) No pole sign may be located on property adjacent to any public street or highway greater with a rightof-
way width equal to or greater than 70 feet, current or proposed (as listed in the most current City's
Thoroughfare Plan) without the prior approval of a specific use Permit as authorized as part of a Planned
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/598
Development. In no case, however, shall pole signs be allowed adjacent to the U.S. Highway 287
Bypass/Loop.
2) A pole sign shall not exceed a height of 25 feet and have a minimum clearance of 11 feet.
3) A pole sign shall be supported by a single or dual freestanding pole with no supporting guy wires and/or
braces constructed.
4) The poles of a pole sign shall be encased with masonry columns.
5) The case of the pole sign shall be landscaped for distance of thi1ty (30) square feet outside of the
distance of the poles with stone-base feature.
6) The sign face area shall not exceed 80 square feet on each face.
7) Only one (1) pole sign may be installed on each platted property or unified development.
8) One (1) ground sign can be allowed with a pole sign provided the ground sign is used for directional
purposes only and cannot exceed three (3) feet in height with a sign face area of not greater than ten (10)
square feet.
9) An ordinance setting fo1th the regulations of a Specific Use Permit (SUP) or Planned Development
(PD) may add additional regulations, modify, or make exceptions to this Section 4.6018(c) [Section
4.6017(c)].
d) Special Provisions:
1) Signs may be illuminated, but the source of light shall not be visible to traveled ways and the entire
image or displayed text shall not be animated, inte1mittent, or flashing.
2) An electronic message sign that complies with the following requirements may be approved
administratively by staff:
i) Each message remains static for a minimum of 4 (four) seconds and operates in a way that all
screen transitions occur within one (1) second such that the initial message does not fade, dissolve, or
travel;
ii) The electronic message center makes up no more than 32 square feet of the total sign area. In
determining the area of the electronic message center, any border or frame provided shall not be
included in determining the sign face area.
iii) Only one electronic message center is visible anywhere on the exterior of the lot on which it is
located;
iv) The electronic message center is installed on a legally subdivided lot or parcel.
v) The electronic message center does not contain animation, rolling or running letters or message
flashing lights or displays as part of the display.
vi) The Electronic message center is not used to display commercial messages relating to products
or services that are not offered on the premises.
vi) All electronic message centers within two hundred (200) feet of a residential area must be turned
off from 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
vii) The electronic message center does not exceed a light intensity of five hundred (500) NITS at
night.
3) An electronic message center to be located in a GP, CR, or C District that does not conform to the
regulations set forth in paragraph d)2) of this section may be located on a lot following the approval of a
Specific Use Permit (SUP).
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5841, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-50 adopted 11/12/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(I),
adopted 12/13/16; Ordinance 2017-76, sec. 1, adopted 10/10/17; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6018 UNIFIED SIGN AGREEMENTS
Multiple lots that are either adjacent, contiguous, or separated only by a right-of-way (and not at cross corners or connected
by narrow strips of land) and considered to be a unified development may be considered a single premises for the purpose of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/598
erecting on/off-premises signs, if a Unified Sign Agreement (USA) is approved by the City Council and executed in
compliance with this Section.
a) Criteria for approval. In consideration of whether to approve multiple lots as a single premises, the City
Council shall consider the following criteria:
1) All areas to be combined in the Unified Sign Agreement (USA) shall be part of a clearly defined unified
office, commercial, retail or industrial development constructed as a single destination point for customers
and visitors. Attributes of a unified commercial or industrial development include:
i) Common name identification to the public;
ii) Shared parking provided throughout the development;
iii) Sign structures utilized for shared signage, including identification of the common name of the
development;
iv) Physical layout of the development results in a cohesive development; and,
v) The boundary area shall not be the combination of different premises joined solely for the purpose
of initiating a Unified Sign Agreement.
2) The overall signage proposed within the Unified Sign Agreement (USA) should show an overall
reduction in sign clutter as evidenced by a reduction in the number, size, and height of signs that would be
allowed in the absence of a Unified Sign Agreement (USA).
3) A Unified Sign Agreement (USA) shall only be executed on property zoned General Professional (GP),
Community Retail (CR), Commercial (C), or Light Industrial (LI) or Planned Developments (PD) for any
combination of these or similar zoning district.
4) Only 1 unified sign agreement shall be allowed per unified development.
b) Allowed Signage. Upon approval of a Unified Sign Agreement (USA), all existing signs remaining on the
approved boundaries of the Agreement shall be removed or brought into compliance with the executed agreement
and this Section. Existing signs shall not be considered nonconforming for the purposes of this executed
agreement.
1) All new signs constructed after the executed agreement shall also comply with the executed Unified
Sign Agreement (USA) and this Section.
2) Within the boundaries of the Unified Agreement (USA), spacing between detached signs shall be a
minimum of 300 feet.
c) Sign Plan required. A Sign Plan covering the entire boundary included in the Unified Sign Agreement (USA)
shall be submitted to the City Council for approval. The Sign Plan shall contain the following information.
i) Description of development within the area of the unified sign agreement demonstrating the attributes of
a unified commercial or industrial development as described in Section a. above.
ii) The location, size, and height of all existing and proposed signs;
iii) Demonstrate an overall reduction in sign clutter as evidenced by a reduction in the number, size and
height of detached signs.
iv) A copy of the Sign Plan shall be attached to the Unified Sign Agreement (USA) and may be amended
only with the approval of the City Council.
d) Notification Requirements.
1) Upon review of a Unified Sign Agreement (USA) or an amendment of a Unified Sign Agreement (USA)
by the Planning Director or designated representative, notice shall be sent by regular United States Mail to
all property owners within 200 feet of the boundaries of the area included in the agreement, as indicated on
the most recently approved municipal tax roll.
2) Such notice shall provide a brief description of the Unified Sign Agreement (USA) and the location of
the area included in the agreement.
3) The notice shall be mailed no later than 20 days prior to consideration of the agreement by the City
Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/598
e) Execution, Amendment, Termination and Filing of Unified Sign Agreements.
1) The Unified Sign Agreement shall:
i) Contain the names and addresses of the owners and the legal descriptions of all properties within
the Unified Sign Agreement;
ii) State that all parties agree that the properties covered by the Agreement may be collectively
treated as a single premises for the limited purpose of determining the number, size and location of
on/off-premises signs permitted in accordance with this Section;
iii) State that the Agreement constitutes a covenant running with the land with respect to all
properties subject to the agreement;
iv) State that all parties agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Midlothian from
and against all claims or liabilities arising out of or in connection with the agreement;
v) State that the agreement will be governed by the laws of the State of Texas;
vi) State that the agreement may be amended or terminated only in accordance with subsection 2)
below;
vii) Be approved by the City Council and approved as to form by the City Attorney;
viii) Be signed by all owners of the properties included in the agreement and the City of Midlothian;
and
ix) Be signed by all lienholders, other than taxing entities, that have either an interest in the lots
covered by the agreement or an improvement on those properties.
2) A Unified Sign Agreement (USA) may be amended or terminated as follows:
i) The amendment or Termination Agreement shall be executed by all owners of the properties
included in the Unified Sign Agreement, and all lienholders, other than a taxing entity, that have an
interest in land covered by the agreement or an improvement on such land.
ii) A termination agreement may be approved by the City Council if all signs on the property
governed by the agreement are in compliance with the most current Sign Regulations, as if no Unified
Sign Agreement had been executed. Any signs that are not in compliance shall be removed or brought
into compliance prior to approval of the agreement by the City Council.
3) A Unified Sign Agreement or an agreement to amend or terminate such an agreement is not effective
until the agreement is approved by the City Council, approved as to form by the City Attorney and the
agreement is filed in the Ellis County Clerk's Office, and two (2) file-marked copies of the Agreement are
delivered to the Planning Director or designated representative.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5842, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6019 SIGNS LOCATED IN THE CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD)
a) Generally: Signs located on property within the Central Business District shall comply with the following design
guidelines:
1) Signs should be architecturally integrated and complementary to the overall design of the buildings and
provide a compatible appearance with the existing signage of other tenants while keeping the overall character of
downtown intact.
2) Signs should promote retail and street activity while enhancing the pedestrian experience.
3) Signs should enhance the primary design elements or unique architectural features of buildings. Unique
design elements should help when determining the size and location of a sign on the building.
b) Wall Signs: Wall signs located on buildings within the CBD shall comply with the following:
1) Each building front may have no more than one (1) sign per tenant.
2) The sign face area for each tenant shall be 10% of the front or rear building facade area of the tenant space.
3) Wall signs may be flush mounted, painted or extend beyond the building into the City right-of-way with
approval of the Planning Director.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/598
4) The wall sign may either be:
a) externally lit, or;
b) only the letters or a border shall be internally lit.
5) Window signs and sidewalk sandwich signs are not included in these maximum signage totals.
c) Canopy/Awning Sign. Canopy/awning signs located on buildings within the CBD shall comply with the following:
1) Canopy/awnings signs placed over tenant spaces are allowed and may extend into the City right-of-way with
approval of the Planning Director.
2) Signs placed on canopy/awnings are allowed and shall not be internally lit.
d) Window Signs. Window signs located on buildings within the CBD shall comply with the following:
1) Window signs may be painted or applied directly to the window.
2) Window signs may cover up to 25% of the glass pane and shall only promote products or services offered
on-site.
3) No opaque tint shall be allowed along any front facade ground-level windows. Any tint provided shall allow at
least 70% of the visible light through the windows.
4) No sign permit is required.
e) Sidewalk Sandwich Signs: Sidewalk sandwich signs located on property within the CBD shall comply with the following:
1) Sidewalk sandwich signs may be placed on the sidewalk only during business hours and shall only promote
products or services offered on-site.
2) Sidewalk sandwich signs may not exceed four (4) feet in height.
3) Not less than five (5) feet of sidewalk clearance for pedestrians must be maintained when a sidewalk
sandwich sign is placed.
4) The signs may extend into the City right-of-way.
5) The signs shall be properly anchored or weighted against the wind.
6) No sign permit is required.
f) Ground Signs: Ground signs located on property within the CBD shall comply with the following:
1) Height shall not exceed five (5) feet.
2) Sign face area shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet.
3) Sign must include a landscaped, stone-base feature with landscaping maintained at a height that does not
obstruct the sign face or any text (including addressing information) located on the sign.
4) The sign shall not be placed in the right-of-way and shall only be externally lit.
g) Temporary Signs: Temporary signs located on property within the CBD shall comply with the following:
1) Temporary signs may include but not limited to banners, flags, etc. and may be placed when related to a
holiday, special event, or promotion.
2) Temporary signs may be displayed for up to 90 days per calendar year and shall be removed 10 days after
the conclusion of the holiday or event.
3) Banners can have a total sign face area not exceeding 20 square feet.
4) A Temporary Sign Permit is required prior to installation.
h) Electronic Signs: Electronic signs located on property within the CBD shall comply with the following:
1) An on-site electronic sign with a maximum display area of six (6) square feet may only be installed in an
interior window.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/598
2) Electronic signs shall only operate during the hours that the business is open to the public.
3) No sign permit is required.
i) Murals/Historic Signs: Mural/historic signs located on buildings within the CBD shall comply with the following:
1) Murals and historic signs that display a historic scene/event or an old business that was once integral to the
history of the city are permitted.
2) Murals and historic signs shall be reviewed by the Historic Advisory Board and require City Council approval
prior to obtaining a Sign Permit.
j) Prohibition of Signs in the CBD District: The following are prohibited in the CBD District:
a) Pole signs;
b) Internally lit signs that do not adhere to Subsection a), above;
c) Animated or flashing signs;
d) Signs unrelated to the business, products or services offered in the building, except as stated in Subsection
h) above;
e) Advertising signs on trash cans, planters, and benches;
f) Temporary signs made into permanent signs;
g) Signs that obscure significant architectural features of the building; and
h) Signs that are not properly maintained.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5843, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6020 SIGNS LOCATED IN LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (LI), MEDIUM INDUSTRIAL (MI), HEAVY INDUSTRIAL (HI)
DISTRICTS
Signs located in Light Industrial (LI), Medium Industrial (MI) and Heavy Industrial (HI) zoning districts shall be permitted to
identify the use or uses of the property upon which they are displayed subject to the following:
a) Building Signs:
1) Building Signs shall not extend beyond the building.
2) In no case shall any building sign or group of building signs have a cumulative total of sign face area
that exceeds twenty percent (20%) of the wall area upon which that building sign or group of building signs
is attached. For purposes of this section, wall surface area shall include the area of doors, and windows.
3) Canopy or awning signs shall be considered to be building signs; however, canopy or awning signs
shall not exceed the total area of the above section.
i) A combination of the two is allowed provided the square footage does not exceed the total area
described in Subsection 2), above.
ii) Only canopy and awning signs shall be allowed to extend beyond the building.
4) Window signs shall not exceed 25% of the window or glass area.
b) Ground Signs: Ground signs shall comply with Section 4.6018(b) [Section 4.6017(b).]
c) Pole Sign: Pole signs shall be subject to the following:
1) No pole sign may be located on property adjacent to any public street or highway greater with a rightof-
way width equal to or greater than 70 feet, current or proposed (as listed in the most current City's
Thoroughfare Plan) without the prior approval of a specific use permit as authorized as part of a Planned
Development.
2) Pole sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height with a minimum clearance of 11 feet.
3) A pole sign shall be supported by a single or dual freestanding pole with no supporting guy wires and/or
braces constructed.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/598
4) The poles of a pole sign shall be encased with masonry columns.
5) Sign face area shall not exceed 80 square feet for each fact [face].
6) The case of the pole sign shall a landscaped area of not less than 30 square feet around the outside of
the distance of the poles with stone-base feature.
7) Only one (1) pole sign may be installed on each platted property or unified development.
8) One (1) ground sign can be allowed with a pole sign provided the ground sign is used for directional
purposes only and cannot exceed three (3) feet in height with a sign face area of not greater than ten (10)
square feet.
9) Pole signs shall be located not less than 500 feet from Districts “A,” “SF-1,” “SF- 2,” “SF-3,” “SF-4,”
“R1.5,” “R2.5,” “R3,” “MD-1,” “MD-2,” “MH,” and “MF” and any other residential zoning district that is
established after the effective date of this ordinance.
10) An ordinance setting forth the regulations of a Specific Use Permit (SUP) or Planned Development
(PD) may add additional regulations, modify, or make exceptions to this Section 4.6018(c) [Section
4.6017(c)].
d) Special Provisions:
1) Signs may be illuminated, but the source of light shall not be visible to traveled ways and the entire
image or displayed text shall not be animated, intermittent, or flashing.
2) An electronic message sign that complies with the following requirements may be approved
administratively by staff:
i) Each message remains static for a minimum of 4 (four) seconds and operates in a way that all
screen transitions occur within one (1) second such that the initial message does not fade, dissolve, or
travel;
ii) The electronic message center makes up no more than 32 square feet of the total sign area. In
determining the area of the electronic message center, any border or frame provided shall not be
included in determining the sign face area.
iii) Only one electronic message center is visible anywhere on the exterior of the lot on which it is
located;
iv) The electronic message center is installed on a legally subdivided lot or parcel.
v) The electronic message center does not contain animation, rolling or running letters or message
flashing lights or displays as part of the display.
vi) The Electronic message center is not used to display commercial messages relating to products
or services that are not offered on the premises.
vi) All electronic message centers within two hundred (200) feet of a residential area must be turned
off from 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
vi) The electronic message center does not exceed a light intensity of five hundred (500) NITS at
night.
3) An electronic message center to be located in a LI, MI, or HI District that does not conform to the
regulations set forth in paragraph d)2) of this section may be located on a lot following the approval of a
Specific Use Permit (SUP).
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5844, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(J), adopted 12/13/16; Ordinance 2018-20
adopted 4/10/18)
4.6021 PERMITS
a) Except where expressly exempted as provided by applicable ordinance, any person, firm, or corporation desiring to
construct or cause to be constructed, install[ed] or alter[ed] any sign or billboard within the city shall first apply for and obtain
a permit from the Development Services Department. All signs must be from a registered sign graphics company or operator.
b) A Permit fee shall be paid by the applicant before any sign permit is issued.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/598
c) Before a sign Permit for a sign located adjacent to an Interstate and/or Federal Aid primary highway or other road or
highway regulated by the Texas Department of Transportation, the applicant for the sign permit must present proof of having
first obtained an outdoor Advertising license from the State of Texas for the purpose of advertising along said road or
highway or otherwise establish that such permit or license is not required by state or federal law or regulation.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5851, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6022 SYMBOLS
Symbols which are designed as an integral part of the building structure and symbols and signs which are not visible or
readable from the public street or right-of-way shall not be limited by the sign regulations of the applicable zoning district or
land use category. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5852, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6023 TRAFFIC CONTROL CONFLICTS
No sign or lighting permitted under these regulations shall be erected, placed or allowed to remain whereby such creates
confusion, impairs hearing or vision, or otherwise distracts the automotive driver using any public street. (Ordinance 2013-24,
sec. 4.5853, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6024 RESIDENTIAL AREA NUISANCE
No sign or lighting permitted under these regulations shall be authorized whereby such sign or lighting, by reason of
placement, lack of shielding, noise generation or character of operation, would be adverse to the normal sensibilities of a
person residing on adjacent property or would interfere with the reasonable use, enjoyment or right of privacy on his property.
Specifically:
a) The source of lighting shall not be directly visible from the adjacent residential property and light shall be
shielded downward to prevent such exposure:
b) The noise level of signs and lighting fixtures, when measured within the adjacent dwelling unit, shall not be
greater than the noise levels of equipment customarily in operation in the home (50 dBA).
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5854, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6025 SIGNS IN OR OVER RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED
Except as otherwise allowed by ordinance, no sign shall be located within or project over the right-of-way of any public
highway, street, or alley, regardless of whether a permit is required to be issued prior to its installation or construction, without
first entering into a Right-of-Way Encroachment with the City after approval by the City Council. This Section 4.6025 shall not
apply to:
a) Official traffic-control signs or entrance and exit signs less than 30 inches above grade placed with
permission of the City.
b) Any sign placed by the City to promote civic events, local businesses, and community-wide events.
c) Kiosk signs installed in accordance with Section 4.6007.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5855, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6026 REMOVAL WHEN UNSAFE OR UNLAWFUL; AUTHORITY OF BUILDING INSPECTOR OR CODE
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
a) The owner of any sign shall keep the sign and all related supporting structures, guy wires, braces, anchors, in safe
condition at all times.
b) The Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer or a designated representative shall give written notice to the sign
owner and the property owner upon a finding that a sign is unsafe or insecure, is a menace to the public, or unlawful.
c) If within ten (10) days after receipt to the notice required by subsection b), above, such owner fails to remove or alter the
sign in order to make such sign safe and secure or otherwise perform such work as necessary to bring the sign into
compliance with applicable building codes and regulations enacted by the City, the Building Inspector or Code Enforcement
Officer or a designated representative may cause such sign to be removed or altered to comply with applicable ordinances at
the expense of the sign owner or owner of the property upon which the sign is located.
d) The Building Inspector or Code Enforcement Officer or a designated representative may cause any sign which is an
immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5857, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/598
4.6027 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED SIGNS.
a) An abandoned sign or abandoned sign structure remaining on property beyond the period authorized by this section
creates a blight on the community and is declared to be a public nuisance. An abandoned sign or abandoned sign structure
that is not also sign structure must be removed from the premises if not repaired in accordance with Section 4.6026:
1) on or after the first anniversary of the date the business, person, or activity that the abandoned sign or sign
structure identifies or advertises ceases to operate on the premises on which the abandoned sign or abandoned
sign structure is located; or
2) if the premises containing the abandoned sign or abandoned sign structure is leased, on or after the second
anniversary after the date the most recent tenant ceased operating on the premises on which the abandoned sign
or abandoned sign structure is located; or
3) if the abandoned sign or abandoned sign structure advertises a time, event, or purpose which no longer
applies, not later than ten (10) days after the termination of the time, event, or purpose.
b) Signs that would otherwise by removed pursuant to subsections a)1) or a)2), above, are not required to be removed if
the copy portion of the sign identifying the business or tenant no longer located on the property is obscured so that the
business to which the sign related is not visible; provided, however, (i) removal of a sign face on a cabinet sign without
replacing the sign face with a blank sign face or (ii) removal of a canopy and leaving only the canopy frame, is prohibited.
Painted wall signs shall be painted over with a color that resembles or matches the wall and does not allow the sign message
to be visible after overpainting.
c) This section does not apply to political signs.
d) For purposes of this Section 4.6027, “abandoned sign” and “abandoned sign structure” means a sign or sign structure,
respectively, that identifies a business, person, or activity that no longer occupies or operates on the premises on which the
sign or sign structure is located or pertains to a time, event, or purpose which no longer applies.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5857, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6028 PROHIBITIONS
The following signs are prohibited:
1) Signs that imitate or resemble “any official traffic sign, signal or device” or using a revolving beam or beacon
resembling any “emergency vehicle.”
2) Signs erected, maintained, or attached to on trees or which are painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural
features.
3) Development directional signs.
4) Cloth, canvas, paper, balloons, streamers, bunting, banners, flags, pole signs, signs that contain moving
parts or devices other than in rigid frames unless otherwise expressly allowed by ordinance.
5) Signs erected in violation of the building or electrical code of the city.
6) Signs attached to or maintained upon any public utility pole or structure.
7) Signs attached to or painted on the outside of a fence, railing or wall that is not a structural part of a building.
8) Signs attached to or painted on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, or street (except house address numbers).
9) No person shall display on any sign any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. Any sign which contains any
obscene, indecent or immoral matter shall be removed or the obscene, indecent or immoral matter must be
removed within 24 hours of notice.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 4.5858, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6029 GOVERNMENTAL SIGNS
a) “Governmental Sign” Defined. For purposes of this section, “governmental sign” means a temporary or permanent sign
owned, leased, or operated by the City or other governmental entity, located on public or private property, and used solely to
provide information, directions, or warnings to the public, including, but not limited to, information about public events
sponsored by the governmental entity. A governmental sign is not a billboard even if located off-premises from property
owned or leased by the governmental entity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 528/598
b) Location. Governmental signs may be located in any zoning district in the City's corporate limits or in the City's
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
c) Sign Design and Placement Criteria. The design and location of a governmental sign on a specific property shall be
subject to the regulations relating to location and design for the zoning district in which the governmental sign is located.
d) Traffic-Control Signs Exempt. Traffic-control signs installed by a governmental entity, or by a contractor performing work
in or adjacent to highways, streets, and alleys as authorized by a governmental entity, are exempt from this section.
(Ordinance 2017-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/10/17; Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
4.6030 COLORS OR PALETTE AS A REFERENCE FOR SIGN CONTRACTORS
a) Earth tone is a color scheme that draws from a color palette of browns, tans, warm grays, greens, oranges, whites, and
some reds, and some blues. The colors in an earth tone scheme are muted and flat in an emulation of the natural colors
found in dirt, moss, trees and rocks:
b) Neutral colors are colors that are lacking hue, usually they are very light colors such as gray, beige and taupe
(brownish-gray). Neutral colors are usually dusky in nature and “achromatic”:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/598
c) A “Special Exception” may be obtained to request colors not shown under this Section 4.6030.
(Ordinance 2018-20 adopted 4/10/18)
SECTION 5
SPECIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
5.01–5.99 RESERVED
5.100 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
Planned Developments (PD's) are customized zoning districts intended to accommodate unified design of residential,
commercial, office, professional services, retail and institutional uses and facilities or combinations thereof, in accordance
with an approved development plan. PD's are designed to permit flexibility and encourage a more creative, efficient and
aesthetically desirable design and placement of buildings, open spaces, circulation patterns and parking facilities in order to
best utilize special site features of topography, size or shape. PD's will only be permitted to occur on parcels of land that
contains three (3) acres or more, provided, however, Urban Village Planned Developments may be approved for parcels of
land that are five thousand seven hundred (5,700) square feet in area or larger. It is not intended to be solely or merely a
method of avoiding area restrictions required in other straight zoned districts (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.100, adopted
7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-03 adopted 1/9/18)
5.101 RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/598
Residential Planned Developments shall be considered appropriate where one or more of the following conditions prevail:
a) The development is a mixed-use master planned project that incorporates a range of housing types and
densities. For larger developments located on appropriate thoroughfares, other compatible land uses such as
retail should be incorporated into the project in a unified, integrated manner.
b) The development should offer amenities consistent with the scale and character of the project. Development
Plans shall meet or exceed the Amenity Criteria set forth in Table 1. Satisfaction of Amenity Criteria listed in Table
1 is a necessary but not sufficient condition of approval of a Planned Development.
c) The Council shall evaluate the intensity, density and character of a proposed Planned Development and
make a determination as to whether the proposal is compatible with surrounding land uses and consistent with the
City's established Comprehensive Plan goals. The Council has the authority to deny any Planned Development
proposal that is judged to be inconsistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan goals of the City, even if such a
Planned Development meets the Amenity Criteria established in Table 1.
d) The development should preserve valuable natural amenities as much as possible (e.g., mature tree
specimens) and should maximize the integrated use of lakes and vistas as much as possible.
Table 1. Amenity Criteria
At a minimum, Residential PDs shall satisfy the following criteria:
PRIMARY AMENITIES (ALL CRITERIA MUST BE SATISFIED)
1) Usable Public Open Space.
a) Minimum 5% or a minimum 5 acres of residential acreage (located outside the 100-year floodplain),
whichever is greater.
b) Maintained by a required Homeowner Association or Public Improvement District (HOA or PID)
c) Must be served with trails, recreation equipment, or designed for active use
d) One equipped 12,000-square-foot playground, meeting the Midlothian Parks & Recreation Department
playground prototype standards, per 150 homes
2) For every 2-1/2 lots sized 7,000 to 8,000 square feet, there must be at least 1 lot greater than or equal to 9,000 square
feet; for every 2-1/2 lots sized less than 7,000 square feet, there must be 1 lot greater than or equal to 10,000 square feet
(applies only to PDs with minimum 50 acres of residential use).
3) Enhanced Entryways (boulevard-style landscaped medians with stone-brick entry features). Must submit detailed plan.
4) Reservation of school or park site when requested by appropriate entity and/or in conformance with adopted
Comprehensive Plan (applies only to PDs over 150 acres)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/598
5) Curvilinear Street Pattern (applies only to PDs over 50 acres)
6) Basic Architectural Variety
a) The percentage of total housing units with front-loading garages may not exceed 65%.
b) No one architectural style may be repeated for a distance of four lots, either on the same side or opposite
side of the street.
7) A 15-foot perimeter landscape easement with required berm and street trees that meets or exceeds the City's
Landscaping Regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, adjacent to all public rights-of-way greater than 75 feet in width.
SECONDARY AMENITIES (6 OF THESE 13 CRITERIA MUST BE MET)
1) Side Entry or Rear Entry Garages (minimum 75% of housing units)
2) Community Center/Public Plaza at least 3,000/6,000 square feet, respectively.
3) Minimum 90% Brick/Stone Masonry Coverage
4) Internet-based community. Each home and business facility must be connected to the Internet via a central fiber optic
network.
5) Enhanced Subdivision Design Standards (utilizing the design techniques which include but not limited to coving,
enhanced architecture, entrance arch, varying roof pitches of at least 8:12, etc.).
6) Pond or lake feature with fountain or other water feature. Pond must be designed to hold water year-round and include
a perimeter walking trail. Total pond area must be at least one and [sic] 1-1/2% of the total PD area.
7) Upgraded roadway commitments beyond Thoroughfare Plan requirements, as approved by the Planning Director
8) Other Sufficient Infrastructure Cost Participation Not Otherwise Required, as approved by the City Engineer and
Planning Director
9) Design theme (restored barn as community center, etc.) accepted by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council, and incorporated throughout the design of the development
10) Curvilinear Street Pattern (does not qualify as a Secondary Amenity for PDs over 50 acres)
11) Preservation of Valuable Tree Specimens (minimum two trees per acre, minimum one-foot caliper; or, minimum of 24
caliper-inches per acre). Must provide detailed plans.
12) Approved Streetscaping Plan (with enhanced paver block crossings, brick median nose stubs, wider-than-required
sidewalks, decorative street lighting, and enhanced landscaping on all major roads within the PD) as approved by the
Planning Director
13) Another amenity directly contributing to the enduring quality of the future neighborhood, judged to be significant by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.101, adopted 7/9/13)
5.102 NONRESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS
Nonresidential planned developments shall be considered appropriate where one or more of the following conditions prevail:
a) Commercial or industrial uses are grouped into clusters allowing an appreciable amount of the land for open
space or joint use such as parking and storage.
b) Commercial or industrial projects with part of the land used for residential purposes.
c) Single purpose commercial or industrial uses of innovative land utilization.
d) A combined of residential and nonresidential uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.102, adopted 7/9/13)
5.103 URBAN VILLAGE PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS (UVPD)
Urban Village Planned Developments (UVPD) shall be considered appropriate where one or more of the following conditions
are satisfied:
a) If within 500 feet of the subject site, 75% of the lots were platted prior to 1960.
b) Proposed uses are compatible with the surrounding area.
c) Proposed architecture is compatible with the surrounding area.
d) The UVPD is consistent with the goals/objectives set forth for the Downtown/Original Town area in the
Comprehensive Plan.
e) The UVPD includes at least one nonresidential use.
f) The UVPD development plan incorporates effective parking lot screening and minimizes conversion of grassy
areas to paved surfaces, especially within the front yard area and, excludes pole signs from the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.103, adopted 7/9/13)
5.104 HEIGHT REGULATIONS
The maximum height requirement for permissible uses in this district shall be established on the approved development plan
with due regard to site and general area characteristics including land use, zoning, topography and setbacks, etc. (Ordinance
2013-24, sec. 5.104, adopted 7/9/13)
5.105 DENSITY, AREA AND COVERAGE REGULATIONS
The density of development, the minimum dimensions of lots and yards and maximum lot coverage shall be established on
the approved development plan with due regard to site and general area characteristics including land use, zoning,
topography, thoroughfares and open space opportunity. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.105, adopted 7/9/13)
5.106 PARKING REGULATIONS
a) All parking and vehicle use areas shall be paved with an all-weather surface. Off-street parking facilities shall be
provided at locations designated on the approved development plan.
b) Minimum off-street parking requirements shall be established in the approved development plan. Any deviation less
than the minimum requirements specified in Section 4.400 shall require specific approval from the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council. Parking area and numbers of spaces for the applicable district shall apply to these regulations.
c) Reduced parking and the use of on-street parking may be allowed in the Urban Village Planned Development (UVPD)
with an approved site plan.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.106, adopted 7/9/13)
5.107 SITE PLAN APPROVAL
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/598
An application for approval of a Site Plan under the Planned Development District regulations may be filed by a person
having a legal interest in the property to be included in the Site Plan. In order to ensure unified planning and development of
the property, the applicant shall provide evidence, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, prior to final approval of the Site
Plan that the property is held in single ownership or is under single control. Land shall be deemed to be held in single
ownership or under single control if it is in joint tenancy, tenancy in common, a partnership, a trust, or a joint venture. The
Site Plan shall be filed in the name(s) of the record owner(s) of the property, which shall be included in the application.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.107, adopted 7/9/13)
5.108 APPLICATION
An application for a Planned Development District may be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission in the same
manner that an application for zoning change is made. Applications for approval of a Planned Development District shall be
processed according to the procedure specified herein and a site plan and related data shall be submitted for approval in
accordance with the requirements set out in this Section. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.108, adopted 7/9/13)
5.109 PROCEDURE
Application for approval of a Planned Development district shall be processed according to the procedure specified herein
and a development site plan and related data shall be submitted for approval.
a) An application for a Planned Development shall be accompanied by a development site plan meeting the
requirements set forth in this ordinance.
b) Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Director shall make notification of a public hearing as set forth in
the zoning ordinance.
c) The Planning Director shall prepare a written report analyzing the development site plan and such report
shall be given to the Planning and Zoning Commission and applicant at least 3 working days prior to the public
hearing.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.109, adopted 7/9/13)
5.110 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
The Site Plan shall clearly indicate all significant features of the proposed development, on an accurate scaled drawing, to
include:
a) Planned Development Narrative describing in detail how amenity requirements will be satisfied.
b) A location map showing location of site in reference to existing streets.
c) The boundaries of the area included in the plan surveyed by a competent licensed engineer or surveyor and
the total gross acreage of the plan.
d) All recorded or physically existing public and private rights-of-way and easements located on or adjacent to
the plan area.
e) The approximate topography of the plan area, major watercourses and 100-year floodplain.
f) The proposed land uses and the approximate location of proposed buildings and other structures on the site,
existing structures, and uses adjacent to said site.
g) The character and density distribution of all proposed residential uses in the plan area. A table depicting the
number of lots in each 1,000-square-foot size category in both numerical and percentage form must be provided.
In addition, an accompanying color-coded map depicting the described above must also be provided and should
be limited to no more than 6 colors.
h) Where density variations are proposed within the development plan, the general location, maximum density
and site coverage and the housing type in each area of density variation.
i) The approximate location and dimensions of all parking areas, malls, water bodies, open areas and
recreational areas and any other community facilities such as churches, schools, etc.
j) All proposed streets, alleys, ways, including walkways, dedicated to public use, and the location of all utilities.
k) In residential developments, the maximum percentage of site coverage.
l) In commercial and industrial developments, the maximum gross area and floor area ratio.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/598
m) All areas reserved for common ownership with an indication of the properties, the owners of which will share
the common ownership.
n) The location and type of walls, fences, screen planting and landscaping.
o) A plan, including side elevation drawings, showing location, size, height, orientation and design of all signs.
p) Housing type and number of dwelling units of all proposed residential structures.
q) In multifamily, townhouse and commercial sections of the plan, the location of each outside facility for waste
disposal.
r) Required setbacks or setbacks in excess of minimum requirements adjacent to the boundaries of the
development plan.
s) A preliminary drainage study, showing all on-site and off-site drainage and final water destination.
t) A statement that clearly indicates that the proposed development will be in complete accordance with the
provisions of the applicable Planned Development District and that all Development Plans recorded hereunder
shall be binding upon the applicant thereof, his successors and assigns, and shall limit and control all building
permits.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.110, adopted 7/9/13)
5.111 DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE
An application for a Planned Development district smaller than 50 acres shall, if the applicant desires or the Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council requires, be accompanied by a development schedule. Planned Development districts of
50 acres or more shall be required to submit a Development Schedule. When included as a requirement, the development
schedule shall indicate the following:
a) The estimated date when development construction in the plan area shall commence.
b) The phases of development, if any, in which the plan area will be developed and the estimated date each
phase will commence.
c) The estimated date of completion of each stage in the development;
d) The area and location of common open space and the area and location of nonresidential uses that will be
developed at each stage; and
e) The project stage or phase in which major infrastructure will be installed prior to issuance of building permits
for that stage or phase. “Major infrastructure” in this case shall include parks, collector roadways, stormwater
management facilities, and other infrastructure identified in the PD Ordinance or by the City Planning Director or
City Engineer as critical to accommodating the impacts of each stage or phase of the development.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.111, adopted 7/9/13)
5.112 REVISIONS OF THE SITE PLAN & DEVELOPMENT SCHEDULE
Proposed revisions or modifications to an approved site plan and development schedule shall be noted and shown on a
stable base reproducible material of the approved plan. Upon the submission of such proposed revision, copies of the
proposed revised plan shall be submitted to the City Council for its review and determination, accompanied by a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission, as to whether the proposed revision constitutes such a
significant change in land use or structures that a public hearing should be called regarding said revision. If the City Council
determines the revised plan does not constitute a significant change, no public hearing shall be called and the revision shall
be deemed approved. If such revision is determined by the City Council to be a significant change, a public hearing shall be
scheduled regarding such revision, proper notice given, and thereafter be considered by the City Council for approval
according to normal procedure. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.112, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(K), adopted
12/13/16)
5.113 EXPIRATION DATE
a) Any planned development zoning designation may expire 2 years after such zoning is approved by City Council unless
a final plat for at least 1 section or phase of the planned development is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
b) Upon meeting the expiration date, the City Council may revert the entire planned development zoned tract back to the
original zoning that preceded the approval of the planned development, or to another appropriate zoning that is consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan. However, the site plan associated with the PD does expire. The Planning & Zoning
Commission may reapprove any expired site plan if the PD has not been changed or amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/598
c) Such rezone shall require public hearings and notifications as stated in Sections 1.44 - 1.46.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.113, adopted 7/9/13)
5.114 APPLICABILITY OF ZONING ORDINANCE
Where a Planned Development (PD) zoning ordinance is silent, the specific Zoning Ordinance regulations of the least
intensive zoning district that would accommodate a particular Planned Development use shall apply. In no case shall a PD
ordinance define the Zoning Ordinance or Subdivision Ordinance as the ordinance in effect at the time of City Council
approval of the Planned Development petition. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.114, adopted 7/9/13)
SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP)
5.200 AUTHORIZATION
The City Council of the City of Midlothian, Texas, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after
recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, may authorize the issuance of Specific Use Permits for the uses
indicated by an “S” in the Use Table located in Section 2.04. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.200, adopted 7/9/13)
5.201 SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
The Planning and Zoning Commission in considering and determining its recommendations to the City Council on any
request for a Specific Use Permit, may require from the applicant plans, information, function and characteristics of any
building or use proposed. The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to assure compliance of the
Ordinance, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any specific use for which zoning is
authorized. In authorizing the location of any of the uses listed as Specific Use Permits, the City Council may impose such
development standards and safeguards as the conditions and locations indicate important to the welfare and protection of
adjacent property from noise, vibration, dust, dirt, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, explosion, glare, offensive view, or other
undesirable or hazardous conditions. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.201, adopted 7/9/13)
5.202 APPLICATION FOR SPECIFIC USE PERMIT
Any person, firm or corporation, either as land owner or tenant, may request the use of property which requires a Specific
Use Permit. A Specific Use Permit may be granted after application has been properly made and a public hearing before the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council has been conducted. The proposed use must comply with all
regulations and restrictions as contained in the Zoning Ordinance, codes, regulations, and conditions of the City of
Midlothian, including, but not limited to the Electrical Code, the Building Code, the Fire Code, the Plumbing Code, and other
applicable Ordinances and codes. In addition all requests for a Specific Use Permit must comply with all State and Federal
laws and regulations applicable to such use. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may enforce
additional restrictions or stipulations as the facts and circumstances of each case may warrant. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec.
5.202, adopted 7/9/13)
5.203 REMOVAL FOR CAUSE
A Specific Use Permit may be removed from a parcel or tract of land when it is found that it has continued to operate in
violation of the conditions as originally granted. No action will be initiated by the City without prior written notification of such
violation to the user and/or owner of the property. If after written notification the use continues without being addressed by the
user and/or owner, or without the user and/or owner providing the City with a plan to bring the specific use into compliance
with the original conditions of the Specific Use Permit, the City may schedule a public hearing, in accordance with state law
regarding public notice for zoning changes. After a public hearing regarding the removal of the Specific Use Permit, the City
may remove the permit in accordance with the procedures as provided in this ordinance. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.203,
adopted 7/9/13)
5.204–5.210 RESERVED
5.211 CRITERIA FOR BED & BREAKFAST USES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 537/598
At minimum, any application for a Bed and Breakfast Specific Use Permit must satisfy the following criteria unless waived by
the City Council:
a) Allowed in zoning districts as listed in the Use Table.
1) One parking space per guest room is required, with a minimum of two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
2) The Bed and Breakfast manager or operator may reside on-site.
3) The SUP application must include a scaled site plan showing all proposed physical improvements,
landscaping[,] signage and screening fences. The conversion of front and side lawns to parking area will be
prohibited.
4) Guests stay are limited to a maximum of 2 weeks per month.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.211, adopted 7/9/13)
5.212 CRITERIA FOR COMPRESSOR STATIONS (RELATED TO GAS WELL DRILLING)
At minimum, any Specific Use Permit (SUP) application to allow a compressor station related to gas well drilling must satisfy
the following criteria:
a) Must be located in the appropriate zoning district.
b) An 8-foot high decorative masonry fence shall be placed around the perimeter. Such fencing shall meet the
requirements set forth in Section 4.5200 of the Zoning Ordinance, unless an alternative design is approved by the
Director of Planning.
c) No portion of the compressor equipment shall be visible above the masonry fence, unless it is housed in a
building.
d) Condensation tanks may not exceed a height of 12 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 538/598
e) A minimum 30-foot landscaped perimeter with street trees (minimum 4-inch caliper) spaced every 30 feet
and minimum 5-foot high shrubs spaced every 10 feet in between the street trees. Such landscaping shall be
native and drought-resistant and be from an approved species list.
f) A meandering 3-foot high berm shall be incorporated into the design of 30-foot landscaped perimeter.
g) The vegetation, berms, and masonry wall shall be kept in attractive state and in good condition at all times by
the applicant or Operator.
h) No noise-producing equipment may emit a sound that exceeds 72 dB(a) within 200 feet. If sound levels
exceed 72 dB(a), sound-reducing mufflers shall be required to reduce noise levels.
i) No compressor station shall be allowed within 300 feet (measured from the site) of an occupied structure.
j) The Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council may add additional requirements as a part of this
Specific Use Permit (SUP).
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.212, adopted 7/9/13)
5.213 CRITERIA FOR RESIDENTIAL USES IN CBD
a) The following minimum design requirements shall be provided in the CBD District.
1) Residential Uses as a Specific Use Permit
i) Residential dwelling units shall be allowed as secondary/ancillary uses in upper stories of structures
only, while maintaining Central Business District uses as the primary use in the first/ground floor.
ii) Floor plans shall be required to be submitted in conjunction with the Specific Use Permit. The floor
plans shall include the location and square footage of all nonresidential uses, the layout, square footage and
total number of residential units.
2) All buildings and structures approved for residential uses must meet all applicable Uniform Building and Fire
Codes.
3) A parking plan for residential uses approved as a Specific Use Permit containing the number and types of
off-street parking to be developed in association with such residential use shall be submitted for approval by the
City Council after a recommendation is made by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.213, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(L), adopted 12/13/16)
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
5.300 DEFINITION
An overlay district is a “transparent” zoning district that lies over an existing zoning district used to implement additional
development standards or places restrictions beyond those required by the existing or base zoning district. The overlay
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 539/598
district generally outlines uniform standards within the established boundary to ensure higher quality of development.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.300, adopted 7/9/13)
5.301 PURPOSE
The purpose of creating overlay districts is to set and coordinate special development standards to a specific area that has
unique value to the City and that are designed to provide a distinctive character, charm, and atmosphere to the designated
area. Overlay districts are appropriate instruments to implement the long-term goals and objectives of the adopted
Comprehensive Plan and are primarily intended to be used when special circumstances justify the modification of base or
existing zoning district regulations to achieve those specific design objectives that do not coincide with traditional zoning
districts. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.301, adopted 7/9/13)
5.302 ESTABLISHMENT & DESIGNATION
a) Overlay districts shall be established through the rezoning process as outlined in Chapter 211 of the Texas Local
Government Code and Sections 1.03 and 1.41–1.46 and only in conjunction with base zoning districts.
b) An overlay district may cover parts of several zoning districts or only a portion of an existing or base zoning district.
c) The existing or base zoning district shall maintain standard permitted land uses and development regulations. The
overlay district may further restrict development standards and/or land uses suitable to the purpose and protection of the
overlay district.
1) Development standards that may be regulated in an overlay district are: lot size, accessory buildings,
building height and area, architectural design & materials, landscaping, storage/loading areas, parking, lighting,
signage, access points, development review procedure, land uses, or any other restrictions that meet the overlay
district's purpose.
2) Land uses may be more restrictive than the base or existing zoning district allows, but not less restrictive.
d) When an overlay district is established, any subsequent application to change the existing or base zoning district shall
not be construed to be an application to eliminate the overlay district for the property covered by the application. Any intent to
eliminate the overlay district on a given property shall be expressly stated to be part of the application.
e) In cases where there is a conflict between the requirements of the overlay district and the underlying existing or base
zoning district, the overlay district restrictions shall apply.
f) When an applicant seeks to vary from the requirements of an overlay district, they shall apply to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for a variance just as they would if they were varying from the requirements of the base or existing zoning district.
g) Overlay districts are adopted the same as any other zoning amendment. When a text amendment is made creating the
regulations for the overlay district, a map amendment shall also be adopted to establish the boundaries for each overlay
district.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.302, adopted 7/9/13)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION OVERLAY ZONE (H)
5.400 PURPOSE
This overlay zone is intended to protect, enhance and perpetuate historic landmarks which represent or reflect distinctive and
important elements of the City's and State's architectural, archaeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and political
history; and to develop appropriate settings for such places and to safeguard the City's historic and cultural heritage, as
embodied and reflected in such historic landmarks by appropriate regulations.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.400, adopted 7/9/13)
5.401 “H” SUFFIX
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 540/598
Portions of certain zoning districts are designated with a Historic Preservation suffix “H”. The “H” designated areas are
subject to the base zoning, underlying district, and are further regulated by the regulations defined in this Section. (Ordinance
2013-24, sec. 5.401, adopted 7/9/13)
5.402 HISTORIC LANDMARK DESIGNATION
The City Council may designate certain buildings, land, areas and districts and the boundaries thereof. The procedure to be
followed to establish a Historic Landmark Designation shall be the same as is required to amend, to repeal or alter the zoning
on a tract or parcel of land. After all notice requirements of State zoning statutes, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. Art. 1011a through
1011f, and hearings have been conducted pursuant to said State statutes, and this ordinance and upon receipt of the
Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation, the City Council may designate the building, land, area or district with
the “H” suffix. The suffix “H” shall indicate the zoning subdistrict designation of those buildings, land, areas and districts which
the City Council has designated as historic landmarks. Such designations shall be in addition to any other zoning district
designation established in this ordinance. All Zoning District Maps shall reflect the designation of an historical landmark
subdistrict by the letter “H” as a suffix.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.402, adopted 7/9/13)
5.403 CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC LANDMARKS
a) In creating a historic landmark designation as set forth in the immediately preceding paragraph, the City Council and the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider one or more of the following criteria:
1) Character, interest or value as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristic of the City of
Midlothian, State of Texas or the United States;
2) Identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the
Town;
3) Location as the site of a significant historic event;
4) Exemplification of the cultural, economic, social or historical heritage of the City;
5) Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites or areas which are eligible for preservation according to a
plan based on historical, cultural or architectural motif;
6) Unique location of singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of
a neighborhood or community of the City; and
7) Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 541/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.403, adopted 7/9/13)
5.404 REMOVAL, DEMOLITION OR SUBSTANTIAL ALTERATION
No historic landmark, designated as such, pursuant to the procedures set forth herein, shall be demolished, removed,
altered, remodeled, razed or substantially reconstructed unless a permit for the same has been issued by the City Council. If
an application for such a permit is received by the City for demolition, removal, razing or substantial reconstruction of any
designated historic landmark, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing, make findings of fact in each
situation, and make appropriate recommendations to the City Council. No permit shall be issued to demolish, remove, raze or
substantially alter or reconstruct until such matter is resolved through all means available. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall conduct a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the application by the City. After the public hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend to the City Council whether to grant or deny the application. (Ordinance
2013-24, sec. 5.404, adopted 7/9/13)
5.405 CITY COUNCIL ACTION
The City Council shall consider the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendation within thirty days of passage of
same. The City Council, after conducting a public hearing and taking into consideration all of the factors presented, may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 542/598
approve or disapprove the application for a permit to demolish, remove, raze or substantially alter or reconstruct. The
Council's action shall be final. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.405, adopted 7/9/13)
5.406 PRESENT USE NOT AFFECTED
Use classifications of all property included in a historic landmark subdistrict shall continue to be governed by the Zoning
Ordinance of the City. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.406, adopted 7/9/13)
5.407 PROPERTIES WITH “H” DESIGNATION
1) Larkin Newton Cabin, Ordinance 2012-09
2) Old Fire House, Ordinance 2012-10
3) Kimmel Park, Ordinance 2012-11
4) Newton Cemetery, Ordinance 2012-21
5) Midlothian Cemetery, Ordinance 2012-22
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.407, adopted 7/9/13)
AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE
5.600 PURPOSE
The purpose of the overlay zone is to provide additional regulations and requirements for areas adjacent to or within a
specified proximity to an airport. These additional regulations and requirements provide for appropriate and compatible uses
of land surrounding the airport and provide for the safe operation of the airport facility itself.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.600, adopted 7/9/13)
5.601 USE REGULATIONS
Land use regulations of the existing base zoning district shall still apply, with applicable modifications regarding construction,
planning, use and development to be in compliance with and pursuant to the Municipal Airports Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann.
Art. 46d-1 through 46d-22 and all rules, regulations, leases, agreements and ordinances adopted thereunder; the airport
Zoning Act, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann. Art. 46e-1 through 46e-15; and all building, construction and performance standards
applicable and heretofore adopted by the City of Midlothian. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.601, adopted 7/9/13)
5.602 OVERLAY ZONE BOUNDARIES
The Airport Overlay zone shall apply to the “controlled area” as defined under the Airport Zoning Act as land located outside
airport boundaries and within a rectangle bounded by lines no further than 1-1/2 statute miles from the centerline of an
instrument or primary runway and lines located no further than 5 statute miles from each end of the paved surface of an
instrument or primary runway. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.602, adopted 7/9/13)
5.603 AIRPORT HAZARD ZONING ORDINANCE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 543/598
This Section shall also adhere to the regulations adopted by the Midway Airport Joint Zoning Board, created by Ordinance
2009-02, entitled Airport Hazard Zoning Ordinance, dated April 9, 2009, and recorded in the Ellis County Clerk's Office under
Instrument No. 0911839 and filed under Volume 02453, Pages 0935-0944. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 5.603, adopted 7/9/13)
SECTION 6
COMMUNICATIONS & CELL TOWERS
6.01 HEIGHT
a) Type 1 and Type 2 Commercial Communications Towers shall meet the following maximum height requirements:
1) In the A, GP, CR, C, LI, MI, and HI zoning districts, a communications tower shall not exceed the maximum
height as required in the Area Requirements.
2) In the CBD, a communications tower shall not exceed a height greater than that equal to the main structure
on the lot for which the said tower is proposed or located.
b) Height Exception:
1) Communications towers may exceed the maximum height requirement by providing an additional 2 feet of
front yard, rear yard, and side yard setback for each 1 foot above the maximum height requirement.
c) Distance Requirements
1) Front Yard: A communications mount or communications tower shall comply with the front yard setbacks as
required in the Area Requirements for the zoning district in which it is proposed or located.
2) Side and Rear Yard: A communications mount or communications tower shall comply with the minimum side
yard and rear yard setbacks as required in the Area Requirements for the zoning district in which it is proposed or
located. Guy wires are permitted in the required side and rear yards; however, the anchor point of any guy wire
shall not be located closer that 5 feet to a side or rear property line.
d) Communication mounts and communication towers must be installed as per the manufacturer's recommendations or
under the seal of a registered professional engineer of the State of Texas and shall be inspected and approved by the
Building Official.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 544/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 6.01, adopted 7/9/13)
SECTION 7
WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
7.01 REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS
a) All wind energy systems shall be administratively approved if the following requirements listed below are met. Upon
satisfaction all these requirements, a building permit shall be required.
1) Only wind energy system that supplants on-site commercial electric energy consumption shall be allowed per
platted property or tract of land.
2) No minimum lot size is required for wind energy systems if the established setback requirements are met
and a primary structure is constructed. A minimum 3 acres is required for a second wind energy system, if granted
by a Specific Use Permit (SUP).
3) The tower for a wind energy system shall be set back from the property line or overhead utilities by a
minimum distance equal to the overall structure height (pole height plus the length of one blade). There shall be
no setback requirements between buildings or dwellings on the affected property. Any setback distance shorter
than this requirement must be approved by Specific Use Permit (SUP).
4) The maximum height of a wind energy system tower shall be 80 feet (excluding blades), unless otherwise
exempted by a Specific Use Permit (SUP).
5) Wind energy systems shall comply with applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations,
including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
6) All wind energy system towers shall have blueprints, drawings, etc. of the tower and foundation sealed by a
professional engineer licensed by the State of Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 545/598
7) Installation shall be limited to either the side or rear yard on lots less than 3 acres.
8) Only monopole type structures shall be allowed on residential lots less than 3 acres. Other types of
structures may be allowed on larger residential or nonresidential lots by an approved Specific Use Permit (SUP).
9) Roof-mounted wind energy systems shall be allowed by an approved Specific Use Permit (SUP).
10) Wind energy systems proposed to be installed within the 100-year floodplain shall have approval of the City
Engineer and, where applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and will require to take such measures, as
required by the City Engineer, to protect the sites from damage from potential flooding.
11) No part of the wind energy system shall be placed in any easement without the approval of the easement
holder.
12) All wind energy systems shall be equipped with a redundant braking system of both aerodynamic overspeed
controls and mechanical brakes.
13) Any installation of wind energy systems shall be installed by a factory-approved contractor meeting all the
City's adopted codes and regulations.
14) All electrical wires associated with a wind energy system shall be protected by an electrical conduit as
approved in the City's most recently adopted Electrical Code.
15) Wind energy systems shall not exceed 65 decibels (dB), measured at the property line.
16) Only warnings signs shall be placed on the wind energy systems that meet the requirements below. In no
case shall any type of advertising signs be allowed on any wind energy system. A clearly visible warning sign that
states “Caution, High Voltage” shall be placed at the base of the pole, or on the external interconnect box, if
installed.
17) Climb Prevention/Locks
i) All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access.
ii) The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible
to the public for a minimum height of 12 feet from the ground.
18) Visual Appearance
i) A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) and shall not exceed their minimum requirements.
ii) All wind energy system towers and related components shall remain painted or finished in a neutral
color that was originally applied by the manufacturer.
19) Maintenance & Inspections. A wind energy system shall remain operational and be properly maintained at
all times unless approved by City staff for reasons such as sale of a property, performing routine maintenance or
other brief periods of inactivity. A wind energy system shall initially be inspected within 3 years with subsequent
inspections every 5 years thereafter by a manufacturer-approved inspector to verify the structural integrity of the
pole and associated foundation. The homeowner or inspector shall file a report with the City's Building Official.
20) Inoperable Systems
i) A wind energy system whose equipment is inoperable for 6 months shall be notified by the Building
Official that they have 6 months from the notice date to restore their system to operating condition.
ii) If the owner fails, the wind turbine shall be removed from the tower for safety reasons. The tower itself
would then be managed under the Public Nuisance language of the City Code.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 7.01, adopted 7/9/13)
7.02 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
a) An operational plan is required with a building permit and shall include the following:
i) Boundary survey of the property with setback lines,
ii) An as-built survey of the property,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 546/598
iii) Location of the proposed wind energy system,
iv) Public rights-of-way contiguous with the property,
v) Overhead utility lines,
vi) Wind system specifications, including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, tower height, and tower type,
vii) Tower foundation blueprints or drawings, sealed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Texas,
viii) An engineering analysis of the tower including connections to the foundation or other structures showing
compliance with the City's adopted version of the International Building Code and certified by a professional
engineer licensed by the State of Texas, shall also be submitted.
b) All wind energy systems interconnected with an electric grid system shall be approved by the electric system prior to
final inspection.
c) An issued permit shall expire if the wind energy system is not installed and functioning within 6 months from the date the
permit is issued.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 7.02, adopted 7/9/13)
SECTION 8
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
8.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The following are provided as guidelines for the construction, interpretation and enforcement of this Section:
a) It is the purpose and intent of this Section to regulate sexually oriented business establishments to protect
and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City and visitors thereto, and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City.
b) This Section intends a balance of the right of the citizens of the City to maintain a decent moral society and,
on the other hand, the right of individuals to express themselves freely in accordance with the guidelines of the
Constitution of the United States and United States Supreme Court rulings pursuant thereto.
c) This Section is also intended to deter property uses and activities, which directly or indirectly, cause or would
cause adverse secondary effects, including the deprecation of property values, on the stability of the immediate
neighborhood surrounding the sexually oriented business.
d) This Section has neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
e) Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this Section to restrict or deny lawful access by adults to sexually
oriented materials or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented materials to their
intended market.
f) Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this Section to impose judgment on the content or merits of any
constitutionally protected form of speech or expression.
g) It is the purpose of this Section to generally charge operators of sexually oriented businesses to comply with
a policy of “keep it indoors and under control” and to hold all operators first line answerability, directly or indirectly,
for all uses of the premises and activities conducted thereon.
h) The definitions for this Section are found in Section 100.300.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.01, adopted 7/9/13)
8.02 CLASSIFICATIONS
a) Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
1) Adult arcades;
2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
3) Adult cabarets;
4) Adult motels;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 547/598
5) Adult motion picture theaters; adult theaters
6) Escort agencies;
7) Nude model studios;
8) Sexual encounter center; and
9) Adult audio or video centers
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.02, adopted 7/9/13)
8.03 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS
a) A person, including an operator of a sexually oriented business, commits an offense if such person operates or permits
the operation, or establishment of a sexually oriented business in any zoning district other than as allowed by the City's
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as amended.
b) A person, including an operator, commits an offense if such person operates or causes to operated or permits the
operation or establishment of a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet from any of the following located within the city
limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction:
1) Religious institution, church, synagogue, mosque, temple or structure that is used primarily for religious
worship and related religious activities or real property owned by, or for the benefit of, a religious organization that
intends to use the property for such purposes if such ownership has been registered with the city;
2) Public and private schools, a public or private educational facility, including but not limited to, child day care
facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuing education
schools, special education schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities; school includes the school grounds
and related athletic or other facilities regularly visited by students;
3) A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities, including but
not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, golf course, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or
tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public land within the city which is under
the control, operation, or management of a governmental entity;
4) A boundary of a residential zoning district or an area designated as residential on the City's Comprehensive
Plan;
5) A Historically designated property;
6) Central Business District
7) Community Conference/Convention Center
8) Areas that currently are, or within the last ten years were, designated as Tax Increment Finance (TIF)
districts and Public Improvement Districts (PID).
9) State, Federal or U.S. Highways or Farm to Market Road.
c) A person, including an operator, commits an offense if such person causes or permits the operation or establishment, or
the transfer or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of another sexually oriented business[.]
d) For the purpose of subsections (b) and (c) above, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line or boundary for the premises where a sexually
oriented business is operated or to be operated to the nearest property line or boundary for the uses or locations described in
subsections (b) and (c) above, to the nearest property line or boundary of the premises where a sexually oriented business is
operated or sought to be operated. The presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant
for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
e) A person commits an offense if such person causes or permits the establishment, maintenance or operation of more
than one classification of sexually oriented business on the same property, in the same building, structure, or portion thereof,
or the increase of floor area of a sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another
sexually oriented business.
f) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is
derived that is in violation of one or more subsections of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The
nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any
reason, including but not limited to, suspension or revocation of license, or voluntary discontinuance for a period of 30 days
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 548/598
or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be
changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,500 feet of one another and otherwise
in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first lawfully established and continually operating at a
particular location is the conforming use and the later established business is nonconforming.
g) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the
location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use or location listed in
Subsections B and C [(b) and (c)] of this section within 1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies
only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has
expired or been revoked.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.03, adopted 7/9/13)
8.04 SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY & EMPLOYEE LICENSE REQUIRED
a) A person commits an offense if such person establishes, operates, maintains or continues to operate a sexually oriented
business without a valid Specialized Certificate of Occupancy issued by the City pursuant to this Section for the operation of
a sexually oriented business for the premises at which the sexually oriented business is operating, or to operate such
business after such Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been revoked or suspended by the City.
b) It is unlawful for any person, entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator or owner to knowingly perform any work,
service or entertainment directly related to the operation of a sexually oriented business for which the City has not issued a
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy or after such Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been revoked or suspended by
the City.
c) It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages or operates a sexually oriented business to have an employee or to
employ a person, regardless of the nature of the employment, who works for the sexually oriented business who is not
licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the City pursuant to this Section.
d) It is unlawful for any person to obtain employment, regardless of the nature of the employment relationship, with a
sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this Section.
e) It is unlawful for any person to fail to have a manager, who has a sexually oriented business employee license and who
is responsible for ensuring compliance with this Section, on-duty and working at any time the sexually oriented business is
open for business.
f) The failure to post a sexually oriented business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy in the manner required herein shall
be prima facie evidence that such business has not obtained such a certificate. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence
that any entertainer, employee, manager or owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in a sexually
oriented business in which a sexually oriented business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is not posted in the manner
required herein had knowledge that such business does not have a valid Specialized Certificate of Occupancy.
g) A Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is required for each sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued only for the one sexually oriented business classification listed on the
application. Any change in the type of sexually oriented business classification shall invalidate the sexually oriented business
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy and require the holder to obtain a new Specialized Certificate of Occupancy for the
change in use. The establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building,
structure or portion thereof is prohibited.
h) Each sexually oriented business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy and each sexually oriented business employee
license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application for renewal.
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 business days prior to the expiration date, and when made less than 30
business days before the expiration date, the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy will still expire on its expiration date.
When the City denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If,
subsequent to denial, the City finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 business days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.
i) Specialized Certificate of Occupancy and sexually oriented business employee license are nontransferable.
j) Each application for a sexually oriented business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy and each application for a
sexually oriented business employee license, or renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee
established by resolution of the city council. An application shall not be considered filed until the required fee is paid and the
application is complete in all respects and all information and documentation required by the application form has been
submitted.
k) Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the chief of police to request on behalf of the
applicant criminal history from the Texas Department of Public safety and other appropriate state and federal agencies. The
applicant shall pay all fees and costs associated with such request for criminal history.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 549/598
l) Each Specialized Certificate of Occupancy and employee license issued by the City shall include 2 photographic
identification cards, a personal card and an on-site card.
m) If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder thereof shall immediately notify the Chief and request a
replacement, which shall be issued after payment of a fee established by resolution of the City Council within three days
following verification of the identify of the holder.
n) A copy of all applications and supporting documentation for Specialized Certificates of Occupancy and employee
licenses shall be maintained in the Development Services Department.
o) The operator of a sexually oriented business shall permit and cooperate with the appropriate City enforcement
personnel shall lawfully inspect the entire premises as well as all activity being conducted therein.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.04, adopted 7/9/13)
8.05 APPLICATION FOR SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
a) Any person, association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity desiring to obtain a Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy for a sexually oriented business shall make application on a form(s) provided by the City's Development Services
Department and sworn to as true and correct. The applicant shall also furnish all necessary supporting documents as
required by the application. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this Section. The application may
request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine whether the
applicant meets the qualifications established in this Section.
b) Only a person who is an officer of or who has an ownership interest in, a sexually oriented business may apply for a
sexually oriented business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy. Each applicant must be qualified under this Section and
each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
c) If an applicant is an individual, such individual must sign the application form as applicant.
d) If the applicant is other than an individual, each individual having the power to control or direct its operations[,] each
individual who is an officer and/or each individual having 20% or greater investment or ownership interest in the sexually
oriented business must sign the application as an applicant. An application on behalf of a corporation or partnership must
provide sufficient documentation with the application to identify all corporate shareholders and directors or partners who have
a 20% or greater ownership interest.
e) If the applicant is a corporation, limited liability company or other legal entity, the entity shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation or formation, evidence that the entity is in good standing under the laws of the state of formation
and if not a Texas entity, the state of incorporation or formation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and
controlling stockholders or owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered office for service
of process. A certified copy of the Sections of incorporation [articles of incorporation], together with all amendments must be
submitted. If the enterprise is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this
state, along with any amendment must be submitted.
f) If the applicant is a partnership or limited partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, the date of its
formation, evidence that the partnership is in good standing under the laws of the state and if not a Texas partnership, its
state of formation, the names and capacity of all partners and officers, whether the partnership is general, limited or
otherwise, a copy of the partnership agreement or certificate of partnership, if any, and the official name and address to be
used for process of service on the partnership. The applicant must submit a certified copy of the certificate of partnership,
together with all amendments filed in the Office of the Secretary of State of Texas. If the partnership is a foreign limited
partnership, the applicant must submit the certificate of partnership and the qualification documents along with any
amendments filed in the Office of the Secretary of State of Texas.
g) Applicant shall submit proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the sexually oriented business is
to be operated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed or fully executed lease for the premises on which the sexually
oriented business is to be operated.
h) In addition to identifying those person required to sign an application under subsection (b) [(d)] above, the application
must identify all parent and sexually oriented related corporations or entities of any person who will own or operate the
sexually oriented business and include the names of the officers of each parent or related corporation or entity.
i) Subsequent corporate sales, mergers, changes in shareholders or changes in partners shall be registered with the
Development Services Department immediately upon completion of the documentation evidencing the transaction. All
subsequent shareholders and directors or partners must be identified and shall be subject to qualification and compliance
with the requirements for obtaining the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy.
j) The application must be accompanied by:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 550/598
1) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business, prepared and sealed by an architect or engineer, drawn to a designated scale or drawn
with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Each sketch or
diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or landmark with marked dimensions sufficient
to show the various dimensions of all areas, walls, doors, windows or other material aspects of the premises.
Each sketch or diagram shall include at least the following:
i) The internal and external configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the structure;
ii) A statement fully describing the external signage to be displayed on the premises, as well as signage
intended to be displayed elsewhere in the City to advertise the business;
iii) The location of one or more manager's stations or office;
iv) The location of all electrical wiring and fixtures, including but not limited to lighting fixtures, sound
systems, special effects equipment, video display equipment, video surveillance systems, etc.;
v) Designation of any portion of the premises in which customers will not be permitted or in which sexually
oriented business activities will not be conducted;
vi) A plan or description of the safety and security measures for the inside and outside of the premises, its
customers and employees; and
vii) A designation of the place(s) at which the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy, a copy of the floor
plants), and other necessary permits, licenses and signage will be conspicuously posted.
viii) The Director of the Planning Department may waive the foregoing sketch or diagram requirements
only for renewal applications if the applicant expressly adopts by reference a floor plan that was previously
approved and certifies that the configuration of the premises have not been altered or enlarged since it was
approved.
2) All new applications shall include a certified survey map prepared by a licensed surveyor or licensed
engineer, which shows the required minimum distances from properties with protected, uses or protected zoning.
3) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered land
surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses
within 1,500 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines or boundaries of the uses and locations
described in Section 14.1-3 B and C [8.03(b) and (c)] and within 1,500 feet of the property to be certified. For
purposes of this Section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is in existence or owned by such
type of user at the time an application is submitted.
4) A nonrefundable application fee of established by resolution of the City Council.
5) Location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street
address, telephone number, if any, and the dates a notice sign was posted as required by this Section.
6) The applicant's mailing address and residence address. For each applicant, a copy of a valid state driver's
license with photo, or a valid state identification card with photo. The originals of the required forms of
identification shall be presented to the chief of police for inspection prior to the issuance of a license.
7) The applicant's driver's license number and state of issuance.
8) A statement whether the applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in payment to
the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
9) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the
applicant; the application must:
i) State the sexually oriented business's fictitious name or business owner's fictitious name; and
ii) Submit the required registration and assumed name documents.
10) A statement as to whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of
each conviction, and the date of release from confinement, if applicable.
11) A statement as to whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license
or Specialized Certificate of Occupancy under this Section or other similar sexually oriented business provisions
from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 551/598
oriented business for which the permit, license or Specialized Certificate of Occupancy was denied, suspended or
revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the
applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder or owner of a
corporation or other legal entity that is licensed under this Section whose license or Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually
oriented business for which the permit, license or Specialized Certificate of Occupancy was denied, suspended or
revoked, and the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
12) A statement as to whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses or
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy under this Section or other similar sexually oriented business regulations
from another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
13) The classification of the sexually oriented business for which the applicant is seeking the Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy. A sexually oriented business may only have one classification to be eligible for a
license.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.05, adopted 7/9/13)
8.06 APPLICATION FOR EMPLOYEE LICENSE
a) An application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall be submitted to the City on a form provided by
the City and shall be sworn to as true and correct. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this Section.
The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this Section.
b) The completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall contain the following information and
shall be accompanied by the following documents:
1) The applicant's name or any other name (including “stage” names) or aliases used by the individual;
2) Age, date, and place of birth;
3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
4) Present residence address and telephone number;
5) Present business address and telephone number;
6) A copy of a valid state driver's license with photo, or a valid state identification card with photo. The originals
of the required forms of identification shall be presented to the chief of police for inspection prior to the issuance of
a license;
7) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
8) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a
form provided by the city. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;
9) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this
or any other county, city, state, or country, has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied,
revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In
the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial,
revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application;
10) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
Section and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each conviction, and
the date of release from confinement, if applicable; and
11) A statement whether the applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in payment to
the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
c) All employees of a sexually oriented business existing prior to the passage of the ordinance from which this Section is
derived must submit an application for a sexually oriented business employee license required by this Section no later than
60 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived and any employee failing to do so shall
not continue to work on the premises of a sexually oriented business if he fails to submit an application within 60 days or if
the application for license is denied. Any person who fails to timely submit an application for a license as required by this
subsection, or any person operating sexually oriented business who allows an employee to continue working who is not in
compliance with this subsection or who fails to receive a license shall be considered to be in violation of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 552/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.06, adopted 7/9/13)
8.07 ISSUANCE OF ORIGINAL SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND EMPLOYEE LICENSE
a) Upon the filing of a complete application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the Development Services
Department shall issue a temporary license, valid for 30 business days, to said applicant. If the sexually oriented business
employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and void. The application
shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained
on the application. The investigation shall be completed within 25 business days from the date the completed application was
filed. Upon completion of the investigation, the Development Services Department shall issue a license, not later than 30
business days from the date the completed application was filed, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence
that one or more of the following are true:
1) The application contains false, fictitious or fraudulent information or the applicant has failed to provide
information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited or
unlicensed by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this Section;
5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within two years of
the date of the current application;
6) The license application fee and/or costs required by this Section have not been paid; or
7) The applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties.
b) Sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses issued pursuant to this section
shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the Development Services
department that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity or committed any act during the
existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The renewal of the license
shall be subject to the payment of a license renewal application fee established by resolution of the city council from time to
time.
c) The Planning Director shall issue a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy to an applicant within 30 business days after
the date a completed application is filed, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the
following are true:
1) An applicant is under 18 years of age;
2) An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties, including but not limited to those related to the sexually oriented business or the property on
which the sexually oriented business is located;
3) The application contains false, fictitious or fraudulent information or the applicant has failed to provide
information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license or specialized
certificate of occupancy by the city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 calendar
months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12
calendar months;
5) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity;
6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the police
department, fire department, development services department, the building official, health department or other
city department or applicable governmental agency as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances;
7) The application fee and/or costs required by this Section have not been paid; or
8) An applicant of the proposed establishment or the proposed location for the establishment is in violation of or
is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this Section, the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, or any other
applicable city ordinance, as may be amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 553/598
d) When issued, the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy shall state on its face:
1) The full name, address and telephone number of the person(s) (“the operator”) to whom it is issued;
2) The name, address and telephone number of the establishment;
3) The classification of the sexual oriented business; and
4) The expiration date.
e) When issued the sexually oriented business employee license shall state on its face:
1) The full name, address and telephone number of the person to whom it is issued;
2) The expiration date.
f) When issued, the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is only valid as to the operator and location for which it is issued.
A sexually oriented business employee license and Specialized Certificate of Occupancy are nontransferable.
g) The Specialized Certificate of Occupancy as well as a copy of the currently approved floor plan shall be continually
displayed in a conspicuous place within the establishment at or near the entrance so that it is visible to the public at all times
and may be easily read.
h) It shall be an offense for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy
or a sexually oriented business employee license.
i) No increase of the floor area or modification in the internal structural configuration of a sexually oriented business shall
be made beyond the area or configuration as shown in the floor plan as approved with the issuance of the Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy unless an amended Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is issued by the Development Services
Department.
j) A Specialized Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for only one classification and is only valid for the premises for
which it was issued[.]
k) The holder of a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy shall be responsible for verifying that each employee holds a valid
sexually oriented business employee license and for maintaining copies of such employee licenses on the premises.
1) All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time the establishment is occupied or open for business.
m) The holder of a sexually oriented business employee license shall have the license available for inspection at the
premises where such person is working pursuant to the authority granted under the license.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.07, adopted 7/9/13)
8.08 ISSUANCE OF AMENDED OR MODIFIED SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
In the event the holder of a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy for a lawfully operating sexually oriented business desires to
modify the operations of the sexually oriented business by changing the classification of the sexually oriented business to
another classification not authorized in the operator's current Specialized Certificate of Occupancy, the operator shall submit
a written application, accompanied by a nonrefundable fee established by resolution of the City Council, to the Development
Services Department for an amended or modified Specialized Certificate of Occupancy. The approval shall be made within
30 business days after receipt of a completed application and shall meet the same requirements as set forth for an original
application. The amended or modified Specialized Certificate of Occupancy shall expire on the same date as the original
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy[.] (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.08, adopted 7/9/13)
8.09 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND EMPLOYEE LICENSE
a) Each Specialized Certificate of Occupancy and each sexually oriented employee business license shall expire one year
from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing a renewal application with the Planning Director on a form
prescribed by the Development Services Department accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city council.
b) Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 business days prior to the expiration date, and when made less than
30 business days before the expiration date, the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy or sexually oriented employee
[license], as the case may be, will still expire on its expiration date). All applications for renewal shall meet the same
requirements as set for an original application.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.09, adopted 7/9/13)
8.10 SUSPENSION OF SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND EMPLOYEE LICENSE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 554/598
a) The Planning Director shall suspend a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy or a sexually oriented business employee
license for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days [if] the Planning Director determines that the operator or an employee of
an operator has:
1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this Section; or
2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this Section.
b) A sexually oriented business may not operate while the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy issued for that business is
suspended. The holder of a sexually oriented business employee license may not work on the premises of a sexually
oriented business while that employee's license is suspended, except as allowed by Section 8.12.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.10, adopted 7/9/13)
8.11 REVOCATION OF SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND EMPLOYEE LICENSE
a) The Planning Director shall revoke a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy and sexually oriented business employee
license if a cause of suspension in Section 8.10 occurs and such license has been suspended within the preceding 12
calendar months.
b) The Director of Planning shall revoke a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy or employee license if:
1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process;
2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the
sexually oriented business or failed to report such activities to the police;
3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business or failed to
report such activities to the police;
4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's
license was suspended;
5) Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises;
6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, including but not limited to
those related to the sexually oriented business or the property on which the sexually oriented business is located;
or
7) A manager, having a sexually oriented business employee license, responsible for ensuring compliance with
this Section is not on-duty and working at any time the premises is open for business;
8) An operator or employee of an operator has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
9) An operator or an employee or an operator has transferred the license in violation of this Section.
c) When the Planning Director revokes a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy or an employee license, such revocation
shall continue for 1 year, and such licensee shall not be issued a license for 1 year after the date of revocation became
effective.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.11, adopted 7/9/13)
8.12 APPEAL OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND
EMPLOYEE LICENSE
a) Any applicant for a license who is denied a license or the holder of a license that is suspended or revoked shall have the
right to appeal such decision to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
b) The appeal may be made by filing with the Zoning Board of Adjustment within 10 business days after notice of the
denial, suspension or revocation has been received, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal and the
name, mailing address, facsimile number and/or e-mail address and telephone number to be used by the city to provide
notice of a hearing as required by this section, and be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council.
c) An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be heard at the next available hearing date as established by the
Board of Adjustment's usual meeting dates. The Planning Director shall notify the appellant and chief of police in writing of
the date, time and location of such hearing at least 7 calendar days prior to the hearing, unless appellant agrees in writing to
a shorter period. The appeal shall be decided on the basis of the preponderance of the evidence. The appellant shall have
the burden of proof of disputed facts to establish that the denial, revocation or suspension was erroneous. For purposes of
this section, notice by facsimile or hand delivery shall be considered delivered on the date of fax, or delivery, if faxed or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 555/598
delivered prior to 5:00 p.m., and if after 5:00 p.m. it shall be considered delivered on the next day. Notice sent by U.S. mail
shall be deemed delivered on the second day following deposit in the United States mail.
d) The decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be made no later than 30 business days after receipt of notice of
the appeal unless waived by the appellant. The decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment is final.
e) If the appellant being denied a license renewal holds an unrevoked, unsuspended license for the preceding year, such
person shall be permitted to continue to operate under the existing license until a final decision is made by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment under this section, unless the Planning Director determines from evidence or information presented to the
Planning Director that continued operation or work by the appellant would constitute a continuing and imminent threat to the
public welfare; however, if said license expired prior to the denial of the renewal, the license shall be considered expired and
the appellant may not use the expired license.
f) An appellant appealing the suspension or revocation of a license may continue to use such license until a final decision
is made by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, unless the Planning Director determines from evidence or information presented
to it that continued operation or work by the appellant would constitute a continuing and imminent threat to the public welfare.
g) The Zoning Board of Adjustment may overturn the denial, revocation or suspension only if the decision of the Planning
Director to deny, suspend or revoke was erroneous and the appellant shows that the application or license, as the case may
be, complies or is in compliance with this Section. The decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be appealed to the
state district court of Ellis County, Texas.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.12, adopted 7/9/13)
8.13 TRANSFER OF SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
a) A person commits an offense if such person transfers a license to another person or entity, or operates a sexually
oriented business under a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy in any name or at any location other than the name and
address for which the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy was issued.
b) Any person desiring to continue the operation of a sexually oriented business after purchase or transfer (including
transfer in the event of death or incapacity) of a sexually oriented business must apply for and obtain a new Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy in such person's name prior to continuing the operation of such business. A Specialized Certificate
of Occupancy shall automatically be deemed revoked as of the date of death or incapacity of the operator in whose name the
specialized certificate of occupancy is issued or as of the date of the transfer or purchase of the applicable sexually oriented
business by the operator in whose name the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy was issued, as the case may be.
c) A person commits an offense if such person counterfeits, forges, changes, defaces or alters a Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy or an employee license. Any Specialized Certificate of Occupancy or employee license that has been altered is
deemed void and invalid.
d) If corporations that have substantially similar ownership merge or consolidate, a fee established, by resolution of the city
council, shall be paid for each sexually oriented business holding a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy that is merged or
consolidated into the surviving corporation. The surviving corporation succeeds to all privileges of the prior corporation that
held the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy if the owners of the surviving corporation meet the qualifications for an
applicant to acquire the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy under this Section. For purposes of this section, corporations
have “substantially similar ownership” if 90% or more of the corporations involved are owned by the same person or persons,
or by the same corporation or corporations, or if the surviving corporation has maintained an ownership interest in the
merged or consolidated corporations since the date the original Specialized Certificate of Occupancy was issued.
e) A Specialized Certificate of Occupancy shall be deemed automatically revoked and invalid in the event an operator
suffers an event of bankruptcy or insolvency.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.13, adopted 7/9/13)
8.14 EMPLOYEE BACKGROUND CHECKS
a) Prior to employment of any person by the sexually oriented business, the operator of the sexually oriented business
shall conduct a criminal history background check on all prospective employees to ensure that no person employed has any
conviction for any specified criminal [activity.]
b) The operator shall maintain a current registration card or file on the premises of the sexually oriented business clearly
identifying all managers, employees and/or entertainers employed by the sexually oriented business including but not limited
to:
1) Full legal name;
2) All aliases or “stage names”;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 556/598
3) Date of birth;
4) Race;
5) Color of hair and eyes;
6) Current residence addresses and phone number;
7) Texas driver's license number (or Texas identification number);
8) Social Security number;
9) Color photograph of full-face view; and
10) Date of criminal background check.
c) Records:
1) Within 5 days of employment of an employee, each manager shall send a copy of the criminal history
background check (with redacted social security number) and registration card to the Chief of Police.
2) Each manager shall maintain on the premises and make available for inspection upon request by City
enforcement personnel the criminal history background information and current registration card for all current
employees.
3) A manager commits an offense if such person fails to make the criminal history background information
and/or current registration card available for immediate inspection upon request by City enforcement personnel.
4) An employee or entertainer commits an offense if such person:
i) Provides false or fictitious information to the operator; or
ii) Fails to timely provide updated information to the operator within 14 business days after any changes in
the required information.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.14, adopted 7/9/13)
8.15 GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
a) As a condition for the issuance of a license, an applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police
department, health department, fire department, development services department, building inspections or other city
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with
the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business and at other reasonable times upon request.
b) A licensee or person who operates a sexually oriented business, or their agent or employee commits an offense if such
person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by representatives of the city as set forth in subsection A [(a)]
above at any time the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for business and at other reasonable times upon
request.
c) The operator, manager, employee or entertainment personnel shall not knowingly permit or allow any customer access
to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area not open to customers as per the floor plan approved by the
Development Services Department pursuant to this Ordinance.
d) An operator may not knowingly employ or engage the service of any person less than 18 years of age as an employee
or entertainer for the sexually oriented business.
e) No person may appear in a state of nudity or engage in specified sexual activities on any portion of the premises
outside the building, which is capable of being viewed from a public street or right-of-way.
f) No operator shall operate or allow the operation of an internal video surveillance system of persons or activity on the
premises without prior written approval from the Police Department, except that internal video surveillance systems may be
used to monitor the premises or activity for legitimate security or safety purposes upon prior inspection and written approval
from the Police Department. This subsection shall not apply to video projection systems.
g) The operator shall maintain on the premises at all times a current copy of all City Ordinances regarding or regulating
sexually oriented business activity.
h) An operator commits an offense if the operator fails to display the signs on the interior of the premises as required by
this Section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 557/598
i) An operator commits an offense if such person permits any customer access to an area of the premises not visible from
the manager's station or not visible by a walk-through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.15, adopted 7/9/13)
8.16 REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY AND EMPLOYEES
a) It shall be an offense for a person to knowingly and intentionally appear in a state of nudity or to depict specified sexual
activities in a sexually oriented business.
b) It shall be an offense for a person to knowingly or intentionally appear in a semi-nude condition in a sexually oriented
business unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least 6 feet from any patron or customer and
on a stage at least 2 feet from the floor level used by patrons.
c) It shall be an offense for an employee to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron while said employee is semi-nude in
a sexually oriented business.
d) It shall be an offense for any patron to pay or give any gratuity to any employee while said employee is nude or seminude
in a sexually oriented business.
e) It shall be an offense for an employee to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron while said employee is semi-nude in
a sexually oriented business.
f) It shall be an offense for a patron in a sexually oriented business to touch a nude or semi-nude employee, or to touch the
clothing of a nude or semi-nude employee.
g) Each manager or entertainer shall conspicuously display his personal card upon his person at all times while acting as
an entertainer or manager of or in a sexually oriented business.
h) Each manager or entertainer shall provide his on-site card to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the sexually
oriented business to hold while the manager or entertainer is on the premises of the sexually oriented business.
i) No manager, owner, or operator shall allow any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity directly to any employee
while that employee is in a state of nudity in a sexually oriented business other than by means of hand or garter tipping, a tip
receptacle or paid as part of the customer's bill.
j) All garters shall be located mid-thigh or lower.
k) No person shall appear in a state of nudity in an area of the adult cabaret in an area of the premises that can be viewed
from the public right-of-way.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.16, adopted 7/9/13)
8.17 HOURS OF OPERATION
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time except between the hours of 10:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 12:00 p.m. noon and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec.
8.17, adopted 7/9/13)
8.18 INTERIOR OF THE SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
a) Subject to reasonable accommodations for legitimate security measures, including approved internal surveillance video
systems, the operator shall maintain the entire premises to permit walk-through inspections without interference by City
enforcement personnel.
b) The interior of the premises shall be arranged in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view into every area of the
premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. The operator shall ensure that
the ability to view into any area where customers are allowed remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials. This regulation shall not apply to adult motels.
c) If the premises contain two or more separate rooms, the operator shall maintain each room with at least one wall or door
equipped with clear windows or openings of at least three feet in width and two feet in height located no less than three feet
above the floor hut no less than two feet below the ceiling for viewing into the entire area and all activity therein. This
regulation shall not apply to adult motels.
d) The operator shall maintain every portion of the premises where customers are permitted access equipped throughout
and illuminated at all times with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient illumination to provide reasonably safe lighting
conditions for patrons, employees or City enforcement personnel walking throughout the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 558/598
e) During hours of darkness when a sexually oriented business is in operation, the operator shall maintain all parking and
pedestrian areas of the premises equipped and illuminated by overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient illumination to provide
reasonably safe lighting conditions for persons or vehicles traveling into, on and out of the property. Said lighting fixtures shall
be directed onto the property as much as is possible to avoid being directed onto neighboring properties.
f) The operator shall not utilize or allow restroom or employee dressing rooms to be utilized for sexually oriented business
purposes, video equipment or for the offering of any sexually oriented merchandise to customers.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.18, adopted 7/9/13)
8.19 EXTERIOR APPEARANCE OF THE SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
a) No exterior portions of a sexually oriented business shall have any types of flashing or moving lights or any words,
lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the
provisions of this Section.
b) No merchandise or activities of a sexually oriented business shall be visible from any point outside the establishment.
c) All exterior portions and/or facades, including the roof, that are to be painted shall be a single achromatic color with a
single achromatic color trim, both colors consisting of a neutral earth-tone color only, however, the trim and the building may
be a different neutral earth-tone color.
d) The exterior architecture and design for any sexually oriented business shall follow the standards set forth in Section
4.5500. Under no circumstances can the design of the building or any related accent feature depict or represent to depict any
anatomical part of the human body.
e) The landscaping for the exterior of any sexually oriented business shall be twice the requirements stated in Section
4.5400.
f) All exterior lighting structures shall not exceed 25 feet in height and shall be shielded, downcast lighting.
g) All parking areas for any sexually oriented business shall be concrete and the minimum parking provided shall be one
space for every four persons based the maximum occupancy load as stated in the Fire Code.
h) No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any material depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specifies anatomical areas by display, sign, show window or other
opening from any public view.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.19, adopted 7/9/13)
8.20 SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
a) Business Requirements for Posting Sign Concerning Intent to locate Sexually Oriented Businesses
1) An applicant for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy for a location for which a specialized certificate of
occupancy has not previously been issued shall post an outdoor sign at the location in compliance with Section
243.0075 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, not later than the 60th day before submitting the
application for a specialized certificate of occupancy to the Development Services Department.
2) The sign shall comply with the following requirements:
i) The sign must be at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size;
ii) All letters must be at least two inches in height and 1 and 1/2 inches in width for each letter on the sign;
iii) The sign shall state that a sexually oriented business is intended to be located on the premises;
iv) The sign shall provide the name and business address of the owner and operator;
v) All required information must be presented in both English and Spanish;
vi) All required information must read horizontally from left to right; and
vii) The sign shall be prominently posted such that it is clearly legible from the public right-of-way.
3) The operator of a proposed sexually oriented business shall notify the Planning Director, by certified mail or
hand delivery, when a sign is posted at the intended location of the business in compliance with Section 243.0075
of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. The notification must be in the form of a sworn statement
indicating the location of the sign and the date it was posted and must be received by the Planning Director within
five days after the posting of the sign. If the Planning Director receives the notification within five days after the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 559/598
sign was posted, the 60-day posting period required by Section 243.0075 shall be deemed to begin on the posting
date. If the Planning Director receives the notification more than five days after the sign was posted, the 60-day
posting requirement shall be deemed to begin on the date the Planning Director verifies the sign has been posted.
4) When a sign is posted at an intended location of a sexually oriented business and the intended location is
not in violation of the distance requirements set out in this Section on the posting date, the sexually oriented
business will qualify as a conforming use with regard to the distance requirements and will not be rendered
nonconforming by any location, subsequent to the posting of the sign.
5) Subsection (4) above does not apply if:
i) A completed application for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy for a proposed sexually oriented
business is not filed with the Development Services Department within 20 days after the expiration of the 60-
day posting requirement under Section 243.0075 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended; or
ii) The application for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is withdrawn or denied; or
iii) The notification requirements of subsection (2) [(3)] above are not met.
b) Signs at Each Public Entrance
1) The operator shall maintain at least one conspicuous permanently mounted sign, presented in both English
and Spanish, at each public entrance, in accordance with the City's sign codes, of a size of at least 18 inches in
height and 24 inches in width, easily visible and legible to all persons prior to entry into the establishment, with all
letters at least one-half inch in height and three-quarters of an inch in width for each letter on the sign which
contains a statement to the effect:
“THIS IS A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT WHICH REGULARLY FEATURES
(description of the type of activity or merchandise as permitted herein). IF NUDITY OR ACTIVITY OF A
SEXUAL NATURE OFFENDS YOU, DO NOT COME IN. NO PERSON UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE
ALLOWED ENTRY”
(If alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed on the premises) - “NO PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF
AGE ALLOWED ENTRY”
c) Exterior Signs
1) Notwithstanding any provision of the City of Midlothian Code or any other city ordinance, code, or regulation
to the contrary, the owner or operator of any sexually oriented business or any other person commits an offense if
he erects, constructs, or maintains any on-premise sign for the establishment other than one primary sign (ground
sign) and one secondary sign (building signage) as provided in Section 8.20.
i) Such building signage shall not exceed a total of 30 square feet
ii) Such on-premise signage shall be a ground sign not [to] exceed 4 feet in height and 15 square feet in
area.
iii) Any other signage not mentioned within Section 8.20 shall fall under the provisions of Section 4.6000.
2) A primary sign may have no more than 2 display surfaces. Each display must:
i) Not contain any flashing lights;
ii) Be a flat plane, excluding the lettering, and
iii) Be rectangular.
3) A secondary sign may have only 1 display surface. The display surface must:
i) Not contain any flashing lights;
ii) Be a flat plane, excluding the lettering;
iii) Be rectangular in shape; and
iv) Be affixed or attached to a wall or door of the establishment.
4) A primary or secondary sign must contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations
or any manner, and may contain only the name of the establishment; and/or one or more of the following phrases:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 560/598
i) “Adult arcade”
ii) “Adult bookstore or adult video store”
iii) “Adult Cabaret”
iv) “Adult motel”
v) “Adult motion picture theater”
vi) “Escort agency”
vii) “Nude Model Studio”
viii) “Sexual encounter center”
5) A primary sign for an adult motion picture theater may contain the phrase, “Movie Titles Posted on
Premises,” in addition to the phrases listed in subsection (4) above.
6) Each letter forming a word on a primary or secondary sign must be of a solid color, and each letter must be
the same print-type, size and color. The background behind the lettering on the display surface of a primary or
secondary sign must be of a uniform and solid color.
7) Any sign located on the premises of a commercial multi-unit center containing an enterprise that displays the
name or any portion of the name of the enterprise, any name under which any enterprise was formerly operated
on the premises, or that contains any of the terms set for the in this Section or any other terminology that is
commonly used to identify, or is associated with the presence of a sexually oriented business, shall comply with all
restrictions of this Section. The intent of this section is to prevent the use of signage identifying the commercial
multi-tenant center itself from being used as a subterfuge to evade the restrictions on sexually oriented business
signs set forth in this Section.
d) Interior Signs
1) A sign shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area of an adult cabaret or adult theater that shall
read as follows:
“THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF
MIDLOTHIAN”
“Entertainers and employees are:
i) Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct;
ii) Not permitted to be unclothed, clothed in less than opaque attire, or to move or remove such
attire, or allow such attire to be moved or removed so as to expose to view any portion of the
pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or any portion of the female breast below the top
of the areola except upon a stage at least 2 feet above the immediate floor level and removed at
least 6 feet from the nearest patron.
iii) Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from any patron for
entertainment before its completion.”
2) It is an offense for the operator to fail to post or display the sign required in this subsection.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.20, adopted 7/9/13)
8.21 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES
a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years of age.
b) A person commits an offense if such person acts as an escort or agrees to acts as an escort for any person less than 18
years of age.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.21, adopted 7/9/13)
8.22 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR OUTCALL BUSINESSES
a) An operator shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years of age for the purposes of acting as an outcall
person or providing outcall services for a customer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 561/598
b) An operator, manager or employee commits an offense if such person acts as an outcall person for any customer less
than 21 years of age.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.22, adopted 7/9/13)
8.23 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR NUDE MODELING STUDIOS
a) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
b) A person under 18 years of age commits an offense if such person appears semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of a nude modeling studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this Section if the person under 18 years was in a
restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex.
c) A person commits an offense if they appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of
nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.
d) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises; except that a sofa
may be placed in, a reception room open to the public.
e) A patron at a nude model studio commits an offense if such person touches an employee who is exposing any specified
anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee.
f) An operator or an employee of a nude model studio commits an offense if such person permits any customer access to
an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by walk-through of the premises without entering
a closed area, excluding a restroom.
g) An employee of a nude model studio, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense if the
employee touches a patron or clothing of a patron.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.23, adopted 7/9/13)
8.24 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT THEATERS & ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
a) An operator shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity or simulated nudity for
customers on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
b) A person commits an offense if such person knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 to appear in a state of
nudity in or on the premises of an adult motion picture theater.
c) A person under the age of 18 commits an offense if such person appears in a state of nudity or simulated nudity for
customers on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater.
d) It is a defense to prosecution under this Section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view
or persons of the opposite sex.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.24, adopted 7/9/13)
8.25 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTEL
a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two
or more times in a period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an
adult motel as defined in this Section.
b) An operator, manager or the person otherwise in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial
establishment that does not have a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy, commits an offense if such person rents or
subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time the room is first rented, such person rents or
subrents the same sleeping room again.
c) For purposes of subsection B [(b)] of this section, the term “rent” or “subrent” means the act of permitting a room to be
occupied for any form of consideration.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.25, adopted 7/9/13)
8.26 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT IN VIEWING ROOMS
a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits
on the premises in a viewing room, booth, stall or partitioned portion of a room having less than 150 square feet of floor
space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, (herein referred to as “viewing area”) shall comply with the following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 562/598
1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram
of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location
of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at
which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an
engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or
to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions
sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus
or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a
diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.
2) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior written
approval of the chief of police.
3) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and
situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. If the premises has
two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any
purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of
sight from the manager's station.
4) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a
manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose,
excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. No viewing area shall have a
door, half-door, curtain, portal partition or other divider unless at least one side is completely open to an adjacent
public room and a manager's station so that the area inside is visible to persons in the adjacent public room and a
manager's station.
5) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the viewing area specified herein remains unobstructed by
any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that
no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons
will not be permitted as set forth in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.
6) No viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place
to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor
level.
8) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) above is
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
9) No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing areas.
10) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing areas. A solid metal
barrier in which an opening cannot be easily made shall be used in the wall construction between viewing areas
within 48 inches of the floor.
11) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing areas to
determine if any openings or holes exist.
12) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing areas to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces,
with no rugs or carpeting.
13) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing areas to be constructed of, or
permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other
porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. A person having a duty under subsection (a)(1) through
(12) above commits an offense if such person knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.26, adopted 7/9/13)
8.27 MINORS
a) A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to person under the age of 17 years, displays a book,
pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film or videocassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual
lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following:
1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 563/598
2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the
top of the areola; or
3) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered.
b) In this Section “display” means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee
of the business establishment:
1) It is a available to the general public for handling and inspection; or
2) The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public.
c) Except as provided in subsection (d) below a person commits an offense if the person knowingly allows a person under
the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18
years to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at any time the sexually oriented business is open for
business.
d) No person under the age of 21 shall be permitted on the premises of a sexually oriented business where persons
appear in a state of nudity or a state of semi-nudity. A person commits an offense if the person knowingly allows a person
under the age of 21 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business where persons appear in a state of nudity or state
of semi-nudity. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to enter or be on the premises of a sexually
oriented business, where persons appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, at any time such sexually oriented business is
open for business.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.27, adopted 7/9/13)
8.28 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES & CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED
a) It shall be an offense for any person to maintain, own, or operate a sexually oriented business on any premises on
which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption, or permitted to be consumed.
b) It shall be an offense for any person who maintains, owns or operates any commercial establishment where alcoholic
beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, or are permitted to be consumed on the premises,
to permit any person to appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.28, adopted 7/9/13)
8.29 SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTERS PROHIBITED
a) Sexual encounter centers are prohibited. No license or Specialized Certificate [of] Occupancy shall be issued for the
operation of a sexual encounter center.
b) A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or causes to be operated a sexual encounter center. Any
person in control of such premises shall be presumed to be operating the sexual encounter center.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 8.29, adopted 7/9/13)
SECTION 9
NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES AND STRUCTURES
9.01 INTENT
Within the districts established by this ordinance, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and
uses of land, which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended, or before the land was annexed into the City,
but would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this
ordinance to permit those nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses
are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this
ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other
structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 9.01, adopted 7/9/13)
9.02 HARDSHIPS REGARDING NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or
designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. (Ordinance 2013-
24, sec. 9.02, adopted 7/9/13)
9.03 NONCONFORMING LOTS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 564/598
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any nonconforming lot whether
such lot was created by plat or separate ownership/instrument prior to adoption of Ordinance No. 116 (approved on May 4,
1959) or amendment thereto, or before annexation of land into the City. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of
continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district. Development on such lot shall conform to
the minimum dwelling square footage, residential density, percent impervious area, height, front yard setback, side yard
setback, and rear yard setback requirements for the district in which the lot is located. Variance of area, width, and yard
requirements shall be obtained only through action of the Zoning Board of Adjustments. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 9.03,
adopted 7/9/13)
9.04 RECONSTRUCTION OF OWNER-OCCUPIED, NONCONFORMING RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES
a) In any district where a residential structure was lawfully constructed and occupied prior to the adoption of this ordinance
or annexation of land into the City, said structure may be reconstructed in accordance with the following provisions:
1) The primary structure and any related accessory buildings shall be rebuilt according to the building footprint
as it existed prior to the event necessitating reconstruction,
2) The reconstruction shall not in any way result in the modification or expansion of any nonconforming
structure or nonconforming use, and
3) The nonconforming structure must have been occupied by the property owner prior to the event
necessitating reconstruction.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 9.04, adopted 7/9/13)
9.05 NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND
a) When, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance or annexation of land into the City, lawful use of
land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1) No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land
than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance;
2) If any such nonconforming use of land voluntarily ceases for any reason for a period of 6 months or more,
any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in
which such land is located.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 9.05, adopted 7/9/13)
9.06 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
a) When, on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance or annexation of land into the City, a building or
structure exists that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage,
height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1) Such structure may not be enlarged in a way which increases its nonconformity; and
2) Such structure may not be altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; and
3) Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at
time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance;
4) In determining the replacement cost of any nonconforming building or structure, there shall not be included
therein the cost of land or any factors other than the most current value for improvements as shown on the current
tax roll.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 9.06, adopted 7/9/13)
9.07 NONCONFORMING USE OF STRUCTURES
a) When, on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance or annexation of land into the City, a use of a
building or structure, or of structure and premises in combination, exists that would not be allowed in the district under the
terms of this ordinance, the use may be continued, subject to the following provisions:
1) No building or structure associated with a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, constructed,
reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 565/598
district in which it is located;
2) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building, but no such expansion of use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building and no such expansion of use shall require the
enlargement, extension, construction, reconstruction, movement, or structural alteration of the structure the use
occupies;
3) Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a
permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
4) When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, voluntarily becomes
vacant and remains unoccupied or out of use for a continuous period of 6 months or more, the structure thereafter
shall not be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located;
5) Whenever a building or structure containing a nonconforming use is destroyed or damaged by any means to
an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction, the nonconforming use status
shall be immediately terminated.
6) In determining the replacement cost of any building or structure housing a nonconforming use, there shall not
be included therein the cost of land or any factors other than the most current value for improvements as shown
on the current tax roll.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 9.07, adopted 7/9/13)
9.08 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE
a) On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done on ordinary repairs or on
repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing. The cubic content of the building or structure as it
existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased.
b) Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or
part thereof, declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting public safety, upon order of such official.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 9.08, adopted 7/9/13)
9.09 USES UNDER SPECIAL EXCEPTION
Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use,
but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such district only for the single property granted such
exception. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 9.09, adopted 7/9/13)
SECTION 10
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
10.01 CREATION
There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Adjustment to be composed of 5 members and 2 alternate members who shall be
residents and qualified voters of the City of Midlothian and shall serve without compensation.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.01, adopted 7/9/13)
10.02 MEMBERS, TERMS OF OFFICE, AND GENERAL RULES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 566/598
a) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five 5 regular members and 2 alternate members who shall be
appointed by the City Council in accordance with Chapter 211.008–211.011 of the Texas Local Government Code.
1) The Board Members shall serve for a period of 2 years and until their successors are duly appointed and
qualified.
2) The Alternate Members will be assigned Numbers 1 and 2 for the order in which the Alternate will be called
upon to serve in the absence of a regular member.
b) All members will be appointed by a majority vote of the City Council.
1) Members may be removed by a majority vote of the members of the City Council, for cause on a written
charge after a public hearing.
2) Board members may be appointed to succeed themselves.
3) Vacancies shall be filled by an alternate member for the unexpired term of a member whose term becomes
vacant.
c) Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as stated in the Zoning Board of
Adjustment's Rules of Procedure, Resolution 2009-10.
d) All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, except when it is consulting with its attorney.
e) The Board may adopt rules to govern its proceedings, providing, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with the
terms of this Ordinance.
f) 4 members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. All cases to be heard by the Board of
Adjustment will always be heard by a minimum number of 4 members.
g) The applicant bears the burden of proof in establishing the facts justifying a variance.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.02, adopted 7/9/13)
10.03 AUTHORITY OF BOARD
a) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the authority, subject to the standards established in Sections 211.008 to
211.011 of the Texas Local Government Code and those established within the Zoning Ordinance, to exercise the following
powers and perform the following duties:
b) Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in the enforcement or interpretation of this Ordinance.
1) The Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement,
decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or
determination, and for that purpose the Board has the same authority as the administrative official.
c) Hear and decide Special Exceptions to the terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
d) Authorize in specific cases a variance (see Section 10.05) from the terms of this Ordinance if the variance is not
contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done.
e) The concurring vote of 4 members of the Board is necessary to:
1) Reverse an order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or determination of an administrative official;
2) Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the Board is required to review under this Zoning
Ordinance; or
3) Authorize a variation from the terms of this Zoning Ordinance.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.03, adopted 7/9/13)
10.04 LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORITY OF BOARD
a) The Board may not grant a variance authorizing a use other than those permitted in the district for which the variance is
sought.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 567/598
b) The Board shall have no power to grant or modify rezones, Zoning or Subdivision Ordinance amendments, Specific Use
Permits (SUP) or Planned Developments (PDs).
c) In the event that a request for a zoning amendment is pending before the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City
Council, the Board shall neither hear nor grant any variances with respect to the subject property until final disposition of the
zoning amendment.
d) All administrative remedies available to the applicant shall have been exhausted prior to a hearing by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
e) If a proposed site does not conform to the zoning district standards and a variance has been requested, the Planning
and Zoning Commission and/or the City Council may defer its actions until the Zoning Board of Adjustment has acted on the
variance requests.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.04, adopted 7/9/13)
10.05 VARIANCES
a) In order to grant a variance from these zoning regulations, the Board of Adjustment must make written findings that an
undue hardship exists, using the following criteria:
1) That literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance will create an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty in
the development of the affected property;
2) That the situation causing the hardship or difficulty is neither self-imposed nor generally affecting all or most
properties in the same zoning district;
3) That the relief sought will not injure the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; and;
4) That the granting of a variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of these regulations.
b) A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on economic
gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this Ordinance to other
parcels of land in the particular zoning district.
c) No variance may be granted which results in undue hardship on another parcel of land.
d) No variance may be granted that will weaken the specific objectives or regulations of the specific zoning district in which
the property is located.
e) No variance may be granted that will not be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Zoning Ordinance.
f) No variance may be granted that will adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.05, adopted 7/9/13)
10.06 VARIANCE PROCEDURES
a) Whenever a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship in the
development of the property, an application for a variance may be filed with the Planning Department.
1) An application for granting a variance by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in writing using forms
provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a fee pursuant to the adopted fee schedule.
2) The application shall include:
i) a plot plan, drawn to scale, showing all lot dimensions and easements and the locations and dimension
of all existing and proposed lot improvements;
ii) a statement of facts and special conditions why the Zoning Ordinance should not be applied to the
property in question and how the standards governing the Board's action would be satisfied; and
iii) a statement by the Planning Director or his designated citing the facts and why there are no special
conditions for granting the variance.
b) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing no later than 45 days after the date the application for
action is filed. Notice of a public hearing shall be provided to all property owners within 200 feet of the affected property 10
days prior to the public hearing and also published in the official local newspaper and the City's official website 10 days prior
to the public hearing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 568/598
c) Before acting on an application for a variance, the Board shall consider:
1) facts filed with the application;
2) testimony presented at the public hearing on the application;
3) Staff's technical report on the application;
4) the Board's findings in its field inspection of the property; and
5) the Board's own knowledge of the facts and conditions relative to the application.
d) The Board may grant the variance, subject to such special terms and conditions as it may require, provided the
applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that the conditions exist that are found in Section 10.05.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.06, adopted 7/9/13)
10.07 SPECIAL EXCEPTION PROCEDURES
a) Whenever a use requires a Special Exception as stated in the Use Table of the Zoning Ordinance, an application may
be filed with the Planning Department.
1) An application for granting a Special Exception by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in writing using
forms provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a fee pursuant to the adopted fee schedule.
2) The application shall include:
i) A site plan, drawn to scale, showing all lot dimensions, and the location and dimensions of all existing
and proposed lot improvements;
ii) A written statement by the Applicant describing the way in which all conditions prescribed by the Zoning
Ordinance and by these Rules have been or will be met; and
iii) Other matters required by the Zoning Ordinance.
b) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing no later than 45 days after the date the application for
action is filed. Notice of a public hearing shall be provided to all property owners within 200 feet of the affected property 10
days prior to the public hearing and also published in the official local newspaper and the City's official website 10 days prior
to the public hearing.
c) Before action on the application, the Board shall consider:
i) The facts filed with the application;
ii) The testimony presented at the Public Hearing;
iii) The staff's technical report on the application; and
iv) The Board's own knowledge of the facts and conditions relative to the application.
d) The Board shall decide upon those applications for Special Exception when such use or development is specifically
authorized under the Zoning Ordinance subject to the approval of the Board.
e) In reaching its decision, the Board shall determine that the requested Special Exception will establish only those uses
permitted under the Ordinance; that the location of the proposed activities and improvements are clearly defined on the site
plan filed by the Applicant; and that the Special Exception will be wholly compatible with the use and permitted development
of adjacent properties either as filed or subject to such requirements as the Board finds to be necessary (to protect and
maintain the stability of adjacent properties).
f) The Board may limit the term of any approved Special Exception use to any period of time it deems appropriate under
the circumstances.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.07, adopted 7/9/13)
10.08 APPEAL PROCEDURES
a) Whenever it is alleged that there is an error by the Planning Director in any determination or enforcement of the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, an appeal for interpretation of the regulations or map designations may be filed with
the Planning Department.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 569/598
b) An application for Appeal of Administration Decision by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in writing using forms
provided by the City and shall be accompanied by a fee pursuant to the adopted fee schedule. The application shall include:
1) A statement by the applicant describing the way it is alleged the Ordinance should be interpreted or
enforced, together with diagrams and charts illustrating the error and the proper application of the map or text
provisions of the Ordinance; and,
2) A statement by the Planning Director giving the reasons for his interpretation or enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance.
c) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing no later than 45 days after the date the application for action
is filed. Notice of a public hearing shall be published in the City's official website 10 days prior to the public hearing.
d) Before action on an appeal, the Board shall consider:
1) The facts and statements filed in the application;
2) The testimony presented at the public hearing;
3) The staffs report on the appeal;
4) The Board's independent investigation of the language of the Ordinance and of related ordinances bearing
thereon.
e) The Board shall make such interpretation as ought to be made provided the applicant has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Board that one or more of the following conditions exist and that the decision of the Board would be in the
interest of the community and would carry out the spirit and intent of the Zoning Ordinance:
1) That there is reasonable doubt or difference of interpretation as to the specific intent of the regulations or
map;
2) that an appeal of use provisions would clearly permit a use which is in character with the uses enumerated
for the various zones and with the objectives of the zone in question; and
3) that the resulting interpretation will not grant a special privilege to one property inconsistent with other
properties or use similarly situated.
4) In reaching its decision the Board shall establish firm guidelines for future administrative actions on like
matters.
f) The Board shall render an interpretation of those provisions of the Zoning Ordinance where it is alleged that there is an
error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by an Official in the administration of such provisions. In
reaching its decision, the Board shall establish firm guidelines for future administrative actions on like matters.
1) The facts filed with the application;
2) The testimony presented at the Public Hearing;
3) The staff's technical report on the application; and
4) The Board's own knowledge of the facts and conditions relative to the application.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.08, adopted 7/9/13)
10.09 SUBPOENA AUTHORITY
The Chairman may issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses at the request of the Board or a party to the
appeal or application. Any party requesting the issuance of a subpoena shall provide the name and address of the witness
and a brief statement of the relevance of the witness testimony to the Chairman at least ten days before the scheduled
hearing date. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.09, adopted 7/9/13)
10.10 SUBMISSION OF EVIDENCE
The appellant's or applicant's evidence supporting the grant or denial of an application or application shall be submitted only
through the Executive Secretary or the Board in public meeting. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.10, adopted 7/9/13)
10.11 WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION
a) An appeal or an application may be withdrawn upon written notice to the Executive Secretary, prior to giving public
notice of the request.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 570/598
b) A request to withdraw the application or application after public notice has been given and prior to Board action shall
require formal consent of the Board.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.11, adopted 7/9/13)
10.12 APPLICATION AFTER BOARD DENIAL
When an appeal or application has been denied by the Board of Adjustment, a new application shall not be considered by the
Board of Adjustment within 2 years after the date of denial or withdrawal unless the application was denied without prejudice
or the new plans materially changed the nature of the case. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.12, adopted 7/9/13)
10.13 EXPIRATION OF GRANTED APPLICATION
a) If a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy is not issued within 180 days after the Board's decision, such approval
shall expire unless a greater specific time is requested at the time of the application and is authorized by the Board.
b) The Board delegates to the Planning Director the authority to extend the date for expiration of an application for an
additional 180-day period on written request. No subsequent application for extension of commencement shall be granted.
c) The time limit for every granted application shall commence on the day after the Board renders its decision.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.13, adopted 7/9/13)
10.14 JUDICIAL REVIEW
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or
any officer, department, or Board of the City may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such
decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition must be presented within 10 days
after the date the decision is filed in the Planning Department. (Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 10.14, adopted 7/9/13)
SECTION 100
DEFINITIONS
100.1 GENERAL DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words as used herein are defined as follows. Terms that are not expressly defined
herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. No
definition in this Section whether in itself or in conjunction with provisions of Section 100 of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be
construed to regulate rail transportation. Any definitions not listed below shall be defined per Black's Law Dictionary.
Access: Means of approaching or nearing. Includes a right of passage to and from an adjacent street.
Accessory Use or Structure or Building: An accessory use or structure is one customarily a part thereof, which is clearly
incidental and secondary to a permitted use and which does not change the character thereof.
Acreage, Gross: The total acreage of a subdivision, including areas dedicated to the public use such as streets and alley
rights-of-way, floodplains, and any areas that are nonresidential in use.
Acreage, Net: The total acreage of a subdivision less those areas dedicated to public use such as street and alley rights-ofway,
floodplains, and any areas that are nonresidential in use.
Actual Construction: The placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner;
except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such
demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until
completion of the building involved.
Agricultural Use: The use of land for the raising of crops or livestock with intent to make a profit on the sale thereof; as
defined by the Central Appraisal District of Ellis County.
Airport, Heliport, Helipad, or Helistop: Any premises which are used, or intended strip [sic] for use, or for the landing and
take-off of aircraft; and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use as airport buildings or other airport
structures or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and structures located thereon.
Alcoholic Beverage: Any drink, either contained in a sealed container for off-site consumption or served to be consumed on
the premises, that contains an alcoholic content that causes it to be controlled under the authority of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission and allowed by the City of Midlothian only in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.
Animal Production: A facility or area for raising animals (including fish and birds) and the development of animal products,
such as meat, fur, or eggs, on a commercial basis. Typical uses include beef, horse or sheep ranching; piggeries; poultry;
dairy; and fish farming. This use does not include raising animals to sell as pets.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 571/598
Animal Shelter: A facility used to house or contain stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals for the purpose of
providing temporary kenneling and finding permanent adoptive homes for animals.
Antenna: A device used to transmit, retransmit or receive any radio, electromagnetic, or microwave signals.
Antique Shop: A premises used principally for the sale or trade of articles to include works of art, furniture, decorative objects,
archeological relics, or other similar objects having collectable value and being a minimum of 30 years old. Antique shop
does not include secondhand store, thrift store or junk shop or yard.
Alley: A minor public right-of-way, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street. (Alleys are generally discouraged in all future subdivisions in Midlothian, except where
expressly permitted.)
Apartment: A room or group of rooms used as a dwelling for 1 family unit with cooking facilities therein located in a building
where other family dwelling units are located.
Apartment House: Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, and rented, leased or let to be occupied as 3 or
more dwelling units, or apartments.
Apparel Manufacturing: Transforms fabrics produced by textile manufacturers into clothing and accessories. By cutting and
sewing fabrics or other materials, such as leather, rubberized fabrics, plastics, and furs, workers in this industry help to keep
consumers warm, dry, and fashionable.
Appliance or Furniture Store: A retail store that specializes in the sale of equipment used for domestic functions including but
not limited to couches, tables, bedroom sets, washers, dryers, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, etc.
Arcade: An amusement center having coin-operated devices for entertainment[.]
Archery Range: A facility that includes buildings or structures used for target practice with bows and arrows.
Area of the Lot: The area of the lot shall be the net area of the lot and shall not include portions of streets and alleys.
Athletic Training Facilities: An indoor area intended solely for the purposes of training with exercise equipment or engaging in
training for activities that include but not limited to karate, kick-boxing, gymnastics, etc.
Automobile Accessory Sales and Service: A facility or area for the retail sale and installation of aftermarket accessory items
and other new or rebuilt goods for use in motor vehicles (also see Motor Vehicle Repair Garage, major & minor).
Auto Parts Sales Store: A retail store that specializes in the sale of automobile parts and accessories.
Automobile Pound: An off-street area not open for customers to drive into or through for the storage of unlicensed motor
vehicles.
Bank or Financial Institution: A place of business for the custody, loan, and exchange of money; for the extension of credit,
and for the facilitating the transmission of funds. This does not constitute credit services organizations as identified by the
State of Texas (i.e. payday loans, auto/title loans, etc.).
Bakery: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sales of baked products for consumption off-site. The products may
be prepared either on-site and/or distributed off-site.
Bar or Tavern: An area primarily devoted to the serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages on-site and in which the
service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Alcohol sales greater than 75% of gross sales must
be reported to the Texas Alcohol Beverage Commission, per State law.
Base Site Area: That portion of the gross site area remaining after (a) the dedication of public street and utility right-of-way;
(b) subtracting the area within surface easement; and (c) buffer areas from the gross site area.
Batch Plant: A plant for the manufacturing or mixing of concrete, cement, and concrete and cement products, including any
apparatus and uses incident to such manufacturing and mixing.
Beauty Salon/Barber Shop: Any commercial establishment where cosmetology is offered or practiced on a regular basis for
compensation, including hair care, nail care, and skin care.
Bed & Breakfast (private home): A manager/operator-occupied single-family detached dwelling where tourist-oriented lodging
and morning meals are provided for compensation and which complies with the requirements of Section 5.211.
Billboard: A sign permanently or wholly fixed to the ground that is not located on the lot, tract or parcel of the event, activity or
business being advertised, and whose sole intent is to be leased for advertising purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 572/598
Blacksmithing: A person who creates objects from iron or steel by “forging” the metal; i.e., by using tools to hammer, bend,
cut, and otherwise shape it in its non-liquid form. Usually the metal is heated until it glows red or orange as part of the forging
process. Blacksmiths produce things like wrought iron gates, grills, railings, light fixtures, furniture, sculpture, tools,
decorative and religious items, cooking utensils, and weapons.
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities.
Board of Adjustment: The Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) of the City of Midlothian as established by this Ordinance.
Boarding/Rooming House: A rooming and boarding establishment either in a converted single-family home or in a structure
specifically designed for such purpose that serves a specific group or membership, such as a dormitory or workers' camp.
The term of stay is temporary. Accommodations may offer housekeeping, meals, and laundry services and no cooking
facilities are provided in individual living units. Boarding houses may include cabins, clubs, cottages, dormitories,
guesthouses, tourist homes, workers' camps, and dormitories.
Body Art Studio: An establishment whose services include tattooing and/or body piercing, but shall not include a barber shop,
beauty shop, hair salon, cosmetics or make-up salon, spa, nail salon, or similar business where the application of permanent
cosmetics or makeup is an incidental use or an office or clinic of a person licensed by the Texas Medical Board. For purpose
of this definition:
(a) Tattooing: The placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any
person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of
needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin;
(b) Body piercing: The creation of an opening in the individual's body to insert jewelry or another decoration;
(c) Incidental Use: An accessory use which occupies less than 15 percent of the floor area of the premises
occupied by the primary use; and “Permanent cosmetics or makeup”: Tattooing which is limited to the insertion of
a pigment under the skin on a person's face:
(1) in the area of a person's eyes for the purpose of creating permanent eye shadow on the person's
eyelids, eyebrows, or eyeliner; or
(2) on or adjacent to a person's lips for the purpose of creating permanent lip color or lip liner.
Brewery or Distiller: An industrial use that brews ales, beer, meads, and/or similar beverages on-site. Breweries are classified
as a use that manufactures more than 15,000 barrels of beverage annually. A brewpub manufactures up to 5,000 barrels
annually for either consumption [on] premises or sold directly to the consumer.
Buffer Area: An area of land together with specified planting and/or structures thereon, which may be required between land
uses of different intensities to eliminate or minimize conflicts between such uses.
Building: Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, chattels or removable property of any kind and
which is affixed to the land. This term does not include fences.
Building Area: The gross area covered by the building or buildings placed on a lot.
Building Code: Those regulations adopted in Chapter V [Chapter 3] of the Midlothian Code of Ordinances.
Building Ends: Those sides of a building having the least dimension as compared to the front or rear of a building. As used
herein for the building spacing regulations for multiple-family dwellings, a building end shall be interpreted as being the
narrowest side of a building regardless of whether it fronts upon a street, faces the rear of the lot, or is adjacent to the side lot
line, or another building.
Building Line: A line defining an area on the building lot between the street right-of-way or property line and the building line
within which no building shall be constructed, encroach or project except as specifically authorized in an adopted ordinance
of the City of Midlothian.
Building Permit: An instrument in writing signed by an enforcing officer authorizing described construction on a particular lot.
Bulk Storage Facility/Truck Storage or Transfer (outside): The holding or stockpiling on land of material or products where
such storage constitutes 40 percent of the developed site area and the storage area is at least one acre, and where at least
three of the following criteria are met by the storage activity: (1) in a bulk form or in bulk containers; (2) under protective cover
to the essential exclusion of other uses of the same space due to special fixtures or exposed to the elements; (3) in sufficient
numbers, quantities, or spatial allocation of the site to determine and rank such uses as the principal use of the site; (4) the
major function is the collection and/or distribution of the material and/or products rather than processing; and (5) the
presence of fixed bulk container or visible stockpiles for a substantial period of a year.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 573/598
Business, Commercial, or Trade School: Establishments, other than public or parochial schools, private primary or secondary
schools, or colleges, offering training or instruction in a trade, art, or occupation.
Cannery/Bottling Works: A factory for the canning of foods or bottling of beverages.
Carnival, Circus or Fairground: A facility or area for a traveling show or exhibition that has no permanent structure or
installation including but not limited to a carnival, circus, and games of skill or chance or riding device(s) operated for profit.
Carpet and Rug Cleaning: A facility or area for cleaning items in bulk quantities such as clothes and linens. This definition
includes cleaning for hospitals, restaurants, hotels, diaper-cleaning services and other similar accounts, as well as rug and
dry cleaning plants where on-premise retail services to individual households are incidental to the operation of the plant.
Car Wash: A facility or area for the cleaning or steam cleaning, washing, polishing or waxing of passenger vehicles by
machine or hand-operated facilities. A car wash may be (1) a single unit type, which has a single bay or a group of single
bays with each bay to accommodate one vehicle only; or (2) a tunnel type, which allows washing of multiple vehicles in a
tandem arrangement while moving through the structure.
Catering: See Food Catering Service
Cement Products Plant: An integrated facility that prepares the raw mix, feeds it to the pyro-processing system (kiln), and
then grinds the clinker from the kiln system into various cement products. Finished cement is stored in large silos on-site or
bagged for small quantity use. The cement is shipped by truck, rail or barge to customers, or to regional terminals for
customer pick-up. Most cement plants have quarries located nearby to supply the limestone and other raw materials.
Cemetery/Mausoleum: A place used for interment of human or animal remains or cremated remains, including a burial park
for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interment, a columbarium for cinerary interments, or a combination
thereof.
Certificate of Occupancy: A written instrument signed by the enforcing officer authorizing a described use at a described
location, which indicates conformance with the Building Code and Zoning Ordinance.
City: The word “city” shall be the City of Midlothian, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies.
City Council: The governing body of the City of Midlothian, Texas
City Engineer: The duly authorized person in charge of engineering for the City, or his designated representative.
City Manager: That person holding the office of City Manager under the terms of the Midlothian Charter.
City Secretary: That person holding the office of City Secretary under the terms of the Midlothian Charter.
Cleaning Laundry, Drop-off/Pick-up and Self-Service: A facility for the cleaning or laundering of garments principally for
individuals or a facility that provides home-type washing, drying, and/or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on
the premises.
Clinic (Medical or Dental): An institution, public or private, or a station for the examination and treatment of outpatients by an
individual or a group of doctors, dentists or other licensed members of the human health care profession.
Collector Street: A street which carries traffic from local streets to the system of major streets, including the principal entrance
street or streets into a subdivision development and streets designed primarily to provide traffic circulation within or between
one or more subdivisions.
College or University: An academic institution of higher learning beyond the level of secondary school.
Commercial Amusement: An enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining
activity, where tickets are sold or fees collected at the gate of the activity. Commercial amusements include zoos, carnivals,
expositions, miniature golf courses, driving ranges, arcades, fairs, exhibitions, athletic contests, rodeos, tent shows, Ferris
wheels, children's rides, roller coasters, skating rinks, ice rinks, traveling shows, bowling alleys, pool parlors and similar
enterprises.
Commercial Communications Tower, Type 1: An antenna and associated communications mount or communications tower
that is an accessory use to a local business and is intended for the transmission, retransmission or reception of any radio,
electromagnetic, or microwave signals for communications within the related business.
Commercial Communications Tower, Type 2: An antenna and associated communications mount or communications tower
and related structure(s) intended solely for the transmission, retransmission or reception or any radio, electromagnetic, or
microwave signals for all commercial communications other than those defined under Commercial Communications Tower,
Type 1.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 574/598
Commercial Parking: A facility or area for parking that is operated as a business enterprise by charging the public a fee, and
is not reserved or required to accommodate occupants, clients, customers, or employees of a particular establishment or
premises.
Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Midlothian, Texas.
Common Driveway: A driveway on a common property line serving more than 1 platted lot.
Common Property: A parcel or parcels of land, together with improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are
shared by the owners and occupants of the individual building sites in a planned unit.
Communications Mount: A non-permanent, non-penetrating structure placed upon a roof or placed upon the ground to
support an antenna for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving any radio, electromagnetic, or microwave signals. A
communications mount taller than 5 feet shall be considered a Communications Tower.
Communications Tower: A permanent structure, excluding guy wires and related anchor points, erected or constructed to
support one or more antennas for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving any radio, electromagnetic, or microwave
signals.
Community Center: A building to be used as a place of meeting, recreation, or social activity and not operated for profit and
in which neither alcoholic beverages or meals are normally dispensed or consumed.
Conditional Use: A use, which may be permitted in a district, subject to meeting certain conditions or procedures, set forth in
this ordinance (also referred to as Specific Use Permit).
Condominium: Two (2) or more dwelling units on a lot with individual ownership of a unit rather than a specific parcel of real
property, together with common elements. See Article 1301a, Texas Revised Civil Statutes.
Contractor's Plant, Shop, and Storage Yard: A facility or area for the storage and maintenance of contractor's supplies and
operational equipment. An office is considered accessory.
Contractor's Services: Air conditioning, building construction and supply, electrical supply, landscaping service, lumber yard,
plumbing supply, tombstone and monument work, utility materials yard.
Convalescent Home: Any structure used or occupied by 3 or more persons recovering from illness or receiving geriatric care
in exchange for compensation.
Convenience Store: Any retail establishment offering for sale a limited line of groceries, food, pharmaceutical medication, and
household items intended for the convenience of the neighborhood and may sometimes be associated with a gas station.
Corner Lot: A lot abutting upon 2 or more streets at their intersection.
Country Club with Golf Course: A facility or area laid out for playing golf and used for recreational or athletic purposes, with
limited membership and the use of which is primarily restricted to members and their guests. Accessory uses include retail, a
clubhouse and other recreational facilities.
Court: An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than 2 sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely
surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other
permanent place.
Crematorium: A location containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation.
Crop Production: An area for raising or harvesting agricultural crops such as wheat, field forage, and other plant crops
intended to provide food or fiber.
Cul-de-sac: A short, minor street having but one outlet to another street and terminating on the opposite end by an
appropriate vehicular turnaround.
Dairy Operations: An agricultural operation, which produces, manufactures, processes, and sales [sells] milk and milk
products.
Day Care Center: A facility or area used regularly to provide daytime care, training, education, custody, treatment or
supervision to more than six children, adults or elderly in a family setting for less than twenty-four hours a day, whether for
compensation or not. This definition shall not include kindergartens, pre-kindergartens, and schools listed elsewhere in this
Ordinance. A day care may be operated out of a home as long as there are no more than six children.
Day Care Home (babysitting): A home that generally provides care, protection, and supervision of six or fewer children in the
provider's own home, for periods less than 12 hours per day, while the parent or guardian is away.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 575/598
Density: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of subdivision, including floodplains and any areas that are
nonresidential in use.
Depth of Lot: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines.
Developer: An individual, partnership, corporation, or governmental entity undertaking the subdivision or improvement of land
and other activities covered by these regulations, including the preparation of a subdivision plat showing the layout of the
land and the public improvements involved therein. The term “developer” is intended to include the term “subdivider” even
though personnel in successive stages of a project may vary.
Development: Any man-made change in improved or unimproved real estate (but not for agricultural activities), including but
not limited to the construction of one or more new buildings or structures on one or more lots or tracts, paving, or the use of
open land for a new use (but not excavating, filling, compacting, or grading). “To Develop” shall mean to create development.
The term development does not include mining or quarrying activities on land within the City of Midlothian, which has been
issued a Specific Use Permit for such uses.
Distribution Center: A building or area greater than 50,000 square feet in size for storage, wholesale and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies and equipment, but excluding bulk storage of materials that are flammable or explosive or
that create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
District: A section of the City of Midlothian for which the regulations governing the area, height, use of land and buildings, and
other regulations as defined by this ordinance are uniform.
Dormitory: Any structure specifically designed to house student tenants associated with a university, college, or school.
Drilling Activity: To bore or drive a hole into the ground to extract a mineral underneath.
Drive-in Eating Establishment: Any structure and premises specifically designed for the preparation and dispensing of food
and meals for consumption in a vehicle parked on the premises with delivery of food to customers in cars away from the main
building.
Drive-through Establishment or Motor Vehicle-Oriented Business: A business establishment developed so its retail or service
character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or (stacked) parking spaces so as to serve patrons who may
receive a service or purchase a product while waiting in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure.
Driving Range: An area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and tees for practicing golf drives and putting, and
which may include a snack bar and pro shop.
Duplex: 2 single-family dwelling units joined by 1 or more common side walls.
Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for residential purposes.
Dwelling Unit: A building unit or other unit structure, which is designed exclusively for residential purposes for a family.
Easement: An interest in land granted to the City or other governmental entity, to the public generally, and/or to a private
utility corporation.
Efficiency Apartment: An apartment without a bedroom separate from other living quarters.
Electroplating: Process of using electrical current to reduce metal cations in a solution and coat a conductive object with a
thin layer of metal. The primary application of electroplating deposits a layer of a metal having some desired property (e.g.,
abrasion and wear resistance, corrosion protection, lubricity, improvement of aesthetic qualities, etc.) onto a surface lacking
that property. Another application uses electroplating to build up thickness on undersized parts.
Emergency Vehicle: Any vehicle meeting the requirements for emergency vehicles under State law.
Enforcing Officer: The designated enforcing officer of the City of Midlothian or his designated representative.
Exterior Yard: A yard abutting and extending along the full length of the street line of all streets abutting a lot.
Family: Any number of related persons or not more than 6 unrelated persons living in a single housekeeping unit.
Family Home: A facility or area providing food and shelter, personal guidance, care, rehabilitation services, or supervision for
not more than six disabled persons, regardless of their legal relationship to one another, and two supervisory personnel. A
family home is a community-based residential home operated by the Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental
Retardation Act [sic], which provides services to disabled persons, or a nonprofit entity certified by the Texas Department of
Human Resources as a provider under the intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded program.
Farm or Ranch: A tract of land devoted to agricultural purposes and devoted to the raising of animals and especially
domestic livestock
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 576/598
Farm Machinery Sales & Service: A business or facility that specializes in the sale of farm-related equipment.
Fast Food Service: An establishment that prepares and sells food on the premises primarily for consumption elsewhere.
Feed Store: An establishment engaged in retail sale of supplies directly to the day-to-day activities and operations of
agricultural purposes.
Firearm Shooting Range: An area specially designed for the safe discharge and use of rifles, shotguns, pistols, and other
similar firearm for the purposes of target practice or competition.
Fire Station: A building used for fire equipment and firefighters.
Fix-it Shop: Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households rather than to
businesses including the repair of appliances, jewelry, shoes, clothing, televisions, household electronic devices and other
similar products. This does not include the repair of automobiles, trucks, tractors, construction equipment, or major
household equipment such as HVAC units, water heaters, plumbing or electrical repair.
Flood Fringe: That portion of the floodplain which may be filled and/or altered so as to permit the construction of
improvements provided such alterations and/or filling is approved by the City of Midlothian, Public Works Department, and
any State or Federal agency that may have jurisdiction thereof.
Floodplain: Any and all land area adjoining the channel of a river, stream, lake, watercourse, marshy area, or other drainage
element, which has been or may be inundated by stormwater runoff. The extent of the floodplain shall be determined by the
crest of a flood having an average frequency of occurrence of once in 100 years, as established by FEMA.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood, as defined by the Corps of Engineers or FEMA, without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than 1 foot.
Floor Area: The sum total of all floors as calculated from measurements to outside walls.
Food Catering Service: An establishment or business that serves and supplies food to be consumed off the premises at a
particular event or location.
Food Processing: A facility or area in which food for human consumption in its final form, such as candy, baked goods,
tortillas, and ice cream is produced, and the food is distributed to retailers or wholesalers for resale on or off the premises.
Food or beverage processing using mechanized assembly line production of canned or bottled goods is excluded from this
definition.
Foster Family Home: A facility or area providing full-time parental care for 6 or fewer total minor children for which
reimbursement or fee is received for any one or more of the children in return for such services. This use must comply with
statutory licensing requirements.
Fraternal Organization, Civic Club/Lodge or Philanthropic Club: Quarters for a private organization business or philanthropic,
whose principal purpose is the preparation and service of food and drink for members and their guests only. The on-site use
of alcoholic beverages may be allowed when granted a Specific Use Permit.
Freight: Goods, merchandise, substances, materials, and commodities of any kinds that may be transported or transferred
from one place to another by air, rail, or motor carrier.
Front Yard: An exterior yard between an adjacent street and the entrance of a principal structure on a lot. See Yard, Front.
Funeral Home or Mortuary: A mortuary or funeral home is a facility in which dead bodies are prepared for burial or cremation
or funeral services are conducted.
Garage: A building or indoor space in which to park or keep a motor vehicle; sometimes used for storage.
Front-entry garage: A garage that has direct and straight entry from the front of the lot and where the garage
door is parallel to the street.
J-Swing garage: A garage that is accessed through the front yard of a house, where a 90° turn is required to
enter, and where the garage door is perpendicular to the street; not to be confused with a side-entry garage.
Rear-entry garage: A garage that has direct and straight entry from the rear of the lot, usually through an
alley or rear slip street.
Side-entry garage: A garage that has direct entry from a side of the lot and where the garage door is
perpendicular to the street. A side-entry garage can also be classified if a house is located on a corner lot
and the garage entry is accessed from a side street and the front door of the house is located on the other
side street.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 577/598
Garage[,] Repair: An establishment where motor vehicles receive maintenance, repair or where auto body repair takes place
and does not include salvaging.
Gas Service Station: An establishment where gasoline is sold and dispensed into motor vehicle tanks and may sometimes
[be] associated with a convenience store. Such establishments may also have accessory facilities for washing cars, minor
maintenance, oil, and grease, battery charging, tire repair and sale of auto accessories. Such establishment shall not perform
body repair, engine, or transmission overhaul and shall not display vehicles for sale except in districts allowing such sales.
No inoperative motor vehicles shall remain outside the business/building for more than 24 hours.
General Retail Sales: A facility for the retail sale of merchandise, including without limitation craft or novelty store; department
store; dry goods or notions store; electronic media sales or servicing; florist shop; fur storage or sales; gift shop; hardware,
paint or wallpaper store; jewelry store; musical instruments, sales and supplies; optical goods sales; pet shop; piano store;
and variety store.
Golf Course: An area of land laid out for golf with a series of 9 or 18 holes each including tee, fairway, and putting green and
often one or more natural or artificial hazards.
Golf Course, miniature: A theme-oriented recreation facility typically comprised of 9 or 18 putting holes, each with a “cup” or
“hole,” where patrons in groups play a fee to move in consecutive order from the first hole to the last.
Grade: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground between the exterior wall of a building and a point 5
feet distant from said wall, or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface between the exterior wall of a building and
the property line if it is less than 5 feet distant from said wall. In case walls are parallel to and within 5 feet of a public
sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk, alley or public way.
Greenhouse/Plant Nursery: A structure enclosed (as by glass) and used for the cultivation or protection of tender plants
and/or an area where plants are grown for transplanting, for use as stocks for budding and grafting, or for sale.
Gross Density: The number of dwelling units per acre without deduction for landscaping or impervious surfaces.
Gross Leasable Area: The total floor area of a building which is designed for tenant occupancy and use, including basements
and mezzanines, and measured to centerlines of common partitions and to outside of exterior walls, excluding mechanical
equipment, storage, restrooms, stairwells, elevator shafts and other common areas.
Gross Receipts: Receipts from all business conducted on the premises and shall be deemed to include the sales price
received of the goods, including gasoline, sold on consignment without deduction for any amount due the consignor.
Ground Floor Area: The sum total area contained within the first floor of a building other than a cellar or basement calculated
from measurements to outside walls.
Group Home: A family-based facility which contains not more than 15 residents and 3 supervisory personnel and which
provides 24-hour care in a protected living arrangement for the mentally and/or physically impaired, developmentally
disabled, or victims of abuse or neglect. This classification includes congregate living facilities for the elderly, maternity
homes, emergency shelters during crisis intervention for victims of crime, abuse or neglect, and residential services licensed
by the Texas Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse, but not primarily for criminal rehabilitation.
Gun Shop: Any premises used for the sale, vending, dealing, exchanging, or transfer of legal handguns and complying with
any waiting period set forth by city, state or federal regulations.
Halfway House: A residence operated by a governmental entity, providing room and board, on a temporary basis, to one or
more individuals who are in transition from an institution, either penal or medical, to the position where they are not directly
supervised.
Height of Building: The vertical distance from the “grade” to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of
a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest able [gable] of a pitch or hip roof.
Historic Landmark Overlay District: Any area which contains buildings, structures or sites which (a) have a special character
or have a special historical or cultural interest or value, (b) represents one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of
one or more eras in the history of the City, and (c) cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a district
pursuant to the provision of this Ordinance. The area of a Historic Landmark Overlay District may include one or more
properties.
Home Occupation: A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain or support and located entirely within a
residential building, which use is accessory, incidental, and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling purposes and
does not change the essential residential character or appearance of such building or neighborhood or significantly increase
the volume of traffic.
Hospital: A building or portion thereof, used or designated for the housing or treatment of sick, aged, mentally ill, injured,
convalescent or infirm persons; provided that this definition shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 578/598
apartment/hotel not ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons.
Hotel or Motel: Any building containing guest rooms, intended or designed to be rented, or hired out to be occupied, for
sleeping purposes by paying guests.
Ice Kiosk Machines: An industrial machine located in a stand-alone building of not less than 200 square feet which may serve
bulk ice on a large scale directly to the exterior of the building or inside a vestibule area.
Impervious Surface: A surface which does not absorb water and consisting of all building[s], parking areas, driveways, road,
sidewalks, structures, and any areas of concrete or asphalt.
Industrial Storage Yard: Includes outside or mixed outside/inside facility, which may include a private track, to store products
or goods processed at an industrial facility.
Interior Yard: A yard other than an exterior yard extending along the common boundary of adjoining lots.
Kennel: Any building, lot or premises on or in which 4 or more dogs (at least 8 weeks of age) are kept, or any building, lot, or
premises where dogs or cats are housed or accepted for boarding, for which remuneration is received. This term does not
include a veterinary clinic.
Kiln: An oven, furnace, or heated enclosure used for processing a substance by burning, firing, or drying.
Lakes and Ponds: Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain water year-round.
Land Use Plan: The element of the Comprehensive Plan that designates future intentions regarding the location and
intensities of industrial, commercial, and residential land uses in relation to open space, community, transportation, and utility
needs. This information is presented in a graphic format.
Landfill: A system of trash and garbage disposal in which the waste is buried between layers of earth to build up low-lying
land[.]
Landmark: A building or site of immeasurable value in preserving the cultural heritage, or an outstanding example of design
or a site closely related to an important personage, act, or event in history. Such designation marks the site for preservation
and restoration to its historical character and is intended to discourage modifications which detract from its historical
significance.
Landscaped: Adorned or improved by contouring land and placing thereon live plants, flowers, shrubs, trees or grass.
Legal Height: The maximum height of a building permitted by any airport zoning ordinance or other ordinance restricting the
height of structures.
Livestock: Animals kept or raised for use or pleasure and/or profit.
Livestock Sales/Shipping Facilities: A facility or area for the auction of livestock. Accessory uses may include but are not
limited to feed pens, stalls, and outside pens or runs.
Living Unit: The room or rooms occupied by a family and must include cooking and sanitary facilities.
Lodging House: A building where lodging for 5 or more persons is provided for compensation.
Lot: An undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street or an approved open space having direct street
access, and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale, conveyance, transfer, or improvement, which is designated as
a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract, or lot number, or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat
which has been properly filed and recorded.
Lot Coverage: The percentage of the total area of a lot occupied by the base (first story or floor) of a building located on the
lot.
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of
Ellis County prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
Lot Width: The width of a lot at the front building line.
Machine Shop: Shops where lathes, presses, grinders, shapers, and other wood- and metal-working machines are used
such as blacksmithing, tinsmith, welding, and sheetmetal shops, plumbing, heating and electrical repair shops and overhaul
shops.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 579/598
Mail Services: A commercial business which conducts the sale of stationery products, provides packaging and mail services
(both U.S. Postal and private service), and provides mailboxes for lease.
Main Building: The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use.
Maintenance Agreement: An agreement providing for public utilities, drainage, or streets or work to insure the correction of
any failures of any improvements required pursuant to City regulations or to maintain same.
Manufactured Home: A movable or portable structure, designed for use as a residential dwelling, constructed on or after
June 15, 1976 according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, containing an
integral chassis, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems, transportable in one or more sections which is
built on or affixed to a permanent foundation when connected to required utilities. This definition does not include travel
trailers, motor homes, camping trailers, or other recreational vehicles.
Manufactured Home/RV Repair: An establishment providing major and minor repair services to heavy load vehicles,
including trucks, buses, trailers and other similar vehicles.
Manufacturing, Processing and Fabrication: The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new
products, including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials but not
limited to oils, plastics, resins, etc.
Marquee: A roof-like structure projecting over the entrance to a building. It may also project over a sidewalk adjacent and
parallel to the front wall of a building.
Metal Manufacturing: The assembly of metal parts, including blacksmith and welding shops, sheetmetal shops, machine
shops, and boiler shops, that produce metal duct work, tanks, towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors and gates, and
similar products.
Mill: A machine that manufactures by the continuous repetition of some simple action.
Mining: The development or extraction of a mineral from its natural occurrences on affected land.
Mini-Warehouse: Enclosed space rented to members of the general public for private use for dead storage of motor vehicles,
trailers, boats, and household goods. The rented space shall be used for private use only. No retail, service, professional, nor
any other form of business that involves the general public and creates traffic by anyone other than the renter shall be
conducted or performed on or from the rented space.
Mobile Home (fixed dwelling): A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chassis
over roads and highways, connected to utilities and designed without a permanent foundation, without regard of whether
such is placed on a permanent foundation or not. It may consist of one (1) or more units that can be telescoped and
expanded later for additional capacity, or two (2) or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one (1)
single unit. However, this definition shall not include travel trailers, pickup coaches, motor homes, camping trailers, or other
recreational vehicles.
Mobile or Manufactured Home Display or Sales: The offering for sale, storage, or display of trailers or mobile homes on a
parcel of land but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis.
Mobile Home Park: A unified development of mobile home sites, plots, or stands as arranged on a large tract under single
ownership, meeting the area and setback requirements of this Ordinance, and designed to accommodate mobile homes for a
permanent duration.
Mobile Home Subdivision: A unified development of mobile home sites on lots platted for such purpose, where said lots may
be sold to the owners of mobile homes situated thereon, meeting the area and setback requirements of this Ordinance and
designed to accommodate mobile homes on a permanent basis.
Motor Freight Terminal: A facility for freight pick-up or distribution and may include intermodal distribution facilities for truck or
shipping transport.
Motor Vehicle Rental: A facility for the rental of new or used motor vehicles. Motor vehicles kept on the lot for rental purposes
are not considered to be outside storage.
Motor Vehicle Repair Garage, Major (over 3,000 square feet): A facility or area for one or more of the following activities: (1)
reconditioning of any type of motorized vehicle, including any repairs made to vehicles, (2) collision services, including body,
frame or fender straightening or repair, (3) overall painting of vehicles or painting of vehicles in a paint shop, and (4)
dismantling of motorized vehicles in an enclosed structure.
Motor Vehicle Repair Garage, Minor (under 3,000 square feet): A facility or area for general motor repair work as well as the
replacement of new or reconditioned parts in motorized vehicles; but not including any operation included in the definition of
Motor Vehicle Repair Garage, Major.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 580/598
Motor Vehicles Sales & Service: A facility or area for the display, and retail sale of new or used automobiles, boats, trucks,
motorcycles, motor scooters, recreational vehicles or trailers. For purposes of this definition, these items are not considered
outside storage. Service bays are permitted as an accessory use. An auto body shop is permitted as an accessory use.
Moving or Storage Company: A business that specializes in the transporting, retention and/or housing of goods, wares, and
merchandise.
Multiple-Family Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof that is designed, built, and rented, leased or let to be occupied as 3
or more dwelling units and used as by 1 family per dwelling with cooking facilities and other facilities found in a traditional
single-family dwelling.
Museum or Art Gallery: A museum is a facility or area for the acquisition, preservation, study, and exhibition of works of
artistic, historical, or scientific value.
News or Magazine Stand: A temporary structure, manned by a vendor that sells newspapers, magazines, and other
periodicals.
Nightclub: An establishment operated as a place of entertainment, characterized by (1) live, recorded, or televised
entertainment, including but not limited to performances by magicians, musicians or comedians, (2) dancing or any
combination of these two.
Nonconforming Building: A building, structure, or portion thereof that does not conform to the height, area, or yard regulations
of this ordinance and which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
Nonconforming Lot: Any single lot or tract of record that existed prior to the effective date of this ordinance that does not
conform to the width, depth, or area requirements of this ordinance for the zoning district in which such lot is located.
Nonconforming Use: A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this ordinance,
or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Nursing Care: A facility or area furnishing food and shelter in single or multiple facilities to five or more persons who are not
related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or proprietor of the establishment. In addition, the facility provides minor
treatment under the direction and supervision of a physician, or provides a service that meets some need beyond the basic
provision of food, shelter, and laundry.
Occupancy: The use or intended use of the land or building by proprietors or tenants.
Off-Site Advertising Sign: A sign permanently or wholly fixed to the ground other than that defined in this ordinance as a
Billboard that is not located on the lot, tract, or parcel of the event, activity, or business being advertised.
Off-site sale: The sale of types of alcoholic beverages allowed by the City of Midlothian in their original, sealed containers for
consumption off the premises only in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.
On-site sale: The sale of types of alcoholic beverages allowed by the City of Midlothian for consumption on the premises.
Open Air Vending: The sale of any merchandise or goods from an outdoor location upon privately owned property not within
any permanent building or structure designed for the sale of such goods. The term “open air vending” shall specifically
include the sale of merchandise or goods from “stands,” “stalls,” “vehicles,” “tents,” and all other sales not within a permanent
structure. The term “sale” is herein defined as the actual transfer of goods or merchandise. The term open air vending,
however, shall not include activity of itinerant vendors who continuously move about from place to place and who do not
occupy any particular parcel of private property as a permanent or stationary place for the conduct of their business.
Open Space: Private property under common ownership designated for recreational area, private park (for use of property
owners within the subdivision), play lot area, plaza area, building setbacks (other than those normally required), and
ornamental areas open to the general view within the subdivision. Open space does not include streets, alleys, utility
easements, public parks or required setbacks.
Outdoor Special Events: Circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, or other types of special events that meet one of the following
requirements: (1) run for longer than one day but not longer than two weeks, (2) are intended to or likely to attract substantial
crowds, and (3) are unlike the customary or usual activities generally associated with the property where the special event is
to be located. This does not apply to any City-sponsored events, pending Planning Director approval, and that does not
require the closure of a public street.
Outside Sales, Display, and Storage: The storage of material, outside of the walls of the main structure, incidental to the use
of the property. Said material is screened from view by a solid, non-transparent screening fence with a minimum height of 6
feet; and does not exceed the height of the screening fence. Petroleum storage may be stored within the context of this use
as long as it is less than 10,000 gallons. Anything above 10,000 gallons will be considered petroleum products storage/tank
farm.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 581/598
Overlay Zone: A zoning district that characteristically lies over another zoning district. The base zoning district usually retains
the restrictions provided by the zoning ordinance; but is further restricted by the regulations provided in the overlay zone.
Package stores: Any business or establishment whose at least majority of sales derives from the sale of alcoholic beverages
allowed by the City of Midlothian and shall be consumed off the premises only in accordance with the laws of the State of
Texas.
Parking Space: An enclosed or unenclosed area meeting the construction standards of Section 3.5600 and/or 4.5600 of the
Zoning Ordinance, designated for parking passenger vehicles, and which is not on a public right-of-way or alley. Head-in
parking adjacent to a public thoroughfare shall not be permitted.
Parkway Area: That portion of the public right-of-way lying primarily between the edge of the pavement or back of curb and
the private property line.
Pawn Shop: An establishment where articles are traded and exchanged for money plus a right to redeem such articles within
a given amount of time upon repayment of such money with interest.
Permitted Use: A use specifically allowed in one or more of the various districts without the necessity of obtaining a Specific
Use Permit. This does not include conditional uses.
Person: An individual, his heirs, executors, administrators, or assigns; a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns; or the agent of any of the previously mentioned.
Personal Service Shop: An establishment for the purpose of supplying limited personal services such as: cleaning and
laundry collection station, interior decorating, watch and jewelry repair, reader, art gallery, library, museum, studio for
professional art work, photography, dance or fine arts, including teaching of applied and fine arts, this definition does not
include massage parlors, barber shops, beauty shops or hairdressers.
Pet Cemetery: A place where the remains of animals and pets are buried.
Pet Shops: A retail establishment primarily involved in the sale of domestic animals.
Petroleum Products Storage (Tank Farm): An open-air facility containing a number of above-ground, large containers for the
bulk storage in liquid form of petroleum products exceeding 10,000 gallons in aggregate capacity.
Petroleum Refinery: Oil-related industrial activities involving the processing or manufacture of substances such as: asphalt
and tar paving mixtures; asphalt and other saturated felts (including shingles); fuels; lubricating oils and greases; paving
blocks made of asphalt, creosoted wood, and other compositions of asphalt and tar with other materials; and roofing cements
and coatings.
Place of Worship: A facility or area for people to gather together for public worship, religious training, or other religious
activities, including but not limited to a temple, mosque, synagogue, convent, monastery or other structure, together with its
accessory structures and including all accessory buildings used for recreation, administration and/or educational (not
kindergarten, primary, secondary, junior high, or high school), but not including buildings used for residences. This use does
not include home meetings or other religious activities conducted in a privately occupied residence.
Planned Development: A subdivision of land that consists of commercial and/or residential land uses, public land uses,
common open space, park and recreational area, adequate to serve the needs of the tract when fully developed and
populated, which is to be developed as a single entity, under unified control.
Planning and Zoning Commission: The agency appointed by the City Council as an ADVISORY body to it and which is
authorized to recommend changes in zoning and approval of plats.
Planning Director: The Planning Director or Development Services Director for the City, or their designated representative.
Plastic and Rubber Product Manufacturing: The manufacture of rubber products including rubber footwear; mechanical
rubber goads [goods]; heels and soles; flooring; and rubber sundries from natural, synthetic, or reclaimed rubber. Also
includes: establishments engaged in molding primary plastics for the trade, and manufacturing miscellaneous finished
plastics products; fiberglass manufacturing and fiberglass application services.
Premises: Land together with any building or structure occupying it.
Preservation: The act or process of applying measures to sustain the existing form, integrity, and material of a building or
structure, and the existing form and vegetative cover of the site. It may include initial stabilization work where necessary, as
well as ongoing maintenance of the historic building materials.
Printing Plant: A commercial printing operation involving a process that is considered printing, imprinting, reproducing, or
duplication images and using printing methods including but not limited to offset printing, lithography, web offset, flexographic,
and screen process printing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 582/598
Private Garage: An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the main building; if occupied by
vehicles of others, it is a storage space.
Private Tracks: A railroad track located outside of a rail carrier's right-of-way, yard or terminals, where the carrier does not
own the rails, ties, roadbed or right-of-way, and that is accessory to a commercial or industrial use.
Professional Office: A facility for the regular transaction of business, wherein services are performed involving predominantly
administrative, professional, or clerical operations or any other vocation involving predominately mental or intellectual skills.
Public: Shall mean the promotion of a public cause or service, including utilities having a franchise from the City, but
excluding other profit-making organizations.
Public Building: Any building, property, recreation areas, and roads, which are leased, operated, or funded by a governmental
body or public entity.
Public Community Event: An event sponsored by or put together by a local governmental agency that promotes community,
civic, or charitable events that help bring the community together.
Public Library: A public nonprofit facility in which literary, musical, artistic, or reference materials such as but not limited to
manuscripts, computers, recordings, or films are kept for use by loaning to patrons of the facility, but are not normally offered
for sale.
Public Park or Playground: An outdoor area associated [sic] designed for unorganized recreational play. Playgrounds may
consist of open space or informal play areas containing equipment such as swings, jungle gyms, seesaws, merry-go-rounds,
backstops, goals, etc. Areas designed specifically for organized athletic events or containing buildings, bleachers, paved
surfaces, field lights or outdoor speakers, are not included within the definition of playground.
Public Right-of-Way: A strip of land used or intended to be used, wholly or in part, as a public street, alley, crosswalk,
pedestrian path, drainage way or other public way.
Quadraplex: A structure containing four (4) single-family dwelling units or four (4) adjoined single-family dwelling units with a
common wall.
Railroad Track: A structure upon which trains, engines, locomotives, or rolling stock may be transported from one location to
another, including but not limited to a railroad main line and an auxiliary rail line.
Rear Yard: An interior yard extending along the full length of the rear lot line and defined by a line along and parallel to the
rear lot line. See Yard, Rear.
Reconstruction: Is the act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form and detail of a historic building,
structure, or object, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific period.
Recreation Space: Any open or enclosed area that is available to inhabitants of an occupancy for recreational activities. This
term includes swimming pools, recreation rooms, ball courts, grass areas, and any other area, both open to all inhabitants of
the occupancy and not required for another purpose, such as walkways, parking areas, and landscaping.
Recycling Center: A facility that is not a salvage yard and in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines,
books, and other paper products, glass, metal cans, and other products are recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such
products to a condition in which they may again be used for production.
Refinery: A building and equipment for refining or processing.
Rehabilitation: Is the process of returning a property to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which makes possible an
efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property that are significant to its historic,
architectural, and cultural values.
Residence: Same as dwelling; also when used with the word district, an area of residential regulation.
Restaurant: A commercial eating establishment where snacks or meals are vended for consumption primarily on the
premises or for off-premise consumption (i.e. fast food restaurants). If that facility has less than 1,000 square feet of floor
area, it will not require a Specific Use Permit (SUP).
Restoration: The act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a
particular period by means of the removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work.
Rock, Cement Crushers & Stone Quarry: An open pit from which building stone, sand, gravel, mineral, or fill is taken to be
processed for commercial purposes.
Rodeo: A public performance featuring bronco riding, calf roping, steer wrestling, and Brahma bull riding.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 583/598
Room: A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping
quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities.
Rotor: Wind turbine component which consists of the blades and hub.
Salvage Yard: A parcel of land on which wastes or secondhand material are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, processed, or
handled. Materials include but not limited to scrap iron and other ferrous metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, bottles, discarded
goods, machinery or inoperable motor vehicles.
School: A facility or area for elementary or secondary education supported by the State public [sic], a church, or religious
organization. This definition does not include after-school and summer programs which coincide with the age brackets for
public and private schools as provided in this Ordinance.
Scientific Research Laboratory: A facility or area for conducting medical or scientific research, investigation, testing, or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the
laboratory.
Seat: One space for an individual to sit equal to 18 inches to a bench and pew width if other than an individual chair.
Secondary Dwelling Units: A dwelling unit that is accessory, supplemental, secondary, and separate to the principal dwelling
located within a tract of land or platted lot that has its own entrance, kitchen, bathroom, and living area and requires a
Specific Use Permit (SUP) for the zoning districts stated in Section 2.04 (Use Table) of this Ordinance and meet all
requirements stated in Section 3.5700 of the Zoning Ordinance.
Service Establishment: Barber and beauty shops, hairdresser, shoe repair, dry cleaners, etc.
Setback Line: Also known as the Building Line. The line which marks the setback distance from the property line, and
establishes the minimum required front, side or rear yard space of a building plot.
Shelter: A facility providing temporary housing primarily to indigent, needy, homeless or transient persons and which may
also provide ancillary services such as counseling and/or vocational training, bathing, dining and food preparation.
Shopping Center: A composite arrangement of shops and stores that provide a variety of goods and services to the general
public, when developed as an integral unit.
Showroom: A room where merchandise is exhibited for sale or where samples are displayed.
Sign: Any word, number, figure, device, design or trademark by which anything is made known, as used to designate an
individual, firm, profession, business, or a commodity and which is visible from any public street.
Single-Family Attached Dwelling (i.e. townhouse): A single-family attached dwelling unit on a separately platted lot which is
joined at another dwelling unit on one or more sides by a party wall or abutting walls and occupied by not more than one
family.
Single-Family Detached Dwelling: A detached dwelling having accommodations for and occupied by not more than 1 family.
This does not include mobile or manufactured homes.
Site Capacity: The number of dwelling units permitted on a given site.
Site Plan: A map, drawing or chart showing the location of all existing and planned structures, landscaping, design ingress
and egress, parking, height of structures, and/or any other elements as required by these regulations, and which a subdivider
shall submit for approval in accordance with these regulations.
Specialty Shop: An establishment for the purpose of supplying limited specialty items, such as antiques, art objects and
supplies, candy, florist, gifts, greeting cards, framing, stamps and coins, stationery, tobacco, etc.
Stables (commercial): A facility or area for keeping horses, mules or other domestic animals other than for their own use, for
compensation, hire, boarding, riding or show.
Stadium: A sports and entertainment complex which includes a multi-functional stadium, coliseum or other community and
entertainment event venue for use by one or more professional or amateur sports teams with a main facility designed to seat
spectators, along with areas adjacent to such main facility that are legally possessed by the person or entity holding or
owning (whether directly or indirectly), from time to time, the legal possessory right or interest to use or occupy such main
facility.
Steep Slopes: Areas that contain slopes with grades that exceed 10% and are characterized generally by increased
stormwater runoff and potential erosion.
Stone Yard, Building Stone, Cutting, Sawing, or Storage: A type of open-pit mine from which rock or minerals are extracted.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 584/598
Story: The height between successive floors of a building or from the top floor to the roof. The standard height for a story is
12 feet. Does not include the roof structure, chimneys, and parapets.
Street: A public right-of-way which provides primary vehicular access to adjacent land, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, avenue, lane, boulevard, road, place, drive, or however otherwise designated.
Street Line: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
Structural Alterations: Any change in the supporting member of a building such as a bearing wall, column, beam, or girder.
Structure: That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work built up or composed of
parts joined together in some definite manner including, but not limited to a street, alley, sign, fence, wall, or other form of
permanent paving, or construction.
Supermarket or superstore/grocery store: A retail establishment, singular retailer, or wholesale user primarily selling food,
pharmaceutical medication, household merchandise, clothing, and a variety of other retail goods that may or may not have
membership requirements, emphasize bulk sales, discount sales, and department stores.
Temporary Home Sales Office: A single-family residential structure used solely for the display and/or sales of residences
within a subdivision.
Theater: An establishment charging admission to the general public for the privilege of observing live, televised or motion
picture performances.
Thoroughfare Plan: That portion of the Comprehensive Plan, both text and map, that provides the description of street
classifications and general location of the placement of the designated thoroughfares.
Track: A structure upon which trains, engines, locomotives, or rolling stock may be transported from one location to another.
Trailer: A vehicle equipped for use as a dwelling and designed, or capable of, being hauled along a highway. Removal of the
running gear will not change the definition.
Transit Passenger Terminal: A facility for the loading and discharging of bus passengers.
Triplex: A detached building containing 3 single-family attached dwelling units.
Truck Parking Lot: A facility or area for heavy truck parking that is operated as a business enterprise and may charge the
public a fee, and is not reserved or required to accommodate occupants, clients, customers, or employees of a particular
establishment or premises and does not have an associated building or structure. Must comply with Ordinance 96-26.
Truck Stop: A facility, usually located along a major highway, engaged primarily in providing goods and services to the
trucking industry, tractor trucks, or other similar heavy commercial vehicles which may include retail fueling services, a
convenience store selling food and novelty accessories, small restaurants, shower facilities and overnight parking. A “Truck
Stop” shall not include as a primary or accessory use a hotel or motel, repair shop, or automated vehicle washes unless such
use is a permitted use within the zoning district where the truck stop is located or is authorized following adoption of a
specific use permit.
Two-Family Dwelling: A detached dwelling having separate accommodations for and occupied by not more than 2 families.
Use: The principal purpose for which a property or structure is employed or utilized.
Variance: A legal modification of the district provisions, such as yard, lot width and yard depth, signs, setback, off-street
parking and loading regulations, height, access, and screening, granted due to the peculiar conditions existing within a single
piece of property.
Veterinary/Animal Clinic: A facility for the diagnosis, treatment, or hospitalization of animals. The incidental boarding or
breeding of animals is included in this definition.
Warehouse: A use engaged in storage, wholesale, and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment,
excluding bulk storage of materials that are inflammable or explosive or that presents hazards or conditions commonly
recognized as offensive.
Wind Energy System: A wind-driven energy system that converts wind energy into electricity through the use and consisting
of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion electronics. These systems shall be used to reduce domestic
on-site consumption of electric utility power.
Wind Turbine Tower: The freestanding monopole structure, or attached to a structure that supports a wind turbine for a winddriven
energy system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 585/598
Winery: An agricultural processing plant used for the commercial purpose of processing grapes, other fruit products, or
vegetables to produce wine or similar spirits. Processing includes wholesale sales, crushing, fermenting, blending, aging,
storage, bottling, administrative office functions for the winery and warehousing.
Wholesale Distributor: Alcoholic beverage distributor; wholesale equipment and furniture, wholesale groceries, meats, fish
and poultry; wholesale produce; wholesale supply house; wholesale laundry and dry cleaning plant; and any other distributor
of goods for resale.
Wood Product/Paper Manufacture: The manufacture of paper and paperboard, from both raw and recycled materials, and
their conversation [conversion] into products including paper bags, boxes, envelopes, wallpaper, etc.
Wrecker Service: A facility or area in which two or more tow trucks are employed in the hauling of motorized vehicles and for
the storage of vehicles that have been towed, repossessed, or otherwise in the care and custody of the operator of the lot,
but not disassembled or junked.
Yard: An open space other than a courtyard, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring to determine the width of a side yard, the depth of the front yard
or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
Yard, Front: A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the street to the largest required setback of either the
required, established, platted building line or projected front yard. Setbacks shall be measured from the front property line.
Each street frontage shall be considered a front yard except that in one- and two-family districts, the extra frontage yards
may be considered a side or rear yard if there are no other front yards projecting along that same block face. Determination
of what type of yard it should be will be dependent upon the setback that is necessary to maintain uniformity along the block
face.
Yard, Front Projected
Corner Lot: Where a corner lot abuts on the side of a lot facing the other intersecting street, there shall be a
side yard on the corner lot equal to the front yard required on the lot adjacent to the rear of the corner lot or
separated only by an alley.
Interior Lot: Where an interior lot abuts another zoning district, there shall be a projected front yard equal to
the most restrictive front yard required on any lot in the same block face.
Yard, Rear: An open unoccupied space, except for accessory buildings as herein permitted, extending across the rear of the
lot from one (1) side lot line to the other side lot line and having a depth between the main building and the rear lot line as
prescribed for the district in which the building is located.
Yard, Side: An open unoccupied space or spaces on one (1) or two (2) sides of a main building and on the same lot with the
building situated between the building and a side line of the lot and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
Any lot line, not the rear line or front line, shall be deemed a side lot line.
Zoning District Map: The official certified map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which
is an integral part of the Zoning Ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 586/598
Zoning Inspector: The individual or individuals that have been designated by the City to conduct inspections in the field of the
zoning requirements of structures and parcels of land.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 100.1, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2016-35 adopted
10/25/16; Ordinance 2017-45, sec. 1(B), adopted 6/13/17; Ordinance 2018-05, sec. 1(B), adopted 2/13/18)
100.101–100.199 RESERVED
100.200 MASONRY, ARCHITECTURE AND BUILDING DEFINITIONS
Masonry construction shall include all construction of stone material (including artificial stone), brick material, concrete
masonry units or concrete panel construction, which is composed of solid, cavity, faced, or veneered-wall construction and
nonstructural cementious fiber board when used with an appropriate architectural style. For the purpose of this defining
masonry, the following definitions shall apply.
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM): A developer and publisher of technical information designed to promote
the understanding and development of technology and to ensure the quality of commodities, services and safety of products.
Brick Material: Brick material used for masonry construction shall be hard fired (kiln fired) clay or slate material which meets
the latest version of ASTM Standard C216, Standard Specifications for Facing Brick (Solid Masonry Unit made of Clay or
Shale), and shall be Severe Weather (SW) grade, and Type FVA or FBS or better. Unfired or underfired clay, sand or shale
brick are not allowed.
Cementious fiber board: Finish wall, soffit, and tile backing material shall meet U.S. HUD material release No. 1263d; if it is a
part of an approved distinctive architectural style.
Concrete Masonry Units: Concrete masonry units used for masonry construction shall meet the latest version of the following
applicable specifications; ASTM Standard C90, Standard Specification for Hollow Load Bearing Concrete Masonry Units;
ASTM C145, Standard Specification for Solid Load Bearing Masonry Units; ASTM C129, Standard Specification for Hollow
and Solid Non-Load Bearing Units. Concrete masonry units shall have an indented, hammered, split face finish or other
similar architectural finish, and integrally colored. Lightweight concrete block or cinderblock construction is not acceptable as
an exterior finish.
Concrete Panel Construction: Concrete finish, pre-cast panel or tilt wall construction shall be fluted, or exposed aggregate.
Exterior Wall Area: In calculating the square footage of the exterior wall area subject to minimum percentages of masonry
coverage, “exterior wall area” shall include parapet walls and other similar vertical or sloped surfaces attached to the building
walls that are not part of the structural roof. “Exterior Wall Area” shall not include door or window area.
Glass walls shall include glass curtain walls or glass block construction. Glass curtain wall shall be defined as an exterior wall
which carries no structural loads, and which may consist of the combination of metal, glass, or other surfacing material
supported in a metal framework and has less than 25% reflectance.
Laminated Architectural Shingles: Shingles composed of a heavy fiberglass mat base and ceramic-coated mineral granules
that are tightly embedded in carefully refined, water-resistant asphalt that provide a three-dimensional appearance.
Metal walls shall include profiled panels, deep ribbed panels and concealed fastener systems. Exterior finish shall be film
laminated or baked-on enamel painted to the wall manufacturer's standards. The use of corrugated metal, plastic or
fiberglass panels are prohibited. The use of galvanized, aluminum coated, zinc-aluminum coated or unpainted exterior metal
finish is prohibited.
Porch: A roofed structure, usually open at the sides, permanently attached and projecting from the face of a building and
used to protect the entrance.
Radiant Barrier (sheathing): A sheathing that is rated for decking in which is layered with a metallic foil or other reflective
material that blocks radiant heat. This product shall have an emissivity of .05 or below, which means the radiant heat is being
blocked by 95%.
Roof Pitch: The slope of a roof measured in inches of vertical rise per inches of horizontal run.
Roof Soffit: A soffit is the underside of a part on a building, like a protective covering under the eaves of a house, or the
surface of an arch as seen from below (such as an arch, overhang, beam, etc.) typically running from the outside wall to the
outer edge of the roof.
Stone Material: Masonry construction using stone material may consist of granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and
other hard and durable naturally occurring all-weather stone. Cut stone, dimensioned stone, cast stone, and cultured stone
are acceptable[.]
Stucco: A weather-resistant mixture of dehydrated lime, powered marble and glue or various types of cement or plaster used
in decorative moldings and/or coating outside walls and may be allowed as the primary building material if it is a part of an
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 587/598
approved distinctive architectural style.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 100.200, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2013-48 adopted 10/22/13; Ordinance 2016-51, sec. 1(M),
adopted 12/13/16)
100.300 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this article [Section 8] the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Achromatic: Colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. The term includes, but is not limited to, grays, tans, and earth tones.
The term does not include black or any bold coloration that attracts attention.
Adult arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of
consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser
disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any
one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by depicting or describing specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult audio or video center: Any place at which any of the following activities occurs:
* Inbound or outbound telephone or other audio communications in which a topic or purpose of the
communication between an occupant of the premises and a third party is the discussion or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is otherwise pornographic in nature for consideration;
* Video or audio broadcasting, whether live, delayed, by film, by tape recording or otherwise, of specified sexual
activities, specified anatomical areas or pornographic material for consideration; or
* Filming, taping or otherwise creating video or audio recordings, including but not limited to, films, movies,
video tapes, DVDs, audio tapes or compact discs, that are broadcast, sold, manufactured or distributed for
consideration.
Adult bookstore and adult video store: A commercial establishment that as one of its principal business operations offers for
sale or rental for any form of consideration one (1) or more of the following:
* Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or
video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas”; or
* Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual
activities.” This does not include items used for conception control or for protection from sexually transmitted
diseases.
Adult cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
* Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
* Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities; or
* Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Motel: A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that in exchange for any form of consideration:
* Offers accommodations to the public, tenant or occupier of the room for [sic] any television transmissions,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” and/or
“specified anatomical areas”; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way or otherwise advertises the
availability of this type of adult accommodations to the public; or
* Offers a sleeping room(s) for rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or
* Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10
hours.
Adult motion picture theater: A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 588/598
Adult theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who
appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical
areas or by specified sexual activities.
Applicant:
* A person in whose name a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy to operate a sexually oriented business will
be issued;
* Each individual who signs an application for a sexually oriented business as required
* Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business for which a Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy application is made, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the
application;
* Each individual who has a 20% or greater ownership interest in a sexually oriented business for which a
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy application is made, regardless of whether the individual's name appears on
the application; and
* Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a sexually oriented business for which a
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy application is made, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature
appears on the application.
Chief of Police or Chief: The Chief of the Midlothian Police Department or a designee or any employee(s) of the police
department assigned by the Chief to perform the duties prescribed in this Article [Section 8].
City Enforcement Personnel: An authorized representative of any of the following departments or divisions:
* Development Services Department.
* Code Compliance
* Health Department.
* Fire Department.
* Police Department.
Commercial Multi-unit Center: A building or structure (including a shopping mall or strip shopping center) containing three (3)
or more separate premises, each of which is offered by lease or otherwise for separate occupancy or control and each of
which occupies an enclosed area having its own door or entranceway opening onto public property, a public way or a
common area.
Conviction: Conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state of foreign
nation that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. “Conviction” includes disposition of charges against a person by
probation or deferred adjudication.
Employee: A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or
contract basis, whether or not the person is designated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and
whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee does
not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or
for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Entertainer: A person paid to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment may consist
of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers whereby the
entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations.
Escort: A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who
agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease or specified sexual activities for another
person.
Escort Agency: A person, business association or commercial venture that furnishes, or offers to furnish, or advertises to
furnish escorts as one of its business purposes for a fee, commission, tip or other consideration.
Establishment: When used as a verb, means and includes any of the following:
* The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
* The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented
business;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 589/598
* The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
* The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Event of Bankruptcy or Insolvency: The dissolution or termination (other than a dissolution or termination by reason of a party
merging with an affiliate) of a party's existence as a going business, insolvency, appointment of receiver for any part of a
party's property and such appointment is not terminated within 90 business days after such appointment is initially made, any
general assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the commencement of any proceeding under any bankruptcy or insolvency
laws by or against a party and in the event such proceeding is not voluntarily commenced by the party, such proceeding is
not dismissed within 90 business days after the filing thereof.
Exterior Portion: Any part of the physical structure of an enterprise, including, but not limited to, a wall, veneer, door, fence,
roof, roof covering or window, which his visible form [is visible from] any public way or public property.
License: Refers to both a sexually oriented business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy and a sexually oriented business
employee license, unless otherwise specified.
Licensee: A person in whose name a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy to operate a sexually oriented business has been
issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy; and in
the case of an employee license, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually
oriented business.
Manager: A person designated by the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to be responsible for the operation of
such business at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other principal in the business is
present, such person may be considered the manager.
Nude model studio: Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified
anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include a proprietary school
licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college,
or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
* That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or
semi-nude person is available for viewing;
* Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and
* Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Nudity or a state of nudity: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage
with less than a fully opaque, meaning non-translucent, covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly aroused
state.
On-site card: The personal photographic identification card for an employee issued by the Chief of Police that must be
provided by the employee to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the sexually oriented business as set forth herein.
Person: An individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company,
association, or other legal entity.
Personal card: The personal photographic identification card for an employee issued by the Chief of Police that must be
displayed on the employee as set forth herein.
Operated or Caused to be Operated: To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be
operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or
operator of the business.
Operator:
* The person(s) in whose name a valid specialized certificate of occupancy has been issued for a sexually
oriented business pursuant to the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance, Appendix A of this Code [this
ordinance]; or
* Each individual listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy; or
* Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business for which a Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy has been issued, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the application;
or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 590/598
* Each individual who has a twenty (20) percent or greater ownership interest in a sexually oriented business
for which a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been issued, regardless of whether the individual's name
appears on the application; or
* Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a sexually oriented business for which a
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been issued, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature
appears on the application; or
* The person(s) in whose a name a specialized certificate would be required in order to lawfully operate a
sexually oriented business pursuant to the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance, Appendix A of this Code [this
ordinance]; or
* Any individual who is in control of the operations of a Sexually Oriented Business, either on an hourly basis,
daily basis, weekly basis or shift basis or any combination thereof; or
* The person(s) who operates or causes to be operated any form of sexually oriented business, which is subject
to regulation pursuant to the City's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance.
Outcall Business: A commercial venture that provides employees or entertainment personnel who, in exchange for a fee,
commission, tip or other consideration, goes to the location requested by the customer and while there:
* Privately models lingerie or other intimate wearing apparel; or
* Privately performs a striptease; or
* Privately performs a semi-nude or nude modeling session; or
* Bathes or massages the customer;
* But shall not include persons otherwise engaged in legitimate, non-sexually oriented activities or services
such as licensed private nurses, licensed physical therapists, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social
secretaries, or similar persons whose business or service relationship with their patron is not characterized by
sexually oriented activities.
Planning Director: The Planning Director or Development Services Director for the City, or their designated representative.
Principal: Means over 35% of customers, volume of sales, stock in trade, display areas, or presentation time, or any
combination thereof in any three-month increment period beginning from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Stock in trade shall be measured with all titles or objects available on the premises for sale or rental, including those that are
identical being considered a separate title or object.
Residential use or district: A single-family, townhouse, condominium, duplex, triplex, fourplex, mobile home, manufactured
home, multiple-family dwelling or portion of a planned development zoning district that is restricted to residential uses.
Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition: The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola
at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the
human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress,
blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the nipple or areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Sexual encounter center: A business or commercial enterprise that offers, for any form of consideration:
* Any form of physical contact, including massage, by a person with the buttock, anus, male genitals, female
genitals, or female breast of another person for the primary purpose of sexual stimulation or sexual gratification
and regardless of whether any of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude; or
* Body painting of the buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast of another person,
whether those of the patron or employee, for the primary purpose of sexual stimulation or sexual gratification and
regardless of whether any of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. Sexual encounter centers do not
include any massage establishment lawfully registered under Texas Occupations Code, Chapter 455, as
amended, at which services are only provided by persons registered as a massage therapist under Texas
Occupations Code, Chapter 455, as amended.
Sexually oriented business: An adult arcade, adult audio or video center, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center or other commercial enterprise a principal business of which is the offering of a service or the selling,
renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the
customer. Sexually oriented businesses do not include: (i) a bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that business is
an adult bookstore, or adult movie theater or adult video store; (ii) a business operated by or employing a licensed
psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in
performing functions authorized under the license held; or (iii) a business operated by or employing a licensed physician or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 591/598
licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the healing arts. A commercial establishment may have other business purposes
that are not a sexually oriented business or related to a sexually oriented business. Such other business purposes will not
serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as a sexually oriented business so long as one of
its business purposes is a sexually oriented business.
Sign: Any on-premise display, design, pictorial, or other representation that is constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected,
fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that it is visible from the outside of a sexually oriented business and
used to seed the attraction of the public to any goods, services, or merchandise available at the sexually oriented business.
The term “sign” also includes any representation painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of a sexually oriented
business establishment or to any part of the tract upon which the establishment is situated.
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy: A special certificate of occupancy issued by the city for the operation of a classification
of a sexually oriented business at specific premise or location.
Specified anatomical areas:
* The human male genitals in a discernibly aroused state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or
* Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, vulva, anus, anal cleft, buttocks or
a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Specified criminal activity: Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling
prostitution; obscenity, dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with
a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault; incest, solicitation of a child or
harboring a runaway child; molestation of a child; gambling; offenses involving necrophilia or bestiality; or distribution of a
controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above as well as criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation
to commit any of the foregoing offenses, under the criminal or penal statutes of the states, country, county or city; for which:
* Less than 2 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from the terms of
community supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of release from confinement imposed
for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
* Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of conviction or the date of release
from the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
* Less than 5 years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from the terms of
community supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of release from confinement imposed
for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of 2 or more misdemeanor offenses or
combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
* The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a
person residing with the applicant.
Specified sexual activities:
* The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
* Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy; or
* Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above.
Substantial enlargement: The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%, as the floor areas exist on:
(i) the date the ordinance from which this article [Section 8] is derived takes effect; or (ii) for any premises not used as a
sexually oriented business on the date the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect, the date an application for
a license to use the premises as a sexually oriented business is received by the city designating the floor area of the
structure or proposed structure in which the sexually oriented business will be conducted, regardless of any subsequent
changes in applicants, licenses, owners, or operators of the premises or the sexually oriented business.
Transfer of Ownership or Control: Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of
the following:
* The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
* The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or
similar means; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 592/598
* The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or control of the
business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possession the
ownership or control.
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 100.300, adopted 7/9/13)
100.400 SIGNAGE DEFINITIONS
The following definitions are intended to be used solely for signage-related purposes.
Animated Sign: A sign employing visible moving parts or the changing of colors.
Billboard/Off-site Advertising Sign: A sign which advertises businesses, commodities, activities, services or persons which
are not usually available or present upon the premises upon which such sign is located, or which directs persons to any
location not on the premises. Any sign with more than ten percent of the sign devoted to such use shall be deemed an offpremises
sign. A billboard cannot be considered a pole sign. Any sign with more than ten percent of the sign devoted to such
use shall be deemed an off-premises sign. A billboard cannot be considered a pole sign. [sic]
Building Signs: Any on-premise sign attached to, applied on or supported by the wall of a building or structure in such a
manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure or forms the background surface.
Canopy/Awning Sign: A sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other approved fabric, or structural
protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. Only these signs shall be allowed to extend beyond
the building. Any advertisement of the business on this sign shall count towards the total allowable building signage area.
Changeable Copy Sign: A sign that is characterized by changeable copy, letters, symbols or numerals that are not
permanently affixed to the structure, framing or background allowing the letters, characters, or graphics to be modified from
time to time manually or by electronic or mechanical devices, such as but not limited to, a bulletin board, or electronic
message board. Changeable copy signs may not be used to display commercial messages relating to products or services
that are not offered on the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 593/598
Changeable Electronic Variable Message Sign (CEVMS): A sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or
which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including an illuminated sign on which such
illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED
(light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located
within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic-control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard.
Development Directional Signs: An unlighted sign used for the purpose of providing traffic direction to new residential
development and only allowed on weekends adjacent to Texas Department of Transportation rights-of-way with written
permission, in the form of a notarized letter, from the adjacent property owner. These signs are prohibited after April 14,
2006.
Electronic Display Screen: A sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not
include text. This definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens, video
boards, and holographic displays.
Electronic Message Center: Any sign or portion of a sign that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages in
text form wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by
electronic processes.
Event Sign: A temporary sign with no more than two sign faces, with each sign face area not exceeding eight (8) square feet
announcing and providing information about events, bazaars, rallies[,] concerts, athletic and/or recreational activities or
events and similar activities or events.
Flashing Sign: A sign illumination of which is intermittently on and off so as to flash or blink or the intensity varies so as to
appear to flash or blink.
Ground/Monument Signs: A detached on-premise sign permanently placed upon, or supported by the ground with a
continuous masonry base approximately the same width as the actual signage and the signage is attached to the base.
Hanging Signs: A sign that is suspended below a marquee or canopy and is generally smaller than a projecting sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 594/598
Highway Interchange Signs: A freestanding pole sign located within an established proximity to the intersection of two or
more highways intended to advertise restaurant, lodging or automotive services to highway traffic such that the sign may be
visible and legible for a distance of one-half mile.
Historic Signage: A painted sign that is located exclusively within the Central Business District (CBD) along a blank wall and
depicts a historic Midlothian business establishment and one that is not longer in business.
Illegal Sign: Any sign erected, constructed, enlarged or altered which does not conform to the provisions of the zoning
ordinance or other applicable ordinances in effect at the time of erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, or does not
have a valid sign permit.
Illuminated Sign: Any sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.
Kiosk Sign: A freestanding structure located in the City of Midlothian public rights-of-way that displays directional information
to new residential subdivisions, homes, and municipal or community events or facilities and serves the purpose of directing
traffic to the location those locations.
Limited-access Highway: A public right-of-way greater than 100 feet in width that has no at-grade points-of-entry/exit (e.g.
U.S. Highway 287 Bypass/Loop, U.S. Highway 67).
Marquee Signs: A projecting sign attached to or supported by a permanent canopy, often installed on buildings occupied by
theaters, cinemas, performing arts facilities or parking structures.
Nameplate Signs: A permanent on-premise sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building, giving the name and/or address of
the owner or occupant of a building or premises in which it is located and where applicable a professional status.
Non-advertised Message Area: That portion of a sign not used or intended to be used to display commercial copy, convey
information or to attract attention to the subject matter of such sign. This definition includes the sign structure.
Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was lawfully installed in compliance with all city ordinances applicable at the time of
installation, but that does not comply with the current provisions of this zoning ordinance or other applicable ordinances.
On-Premises Sign: A sign which advertises the business name, owner and/or commodities, activities or services offered on
the premises where such sign is located and where at least ninety (90) percent of the sign is devoted to the advertisement of
such business name, owner, commodities, activities or services.
Parkway: A public right-of-way greater than or equal to 70 feet, present or future in width, or the name of which includes
“parkway” designation[.]
Plaque Signs: A smaller version of a wall sign that is attached to the wall surface adjacent to the front entry of a business.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 595/598
Pole Signs: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or poles and requires a Specific Use Permit (SUP), once certain
conditions are met. All pole signs shall be designed in accordance with the Midlothian Building Code.
Political Signs: A temporary unlit sign pertaining to any national, state, county, or local election supporting or opposing an
announced candidate, a party affiliation, a particular issue or referendum and/or primarily contains a political message.
Portable Signs: An outdoor advertising display sign used for the purpose of on-premise advertising that are not temporary
advertising devices or wind devices. Portable signs are those signs whose principal supporting structure is intended, by
design, use or construction to be used by resting upon the ground for support and which may easily be moved or relocated
for reuse. Portable signs shall include, but not limited to signs mounted upon a trailer, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized
mobile structure with or without wheels, including metal area “A” and/or “T” frames resting on the ground, but not
permanently attached thereto.
Projecting Signs: A sign that is affixed to the face of a building or structure and projects outward in a perpendicular manner.
Real Estate Signs: A temporary sign announcing the sale or lease of the lot or tract of land on which the sign is located, or to
the sale or lease of one or more structures, or a portion thereof located thereon.
Restaurant Menu Signs: A sign that incorporates a menu containing a listing of products and prices offered by a business.
Revolving Sign: A sign which revolves on, around, or about a structural support. A structural support includes, but not limited
to, a pole, building or other type of support. Revolving parts within the sign shall not be constructed as a revolving sign.
Sign Face Area: The portion of a sign structure intended to convey information, knowledge or idea to the public, exclusively
of the frame or support structure. Include the terms sign panel and sign copy. For the purpose of these regulations, total sign
face area shall include all signs on any individual structure. In all cases, the sign face area for each type of sign shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 596/598
calculated using the section box method where it is measured at its widest and highest points and have a maximum of two
(2) sides and be designed by a licensed Sign Manufacturer.
Sign Structure: A permanent structure affixed to the ground which supports or is intended to support any sign.
Static Image: Any sign in which advertisement is a fixed still image set for a period of time and requires the installation of new
panels or images, one at a time, at certain intervals. Such sign[s] do not rotate, move, blink, flash or any combination thereof.
Temporary Advertising Devices: Temporary advertising devices which promotes and advertises commodities or services
being offered on-premise on which such signs are located. Temporary advertising devices shall include but are not limited to
banners, balloons or sandwich board signs.
Unified Sign Agreements: An agreement entered into by the City and the developer of unified development to allow on/offsite
signage in exchange for a reduction for overall signage on that development. Such an agreement must adhere to all the
requirements of Section 4.6018 of this Zoning Ordinance.
Vehicle Sign: A sign attached to or upon any vehicle where that vehicle is parked within 20 feet of the edge of a parking lot
adjacent to the public right-of-way and contains arrows, directional information or promotional advertising relating to a
business.
Wall Signs: Any on-premise sign attached to, applied on or supported by the wall of a building or structure in such a manner
that the wall becomes the supporting structure or forms the background surface.
Wind Devices: Wind devices are those signs that may be classified as pendants, spinners, streamers, flags or other similar
wind devices that move freely in the wind.
Window Sign: Any sign, picture, symbol, or combination, thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity,
business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon window panes or glass and is visible
from the exterior of the window.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 597/598
(Ordinance 2013-24, sec. 100.400, adopted 7/9/13; Ordinance 2018-20, sec. 3, adopted 4/10/18)
100.500 LANDSCAPE DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms applicable hereto are defined as hereinafter provided. Words and
terms used in this ordinance, but not defined in this ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in the Zoning
Ordinance or other ordinances of the City. Words and terms defined in two ordinances shall be read in harmony unless there
exists an irreconcilable conflict in which case the definition contained in this ordinance shall control. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future, words used in the singular number shall include the plural number and words used in
the plural shall include the singular. The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive. The word “City” means
the City of Midlothian, Texas.
Agricultural Use: The use of land to produce plant or animal products, such as the growing of crops, raising and pasturing of
livestock, or farming. It does not include the processing of plant or animal products after harvesting or the production of
timber or forest products.
Buildable Area: That portion of a building site exclusive of the required yard areas on which a structure or building
improvements may be erected and including the actual structure, driveway, parking lot, pool and other construction as shown
on a site plan.
Building Pad: The actual foundation area of a building and the area within six feet (6') of the foundation that is used for
construction and grade transition.
Irrigation System: An automatic watering system designed for watering lawns and gardens for a specified amount of time at a
specified time of day. Irrigation systems are typically used to conserve water and time. All irrigation systems shall be
equipped with an approved backflow prevention device to protect the water supply.
Limits of Construction: A delineation on the graphic exhibit which shows the boundary of the area within which all
construction activity will occur.
Municipal/Public Domain Property: Examples of this would include City Hall, public parks, County property, Corps of
Engineers property, State of Texas R.O.W., library, fire stations, water tower sites or similar properties.
Ornamental Grasses: A grass that is generally considered in the landscaping industry in this region to have ornamental
qualities, and which is typically grown in a flower garden. Typically grows 6" - 36" inches and doesn't tolerate being cut below
6 inches. These said grasses are usually used as an accent grass and not the main coverage of the front yard. Most
commonly they are grown for display of their flowers and may contain a variety of colors depending on the season. Other
common ornamental features may include leaves and scent.
Tree: Any self-supporting woody perennial plant which will attain a trunk diameter of two inches (2") or more when measured
at a point four and one-half feet (4.5') above ground level and normally an overall height of at least 15 feet at maturity, usually
with one (1) main stem or trunk and many branches. It may appear to have several stems or trunks as in several varieties of
oaks.
Tree, Marginal: A tree which the City has determined may or may not be worthy of preservation depending on the individual
characteristics of the tree.
Tree, Park: Trees in public parks and all areas owned by the City to which the public has free access to as a park.
Tree, Quality: A tree which the City has determined typically has significant positive characteristics worthy of preservation.
Tree, Street: Trees on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes or ways within the
City.
Tree Topping: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 598/598
Weeds: Vegetation that because of its height is objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary: but excluding shrubs, bushes and
trees, cultivated flowers and cultivated crops.
Xeriscape: A set of garden design and landscape maintenance principles that promote good horticultural practices, efficient
use of water, and means water-conserving drought-tolerant landscaping.
(Ordinance 2014-34 adopted 8/26/14)